                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION

                                            Sneha Elango
                                          Jorge Luis García
                                          James J. Heckman
                                           Andrés Hojman

                                         Working Paper 21766
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21766


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




This research was supported in part by the American Bar Foundation, the Pritzker Children's Initiative,
the Buffett Early Childhood Fund, NIH grants NICHD R37HD065072, NICHD R01HD54702, and
NIA R24AG048081, an anonymous funder, and Successful Pathways from School to Work, an initiative
of the University of Chicago's Committee on Education funded by the Hymen Milgrom Supporting
Organization. We are very grateful to Marianne Haramoto, Fernando Hoces, Joshua Ka Chun Shea,
Matthew C. Tauzer, and Anna Ziff for research assistance and useful comments. We thank Robert
Moffitt, David Blau, the other authors of this volume, and Raquel Bernal, Avi Feller, Micheal Keane,
Patrick Kline, Sylvi Kuperman, and Rich Neimand for valuable comments. The views expressed in
this chapter are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the funders or persons named here
or the official views of the National Institutes of Health or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sneha Elango, Jorge Luis García, James J. Heckman, and Andrés Hojman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Early Childhood Education
Sneha Elango, Jorge Luis García, James J. Heckman, and Andrés Hojman
NBER Working Paper No. 21766
November 2015, December 2015
JEL No. C93,I28,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper organizes and synthesizes the literature on early childhood education and childcare. In it,
we go beyond meta-analysis and reanalyze primary data sources in a common framework. We consider
the evidence from means-tested demonstration programs, large-scale means-tested programs and universal
programs without means testing. We discuss which programs are beneficial and whether they are cost-effective
for certain populations. The evidence from high-quality demonstration programs targeted toward disadvantaged
children shows beneficial effects. Returns exceed costs, even accounting for the deadweight loss of
collecting taxes. When proper policy counterfactuals are constructed, Head Start has beneficial effects
on disadvantaged children compared to home alternatives. Universal programs benefit disadvantaged
children.


Sneha Elango                                         James J. Heckman
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street                                  1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637                                     Chicago, IL 60637
selango@uchicago.edu                                 and IZA
                                                     and also NBER
Jorge Luis García                                    jjh@uchicago.edu
Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                Andrés Hojman
1126 E. 59th Street                                  Department of Economics
Chicago IL 60637                                     University of Chicago
jorge.ggmenendez@gmail.com                           1126 E. 59th Street
                                                     Chicago IL 60637
                                                     andreshojman@gmail.com




Supplementary materials available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21766:
  - Web appendix
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                   6

2 A Framework for Interpreting the Evidence                                                     10
  2.1   The Formation of Skills Over the Life-cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       12
  2.2   Arguments for Subsidizing Early Childhood Education Programs . . . . . . .              14
  2.3   Two Policy Evaluation Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         16

3 Evidence from Demonstration Programs                                                          17
  3.1   The Characteristics of the Demonstration Early Childhood Programs . . . .               18
  3.2   Overview of Programs Discussed in This Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
  3.3   Possible Limitations in the Evidence from Demonstration Programs . . . . .              24
  3.4   Effects on IQ, Achievement Test Scores, and Conscientiousness . . . . . . . .           27
  3.5   Long-Term Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34
  3.6   Connecting Short-Term and Long-Term Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             36
  3.7   Cost-Benefit and Rate of Return Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          40
  3.8   Summary of the Evidence from Demonstration Programs . . . . . . . . . . .               44

4 Evidence from Head Start                                                                      44
  4.1   Overview of Head Start . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      45
  4.2   Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    47
  4.3   Short-Term Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         49
  4.4   Long-Term Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        52
  4.5   Cost-Benefit Analyses     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54
  4.6   Summary of the Evidence from Head Start . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           56
  4.7   The Tennessee Voluntary Pre-Kindergarten Program . . . . . . . . . . . . .              56

5 Evidence from Large-Scale Programs                                                            58
  5.1   Universal Subsidies to Childcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      61

                                               3
        5.1.1   Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      61
        5.1.2   Quebec    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63
  5.2   Local Universal Programs in the US . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        64
  5.3   Summary of the Evidence from Universal Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             69

6 The Importance of Quality                                                                     69

7 Summary                                                                                       71



List of Figures

  1     Graphical Representation of the Technology of Skill Formation . . . . . . . .           12
  2     Dynamics of IQ in PPP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         33
  3     Decompositions of Treatment Effects of PPP on Male Adult Outcomes . . .                 37
  4     Decompositions of Treatment Effects of PPP on Female Adult Outcomes . .                 37
  5     Decompositions of Treatment Effects of PPP and ABC on Male Adult Outcomes 39
  6     Decompositions of Treatment Effects of ABC on Male and Female (Pooled)
        Adult Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      40



List of Tables

  1     Comparing Demonstration Programs, Head Start, and Universal Preschool
        Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      11
  2     Summary Table of Demonstration Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             22
  3     Control Group Background Characteristics at Baseline, All Programs (Mean
        Outcomes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
  4     Treatment Effects on Early-life Skills for Samples Pooled Across Gender . . .           28
  5     Treatment Effects on Early-life Skills for Females . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        29
  6     Treatment Effects on Early-life Skills for Males . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30

                                               4
7    Life-Cycle Outcomes, PPP and ABC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        35
8    Costs and Benefits of PPP and ABC, 2014 USD         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   43
9    Evidence Across Studies of the Impacts of Head Start . . . . . . . . . . . . .      55
10   Federal Funding Streams for Childcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     60




                                          5
1        Introduction

Recent research demonstrates that the effects of adverse early childhood environments per-
sist over a lifetime (Knudsen et al., 2006). Substantial gaps between the environments of
advantaged children and those of disadvantaged children raise serious concerns about the life
prospects of disadvantaged children and the state of social mobility in America.1
        The proliferation of single-parent households—especially households where children have
never had a father present—is a major contributor to the growth in inequality in childhood
environments.2 In the US, single-parenthood is strongly correlated with child poverty. As a
group, the children of single parents are less likely to succeed in life than children from stable
two-parent households.3 This evidence and the evidence that gaps in advantage are growing
across generations4 has prompted growing interest in improving the early-life opportunities
of disadvantaged children.5
        Concerns about the quality of childhood environments are fueled by growth in the labor
force participation of women with children.6 This growth raises concerns about the supply of
childcare and its quality. Disadvantaged parents often lack access to high-quality childcare
and single-parent families are especially vulnerable.7 The percentage of children who grow
up in poverty has increased from 16% in 2000 to 21% in 2013.8
        These dual concerns have stimulated interest in public provision of early childhood
education programs to ease the burden of childcare for working mothers and to enhance the
opportunities available to disadvantaged children.
    1
     McLanahan (2004); Reardon et al. (2011).
    2
     McLanahan (2004); Heckman (2008).
   3
     McLanahan and Percheski (2008).
   4
     Putnam (2015).
   5
     Office of the Mayor (2014).
   6
     Calculations using the Current Population Survey indicate that, between 1960 to 2010, maternal labor
market attachment increased from 41% to 65% for single mothers (with children) and 20% to 60% for married
mothers. Most of these single mothers had children residing with them—in 1960, 91% of children in single
parent families lived with their mothers; this fell slightly to 87% in 2010.
   7
     Blau (2003).
   8
     Rates of child poverty are calculated using the Current Population Survey. Poverty is defined as growing
up in a household below the federal poverty line.



                                                     6
       High-quality early childhood education programs enrich the learning and nurturing envi-
ronments of disadvantaged children. An accumulating body of evidence shows the beneficial
effects of these programs. They are much discussed among academics, mainstream media,
and policymakers. The Obama administration has promoted programs like Head Start as
vehicles of opportunity and social mobility and has called for increased federal investment
in high-quality programs developed and administered by states (The White House, 2014a).
       This paper organizes and synthesizes the evidence on a variety of early childhood pro-
grams. We consider the evidence on means-tested programs.9 Eligibility for these programs
is determined by a measure of childhood poverty (either family income or close surrogates
for it). We also consider the evidence on universal preschool programs.10
       We gather in one place the evidence on the programs with the most rigorous evaluations
for which the reported results can be replicated. We also devote some attention to the
evidence from programs with flawed or limited evaluations, but do not place much weight on
it. We compare the treatments, treated populations, and treatment effects across a broad
range of programs.
       We go beyond the standard, often very limited, discussions of the benefits of early
childhood education. We consider a richer collection of outcome measures, in addition to
the scores on IQ or achievement tests that receive so much attention in the literature. We
consider multiple outcomes across the life-cycle, e.g., physical and mental health, criminal
activity, earnings, and social engagement. We assess the economic and social rates of return
for programs that have the necessary data.
       We do not rely exclusively on evidence from randomized control trials. We use credible
causal evidence from a broad range of studies using different methodologies. The evidence
we assemble shows agreement across studies: there is a strong case for high-quality early
   9
     “Means-Tested” in this paper refers to programs with eligibility criteria based on income, socio-economic
status, or other measures of disadvantage.
  10
     Universal programs have age requirements for children but are not means-tested. However, many ad-
vocate universal programs with sliding fee schedules based on family income, which effectively make them
means-tested.



                                                      7
childhood education for disadvantaged children. It improves the early-life environments
of disadvantaged children, which in turn boost a variety of early-life skills and later-life
achievements.
       We address two distinct questions that are frequently conflated. The first is whether
or not early childhood programs are effective. The second is whether or not the economic
benefits of these programs exceed their costs.
       The answer to the first question depends on the quality of the program being offered and
the alternatives available and their costs. Any measure of effectiveness is a relative statement.
The proper question is: effective relative to what? Affluent families have better alternatives
and generally do not benefit from the public provision of early childhood education aimed at
median or disadvantaged populations. In contrast, high-quality versions of such programs
are consistently found to benefit disadvantaged children and have substantial economic and
social rates of return.11
       Failure to account for the quality of childcare alternatives and the quality of home
environments leads analysts to make misleading statements about program effectiveness. A
recent example is the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS).12 Analyses that fail to account for the
childcare alternatives available to control participants understate the effects of Head Start.
Analyses that account for these alternatives show that Head Start actually has moderate to
strong effects on measures of cognitive and non-cognitive skills13 compared to home care,
but not necessarily when compared with other quality center-based childcare.
       The answer to the second question is that the evidence in hand supports public subsidy
of high-quality programs targeted to disadvantaged populations. At current quality levels
and costs, their social benefits exceeds their social costs. There is little direct evidence on
the effectiveness of the programs we study on the children of affluent families. This paper
  11
      This conclusion is consistent with previous studies that argue that disadvantaged children greatly benefit
from early childhood education. See, e.g., Blau and Currie (2006), Duncan and Magnuson (2013), and
Yoshikawa et al. (2013). We differ from these studies because we consider evidence from a broader range of
studies using diverse but competent evaluation methodologies.
   12
      Puma et al. (2012).
   13
      Feller et al. (2014); Kline and Walters (2014); Zhai et al. (2014).


                                                       8
does not address the general question of what the optimal provision of childcare should be
for persons in different economic strata. The answer to this question would take us too far
afield.
       The economic case for universal early childhood programs is weak.14 The case often
made for them is political in nature. Universality is sometimes sought to avoid stigma and to
promote inclusion. The costs of offering such programs are diminished because, at the levels
of quality usually proposed, the affluent are much less likely to use them.15 The programs
discussed in this paper are less attractive to them because they have better alternatives.
       Table 1 summarizes the programs we discuss and their basic features. We present
detailed descriptions of these programs in Sections 3–5 and Appendices A and B. Section 3
discusses the evidence from four experimental evaluations of demonstration programs: (i)
the Perry Preschool Project (PPP); (ii) the Carolina Abecedarian Project (ABC); (iii) the
Infant Health and Development Program (IHDP); and (iv) the Early Training Project (ETP).
Instead of just reporting estimates from the literature, or doing a meta-analysis, we conduct
a primary analysis of each program using a standardized format. We could not discuss
the Chicago Parent-Child Program (Reynolds et al., 2011) in our analysis because we do
not have access to the most updated and complete data for this program on which claims
about its effectiveness are based . The PI has not cooperated to help us replicate its reported
findings. Our access to data for the Nurse Family Partnership (NFP; Olds, 2006), is similarly
restricted.
       We consider the evidence on Head Start in Section 4. Eligibility for it is means-tested
primarily on the basis of family income. Centers are free to pick their curricula and there
  14
      Universal programs are defined as programs available to all children in a geographical area with only
age as an eligibility criteria. Because they are voluntary, participation in universal programs is far from
universal. For example, the take-up of the two major universal state programs in Georgia and Oklahoma
for the years they are studied is 59% and 74%, respectively (Cascio and Schanzenbach, 2013). Within these
programs, 65% and 66% of participating children were low-income as measured by eligibility for free or
reduced price lunch, which is offered to children whose families are at or below 185% of the federal poverty
line. We discuss preschool take-up by socio-economic status further in Section 5.
   15
      Program costs would be diminished further if the affluent who used them were charged user fees, as some
have proposed (Heckman, 2008).



                                                     9
is a lot of variety in the programs offered. We also discuss the evidence from a recently
evaluated means-tested statewide program that shares some features in common with Head
Start.16
       The evidence on the benefits of universal programs discussed in Section 5 comes from:
(i) national programs in Canada and Norway; (ii) state programs in Oklahoma and Georgia;
and (iii) a recent universal program in Boston. Section 6 discusses non-experimental evidence
on the importance of quality environments in promoting child development. We summarize
our findings in Section 7.
       The goal of this paper is to distill general lessons from the literature that can guide
policy and not to endorse or attack any particular program. The literature is often marred
by a “treatment effect” mentality that sees evaluation research as an up or down statement
about whether a particular program “works” and not why it works or does not work. Our
approach is to understand the mechanisms underlying successful early childhood education
programs with an eye toward designing future approaches that improve on current practice.
With this goal in mind, we next present a framework for interpreting the evidence within a
general model of human development.



2        A Framework for Interpreting the Evidence

Before turning to our review of the literature, we present the guiding principles of this essay.
We first discuss a dynamic model of skill formation based on Cunha and Heckman (2007,
2009). It provides a framework for understanding the effectiveness of early interventions for
disadvantaged children. We next consider arguments for public provisions of interventions.
We then discuss how the availability of alternative childcare options affects the interpretation
of the evidence from interventions.
  16
       The Tennessee Pre-Kindergarten Program (Lipsey et al., 2015).




                                                     10
                         Table 1: Comparing Demonstration Programs, Head Start, and Universal Preschool Programs
                                                                    Eligibility                                                                           Content                                                 Sample Characteristics                                                                                   Measures Available




                                                     Means-tested
                                                                     High Disadvantage
                                                                                         Low Income
                                                                                                      Criteria Narrowly Defined
                                                                                                                                  Homogeneous Treatment
                                                                                                                                                          Medical Services
                                                                                                                                                                             Home Visiting
                                                                                                                                                                                             Parent Involvement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Randomized Control Trial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Small Sample
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Control Contamination
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Age of Follow-ups
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Achievement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Non-Cognitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Parenting Skills
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Subject Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Educational Attainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Use of Public Transfers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Crime
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Health




      Demonstration Programs   ABC                   X               X                   X            X                           X                       X                  -               X                    X                          X              X                       34                  X    X              X               X                  X                    X                        X                         X       X
                               PPP                   X               X                   X            X                           X                       -                  X               X                    X                          X              -                       40                  X    X              X               -                  X                    X                        X                         X       -
                               ETP                   X               X                   X            X                           -                       -                  X               X                    X                          X              -                       20                  X    X              -               -                  -                    X                        -                         -       -
                               IHDP                  -a              -                   -            -                           X                       X                  X               X                    X                          -              X                       18                  X    X              X               X                  -                    X                        -                         -       -
            Head Start         HSIS                  X               -                   X            -                           -b                      X                  X               X                    X                          -              X                       8                   X    X              X               -                  -                    -                        -                         -       -
                               NLSY79/CNLSY          X               -                   X            -                           -                       X                  X               X                    -                          -              X                       21                  -    X              X               -                  X                    X                        X                         X       X
        Universal Programs     State Pre-K: OK       -               -                   -            -                           -                       -                  -               -                    -                          -              Xc                      9                   -    X              -               -                  -                    -                        -                         -       -
                               State Pre-K: GA       -               -                   -            -                           -                       -                  -               -                    -                          -              Xc                      9                   -    X              -               X                  -                    -                        -                         -       -
                               Local Pre-K: Boston   -               -                   -            -                           -                       -                  -               -                    -                          -              Xc                      6                   -    X              X               -                  -                    -                        -                         -       -




11
                               Reform in Norway      -               -                   -            -                           -                       -                  -               -                    -                          -              -                       33                  -    X              -               X                  X                    X                        -                         -       -
          Other Programs       TN-VPK                X               -                   X            -                           -                       -                  -               -                    X                          -              Xd                      6                   -    X              X               -                  -                    -                        -                         -       -

     Note: This table compares the programs from which we draw evidence. ABC: Carolina Abecedarian Project. PPP: Perry Preschool Project.
     ETP: Early Training Project. IHDP: Infant Health and Development Program. HSIS: Head Start Impact Study. TN-VPK: Tennessee Vol-
     untary Prekindergarten Program. Boston: Boston Public School Prekindergarten Program. “High Disadvantage” refers to inclusion of home
     environment and other family characteristics in the eligibility criteria. “Criteria Narrowly Defined” indicates that the program serves a population
     that is narrowly defined in terms of eligibility on the basis of socio-economic status or race. While Head Start serves predominately low-income
     children, the populations served vary greatly across sites in other important characteristics. “Homogeneous Treatment” refers to approximately
     equivalent quality across sites or cohorts. a IHDP limited participation to low birthweight, premature children (≤ 2, 500 grams, ≤ 37 weeks) who
     lived at most 45 minutes away from treatment centers. b Although there are curricular guidelines and performance standards for Head Start,
     individual centers have flexibility in curriculum implementation and offer different services that are intended to meet the needs of the local pop-
     ulation. Thus, we consider Head Start to have heterogeneous treatment, though there are similarities in treatment. Own calculations with HSIS
     data indicate that 30% of HSIS centers use a version of the HighScope curriculum, which was developed in the Perry Preschool Project. “Control
     Contamination” refers to the use by control children of other programs. There is some information on the nature of control contamination for
     almost all of the programs. c These programs are not randomized control trials. There is evidence a substantive part of the comparison groups in
     Boston and Oklahoma had access to center-based care. We assume that this can be extrapolated for the case of Georgia, where the information
     is less clear. d There is not much known about control contamination in TN-VPK; however, control children were not prohibited from enrolling
     in other programs. “Sample Characteristics” describe the features of the study design and data that impact evaluation. “Measures Available”
     describes the data available from our cited studies.
2.1       The Formation of Skills Over the Life-cycle

Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2009) develop a model of the evolution of skills over the life-
cycle. The central ingredient of this model is the technology of skill formation, graphically
represented in Figure 1. At life cycle stage t, parental skills (θtP ), investment (It ), and child
skills (θt ) determine the skills in the next period t + 1 (θt+1 ).17

            Figure 1: Graphical Representation of the Technology of Skill Formation

                            Parental Background   Investment   Skill   Stage of Life Cycle



                                       θ-1P              I-1    θ-1          Prenatal




                                       θ0P                      θ0             Birth


                                                     I0
                                                                θ1       Early Childhood
                                       θ1P

                                                    I1          θ2       Later Childhood

                                       θTP

                                                     IT         θT         Adolescence


                                                               θT+1         Adulthood



Note: This figure illustrates the technology of skill formation, where links in the technology are represented
by arrows. Dots represent periods that are not depicted in the diagram.


       Parents affect their children in multiple ways. Parents with greater parenting skills (θtP )
create warm, supportive, fostering environments independent of their financial resources, the
volume of time spent with children in direct instruction, or child development. Parents with
greater financial and time resources can invest more in goods (e.g., tuition for pre-K) and
time (e.g., taking a child to the zoo) captured by vector It . Whether they choose to do so
depends in part on their preferences.18
  17
    t = −1 corresponds to the prenatal years.
  18
    See, e.g., the review of the literature on parental preferences for child outcomes in Heckman and Mosso
(2014).

                                                         12
      Income is often used as a measure of child poverty, but it is a very crude one. An
affluent but indifferent parent can provide an impoverished early childhood environment.
Financially strapped families can nonetheless provide strong family environments through
their attachment, warmth, and investment in time and caring. Public programs attempt to
bolster both It and θtP and also to provide information to parents. While this paper focuses
on “means-tested” programs, readers should recognize the inadequacy of equating childhood
poverty with poverty in money income.19
      The process of skill formation is dynamic and builds on itself. In the technology of skill
formation, current stocks of skills help create future stocks of skills over the life-cycle, and
future skills have intergenerational impacts. These dynamic relationships make early life an
important period because it lays the foundation for building skills later in life. The following
points are established in the recent literature.


  1. Skills are multiple. Individuals have many life-relevant skills beyond the cognitive skills
        measured by IQ and achievement tests. These additional skills are variously referred
        to as non-cognitive skills or character skills. They also include health and mental
        health. They are important predictors of successful lives. These skills are important
        to different degrees in different life tasks. Early education programs promote these
        skills. In assessing the success or failure of any intervention, a full inventory of the
        skills affected is an essential part of any reliable evaluation of it.20

  2. Skills are self-productive and complement each other. Between any two periods in the
        life of a child, t and t + 1, a child’s stock of skills builds on itself (“skills beget skills”).
        Skills are not only self-productive but also promote the production of other skills. Skills
        are said to complement each other in period t when together they promote skills in
        period t+1 more than each skill alone. Cognitive skills, non-cognitive skills, and health
        in period t complement each other and produce cognitive skills, non-cognitive skills,
 19
      See Mayer (1997) and Heckman and Mosso (2014).
 20
      Heckman and Kautz (2012, 2014).


                                                   13
       and health in period t + 1.21

  3. Skills complement investment. By fostering early-life skills, early childhood education
       establishes a foundation which facilitates the accumulation of skills later in life.22 Early
       childhood education promotes life-cycle skill development by increasing the stock of fu-
       ture skills that promote the productivity of future investment. This feature of life-cycle
       investment is called dynamic complementarity. Under conditions confirmed empirically
       in Cunha et al. (2010), it is more productive to invest in disadvantaged children early in
       life than to remediate disadvantage later in life. This arises from the complementarity
       between later-life skills (acquired by early-life investment) and later-life investments.
       Enriched, early-life investment helps disadvantaged children capture many of the same
       benefits of later-life investment that are experienced by their more advantaged peers.
       The flip side of dynamic complementarity is that it is harder to remediate early dis-
       advantage at older ages. Investment at later ages in adolescents lacking a strong early
       skill base is often much less productive than investment at early ages.23

These features of the technology of skill formation help to explain why supplementing parent-
ing skills and the quality of investment offered to disadvantaged young children are socially
fair and economically efficient strategies.24


2.2     Arguments for Subsidizing Early Childhood Education Pro-

        grams

Many arguments have been made for subsidizing early childhood programs for disadvantaged
families. Heckman and Mosso (2014) summarize the literature.
      All of the arguments build on the evidence that early childhood environments have
profound consequences on the lives of children, and affect the entire society through reduced
 21
    See, e.g., Heckman and Mosso (2014).
 22
    Cunha and Heckman (2008); Cunha et al. (2010).
 23
    See Heckman and Kautz (2014).
 24
    Heckman and Mosso (2014).

                                                14
crime, enhanced health, greater educational attainment, and greater social engagement.
Adverse early childhood environments create externalities—effects on society as a whole—
that parents (for whatever reason) do not act on or internalize. The exact reasons for deficits
in early investment are debated. There are three classes of arguments.
      Some point to borrowing constraints facing disadvantaged families that have become
more pronounced in recent decades with declining real wages for less educated workers and
that are exacerbated by rising tuition costs (see Caucutt and Lochner, 2012 and Duncan and
Murnane, 2014). Under this argument, parents under-invest in children because their cost of
investing is greater than the social cost of funds. With the growth in single-parent families
and the need for women to work to support their families, time constraints on parents have
also increased.
      The evidence on the importance of borrowing constraints is hotly debated (see, e.g.,
Mayer, 1997 and Heckman and Mosso, 2014). As previously noted, more than money is
involved in creating nourishing, productive child environments. The evidence that cash
transfers to disadvantaged families have important effects on child development is weak.
      Other information-based arguments have been advanced that note the importance of
family knowledge of best practice child rearing.25 There is considerable evidence that dis-
advantaged parents lack the information required to be effective parents. Many programs
(ETP, IHDP, PPP) are based on this premise and it is one reason for home visiting pro-
grams. It is a justification for using in-kind transfers of information and direct supplements
to parenting, rather than simple cash transfers.
      More controversial is the argument that parents lack sufficient altruism/concern for their
children. This paternalistic argument has evident merit in the case of abusive parents, or
parents who deny children access to opportunities that would give them options the parents
do not wish them to exercise (e.g., high school education for Amish children).
      This paper does not evaluate the merits of these separate arguments. But the evidence
 25
      See Cunha et al. (2013) and Cunha (2015) for recent evidence on this question.



                                                     15
shows that in contemporary American society, disadvantaged children face adverse child
rearing environments, and high-quality targeted in-kind policies that have been implemented
are effective.


2.3      Two Policy Evaluation Questions

In evaluating program impacts on skill development, researchers must be careful in under-
standing what the evidence reveals. Families differ in terms of the quality of the early
environments offered to their children. Researchers need to distinguish between two ques-
tions when evaluating program effectiveness. The first question is: What is the causal effect
of an early childhood education program relative to a particular childcare alternative, where
one of these alternatives might be no treatment at all? The second question is: What is the
causal effect of adding a program to the available choice set? 26
       The first question addresses the effectiveness of a policy that offers a particular early
education program compared to a particular alternative, e.g., home care. The second ques-
tion addresses the effectiveness of expanding the choice set available to parents, i.e., adding
one more alternative. Most of the evaluations we consider answer the second question, even
though answers to it are often treated as answers to the first.27
       These questions are often confused. In particular, estimating the causal effect of ex-
panding the availability of choices—making a new program available—and interpreting such
estimates as statements about the effectiveness of that program compared to no program
at all, might suggest that a program is ineffective. If the control group of a study has
access to alternatives that are good substitutes for the program being studied, and if the
researcher erroneously assumes that the relevant alternative to the program being evaluated
is home childcare and not some higher quality alternative, then there would appear to be no
causal effect of the program’s availability—even though the program may be highly effective
  26
    See Heckman and Vytlacil (2007).
  27
    Heckman et al. (2000) discuss these problems under the rubric of “substitution bias.” See also Heckman
(1992).



                                                   16
compared to home child care.28
      This type of error is made in many evaluations of Head Start—particularly, in evaluations
that use data from the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS). The control group in HSIS had
access to treatment substitutes, which sometimes include other Head Start centers. Studies
that ignore the availability of program substitutes find weak effects.29 Studies that account
for the substitutes available find moderate to strong effects of Head Start compared to no
program at all on measures of cognitive skills and non-cognitive skills.30
      We discuss this evidence in detail in Section 4 after discussing the evidence from demon-
stration programs. A discussion of these programs is relevant to our analysis of Head Start.
The curricula of these programs are embedded in versions of the curricula used in Head
Start centers, although they are funded at lower levels than in the original programs. Our
evidence on demonstration programs offers indirect evidence on the possibilities for success
of an enriched Head Start program.



3      Evidence from Demonstration Programs

This section analyzes the evidence from the demonstration programs listed in Table 1. We
conduct a new primary analysis of the four programs listed there rather than just a meta-
analysis of existing studies. We first present the common features of the demonstration
programs we analyze and our criteria for selecting them. We then describe them in Subsec-
tion 3.2. We discuss common methodological issues that arise when analyzing these programs
in Subsection 3.3. In Subsection 3.4 we present evidence on the short-term effects from these
programs. We present evidence on long-term effects in Subsection 3.5. Subsection 3.6 re-
lates the short-term findings to the long-term findings. Subsection 3.7 discusses cost-benefit
analyses for two major demonstration programs, PPP and ABC. Subsection 3.8 summarizes
the discussion.
 28
    See Heckman et al. (2000).
 29
    Puma et al. (2012).
 30
    Feller et al. (2014); Kline and Walters (2014) and Zhai et al. (2014).


                                                     17
3.1      The Characteristics of the Demonstration Early Childhood

         Programs

The early childhood demonstration programs we consider are targeted social experiments
designed to bolster various aspects of the early lives of disadvantaged children. Assignment
to treatment is randomized, although non-compliance and attrition can compromise the
inference from any randomization. These programs are all means-tested, though they have
different eligibility criteria.
       The evidence on demonstration programs is not always comparable across programs,
because they differ in terms of data availability, eligibility, quality, duration of treatment,
length of follow-up, and other characteristics. Careful analysis is required in making valid
cross-program comparisons of program effects. We discuss program differences and iden-
tify common components. The demonstration programs considered here have the following
common features:


   1. They are center-based. This section focuses on four center-based programs: (i) the
        Perry Preschool Project (PPP); (ii) the Carolina Abecedarian Project (ABC); (iii) the
        Infant Health and Development Program (IHDP); and (iv) the Early Training Project
        (ETP).31

   2. They are means-tested. The programs we consider are all means-tested, although they
        use different eligibility criteria. The evidence on universal programs discussed in Sec-
        tion 5 shows that early childhood education is particularly effective for disadvantaged
        children.
  31
     We do not consider three important programs outside of the US: the Mauritius Study, due to its excessive
attrition by age 40 (58%) (Raine et al., 2010), the Turkey Early Enrichment Program, also due to its excessive
attrition by age 26 (49%) (Kagitcibasi et al., 2009), and the Jamaica Study (Gertler et al., 2014), which
focused primarily on nutrition and home visits. We do not consider the Nurse Family Partnership program
because it focused mainly on prenatal care (Olds et al., 1986, 1994; Eckenrode et al., 2010; Heckman et al.,
2014). Other programs in the US that we do not consider include the following: the Milwaukee Project,
because data are unavailable (Page, 1972; Sommer and Sommer, 1983; Garber, 1988; Gilhousen et al.,
1990); the Even Start Program (Ricciuti et al., 2004) and the Comprehensive Child Development Program
(St. Pierre et al., 1999, 1997) because of lack of information on childcare alternatives.


                                                     18
   3. The programs considered collect measurements on multiple skills and outcomes over
       long periods of the life-cycle. It is a common but mistaken practice to evaluate pro-
       grams based on outcomes only measured at early ages. Uninformed analysts sometimes
       assume that programs are ineffective due to the fadeout in IQ in the short-term eval-
       uations that ignore multiple capacities. We evaluate programs using a diverse set of
       long-term outcomes that matter for success in life, such as health, education, earnings,
       and participation in crime.

   4. We discuss, where necessary, the consequences of compromised randomization, attrition
       of participants from programs or from study samples, the availability of good substitutes
       in the control group, and other challenges in conducting evaluations. Compromises
       of the initial randomization protocols occur when subjects assigned to treatment or
       control status in an experimental protocol switch their initially assigned status or
       leave the program or the follow-up surveys. Despite challenges in analyzing the data,
       we show that valid, policy-relevant information can be derived from these studies.


3.2     Overview of Programs Discussed in This Section

Table 2 presents an overview of the programs we study. We discuss their most promi-
nent characteristics in the next few paragraphs and present a more detailed discussion in
Appendix A. The oldest programs we study are ETP and PPP. They began in 1962 and
continued until 1964 and 1967, respectively. ABC is also relatively old, beginning in 1972
and continuing until 1982. The most recent program is IHDP, implemented from 1985 to
1988. PPP and ABC have high-quality data with long-term follow-ups. IHDP and ETP
only have follow-ups into young adulthood. ETP, PPP, and ABC shared a common goal of
preventing “mental retardation” and promoting school-readiness (Weikart, 1967; Gray et al.,
1982; Ramey et al., 1982; Zigler and Muenchow, 1994).32
  32
    Note that the clinical understanding of mental retardation was once associated with disadvantages that
hindered early life development Noll and Trent (2004).



                                                   19
       The researchers who implemented ETP, PPP, and ABC also created the curricula for
these programs. The staff adapted and improved them while they were being conducted
(Heckman et al., 2015). All three curricula have elements in common: promotion of play-
based and child-directed learning, emphasis on language development, and emphasis on
developing non-cognitive and problem-solving skills. The curricula in IHDP was adapted
from the curricula of both ABC and a spinoff program, the Carolina Approach to Responsive
Education (CARE) (Gross et al., 1997).33
       Of these studies, PPP and ABC presently have the longest follow-ups, with data up to
ages 40 and 34, respectively. A follow-up through age 50 of Perry is being collected at the
time of this writing. Both PPP and ETP served preschool-age children and had home visits
with their parents. ABC served children from birth through preschool age. IHDP served
children and had home visits from birth to age 3. ABC had two treatment phases, 0 to 5
and 5 to 8, and correspondingly two rounds of randomization. ABC was the most intensive
program (8 hours per day starting from 1-3 months and continuing to age 8). There were no
home visits in the first phase but parents were encouraged to visit the center. There were
home visits in the second phase. We focus on the first phase (0-5) because there is little
evidence of treatment effects from the second phase.34 While ETP, PPP, and ABC served
relatively narrowly targeted populations, IHDP was more inclusive and served a population
that was far more heterogeneous in terms of race and socio-economic status, although all
children served had low birth-weight.35
       All four programs had relatively educated staffs with some experience in education and
high teacher-to-child ratios. They varied in the amount of time children spent in the center—
PPP had 2 years of center-based treatment for 3 hours a day and weekly home visits; ETP
had intensive summer school and weekly home visits during up to 3 years, but no year-round
  33
      Appendix C provides further details about CARE.
  34
      See Conti et al. (2015) and Campbell et al. (2014).
   35
      Garcı́a (2015) compares the IHDP sample with the cohort born in the same year (1985) in the US. The
author finds that IHDP individuals are, on average, relatively disadvantaged. The author suggests that this
is a consequence of the correlation between measures of disadvantage: maternal labor supply, household
income, a father’s presence at home, premature birth status, and low birth-weight.


                                                    20
center care; and ABC included center-based care during all of early childhood from birth to
school entry for up to 8 hours per day.
    Like ABC, IHDP also began at birth. During the first year, the program provided weekly
home visits. These visits became bi-monthly in the second and third years of treatment.
IHDP provided center-based treatment for up to 9 hours a day for 50 weeks a year in the
second and third years of the program. Both ABC and IHDP included medical components—
most prominently regular physical check-ups for the treated children.




                                            21
                                    Table 2: Summary Table of Demonstration Programs
                                                PPP                            ABC                            IHDP                             ETP

 Program Overviewa
 Years implemented                           1962–1967                     1972–1982                         1985–1988                      1962-1964
                                                                        Chapel Hill, North             8 sites selected after        Segregated black schools
 Site                                   Ypsilanti, Michigan
                                                                         Carolina (UNC)                 competitive review          in Abbotsfield, Tennessee
 # Cohorts                                        5                             4                                 1                             2
 N (Treatment : Control)                    123 (58 : 65)                 111 (57 : 54)                   985 (377 : 608)                  88 (43 : 45)
 Age of Entry                                    3–4                            0                                 0                            4–5
 Duration                                     1–2 years                      5 years                          3 years                       2–3 years

 Treatment
                                                                                                   4 (up to age); 1–2 (after age
 Home Visitsb (per month)                         4                              0
                                                                                                                1)
                                                                                                                                                4
 Center Care (weeks per year)                     30                            50                              50                              10
 Center Care (hours per week)                   12–15                           45                             20+                              20
         Parent Involvement                       X                              -                              X                                -
 Nutrition                                         -                            X                               X                                -
 Diapers/Child Care Goods                          -                            X                               X                                -
 Well-child Health Care                            -                            X                               X                                -
 Ill-child Health Care                             -                            X                               X                                -
 Counseling                                        -                            X                               X                                -
 Parenting Instruction                            X                              -                              X                               X

 Controlc
 Home Visits (per month)                          -                            -                                 -                               -
 Center Care (weeks per year)                     -                            -                                 -                               -
 Center Care (hours per week)                     -                            -                                 -                               -
 Nutrition                                        -                  X(Formula up to 15 mo)                      -                               -
 Diapers (no other health care
                                                  -                      X(up to 15 mo)                          -                               -
 goods)
 Well-child Health Care                           -                 X(Cohort 1, up to age 1)                     X                               -
 Ill-child Health Care                            -                            -                                 -                               -
 Counseling                                       -                            -                                 -                               -
 Parenting Instruction                            -                            -                                 -                               -

 Randomization Protocol
                                       1. Rank by initial IQ of                                     1. Stratify on birthweight
 Steps
                                                child                   1. Match on HRId                      and site
                                                                                                                                      Simple randomization
                                      2. Group evens and odds          2. Adjust by gender,               2. Randomize                   into 2 treatment
                                      3. Balance gender, SES,          maternal IQ, siblings                                               and 1 control
                                                 etc.                   3. Randomize pairs                                                    groups
                                         4. Randomize whole
                                               group

                                                                                                      17 families refused to
                                      Enrolled siblings receive         2 extremely needy
 Compromises                                                                                         participate of the study                  N/A
                                         same assignment              switched to treatment
                                                                                                        after assignment
                                      Working moms switched             4 refused random
                                            to control                      assignment
                                                                     4 abandoned treatment
                                                                      2 considered ineligible
                                                                       after randomization

                                        Stay at home or with                                                                          Stay at home or with
 Counterfactual                                                     Stay at home or childcare       Stay at home or childcare
                                         friends or relatives                                                                          friends or relatives
                                                                      Alternative programs            Alternative programs
                                          (Few substitutes)                                                                             (Few substitutes)
                                                                            available                       available

                                        Cultural Deprivation                                         Live within 45 min from
 Program Eligibilitye                                                       HRI ≥ 11                                                   Home environment:
                                             Scale < 11                                                       center
                                          Low IQ (< 85)                Biologically healthy           Birth weight < 2500g            Education of parents
                                                                       No signs of mental                                            Parent occupation semi-
                                         African-American                                          Gestational age < 37 weeks
                                                                           retardation                                                     or unskilled
                                                                                                      No severe illnesses or
                                       No physical handicap                                                                             African American
                                                                                                      neurological defects
                                                                                                                                    Parent edu ≤ high school

 Curriculum
                                                                     1:3 (age 0–1); 1:4-5 (age
 Adult-Child Ratio                             1:5–1:6                                                        1:3–1:4                        1:4–1:6
                                                                       1–4); 1:5-6 (age 4–5)
 Staff & Certifications
                                                      g
        Teachers                               B.A.                      HS grads, mixedf                 College grads
                                                                                                                                      Teaching Assistants,
         Specialists                   Special Ed. Teachersg             Physician, Nurse                 College gradsf            college & Ph.D. students
                                                                                     f
                                                                              M.A.                         Clinical staff               Home visitorsf, g
 Language Development                             X                            X                                 X                             X
 Motor Development                                -                            X                                 X                             -
 Cognitive Development                            X                            X                                 X                             X
 Non-Cognitive Development                        X                            X                                 X                             X
 Task Orientation                                 -                            X                                 -                             X
 High-Risk Behavior                               -                            X                                 -                             -
 School Readiness                                 X                            X                                 X                             X
Source: All details and sources are extensively discussed in Appendix A. Notes: a In IHDP, an additional 105 twins were also followed in the study, but are
not analyzed in the literature. These twins were assigned to the same treatment group as their siblings. For each site, the program lasted until the youngest
child turned 36 months old, correcting for prematurity. b In PPP, home visits were intended to involve the mother in educating the child, increase her un-
derstanding of the educational process, and to extend the curriculum beyond the classes and into the homes. Monthly group meetings for parents were also
available, but is not well documented. During IHDP home visits, families in treatment groups were given toys with instructions on how to play with their
child with the toys. This was to extend the curriculum beyond the classroom. Home visits also sought to improve the parents ability to problem solve, cope
with personal issues, and function as parents. In addition, parent groups were offered as a chance for parents to share information and concerns with each
other, and to provide them with the opportunity to learn about child education and community resources. Surveys were conducted by college graduates. ETP
had two treatment groups. In one group, parents received two 9-month training sessions; in the other, parents received one 9-month training session. Dur-
ing these training sessions, the objective of the intervention was made clear to mothers during visits to schools. Mothers were encouraged to engage in their
children’s learning, as well as to expand the experiential environment of the child (e.g. trips to the library). c Treatment group individuals received all these
items as well. The control group of the first cohort of ABC received health check-ups for the first year, after which this practice was discontinued. d In ABC,
the High Risk Index (HRI) was comprised of: “Absence of maternal relatives in the area”; “Siblings of school age one or more grades behind age-appropriate
level or with equivalently low scores on school-administered achievement test”; “Payments received from welfare agencies within past 3 years”; “Record of
father’s work indicates unstable or unskilled and semiskilled labor”; “Record of mother’s or father’s IQ indicate scores of 90 or below”; “Record of sibling’s
IQ indicates scores of 90 or below”; “Relevant social agencies in the community indicate the family is in need of assistance”; “One or more members of the
family has sought counseling or professional help in the past 3 years”; maternal and paternal educational levels; family income; father’s presence. e In PPP,
criteria for home environment included education of parents, occupational level of father, maternal employment, and household density. f Signifies that staff
were specially trained for the program. g Signifies that staff were state certified.
      PPP, ABC, and ETP are not strictly means-tested programs. They use varying measures
of disadvantage roughly correlated with income, such as the quality of home environments as
characterized by single parenthood, parental education, and housing density. Additionally,
PPP and ETP were explicitly designed to serve African-American children.
      IHDP differs from the other programs in its eligibility criteria. All participants were
premature births (≤ 37 weeks), low birth-weight (≤ 2500 grams), and resided, at most,
45 minutes away from the location of the program. While the other demonstration pro-
grams served fairly narrowly defined disadvantaged populations (although the criteria used
differ), IHDP served a population that was more heterogeneous in socio-economic status
and race and only homogeneous in child birth-weight. However, because perinatal health is
related to the socio-economic characteristics of the parents, IHDP subjects were disadvan-
taged compared to the general US population (Garcı́a, 2015). Table 3 describes the baseline
characteristics of the populations served by the four demonstration programs we study.36




 36
      We describe only the control groups.


                                              23
Table 3: Control Group Background Characteristics at Baseline, All Programs (Mean Out-
comes)

                                           PPP              ABC               IHDP              ETP
                                       Mean SD        Mean      SD      Mean       SD      Mean     SD
      Black                            100% 0%        97%      16%       53%      50%      100%     0%
      IQ, Ages 2–4                     79.02 6.44     90.42   11.46      88.00   20.16     87.29 11.88
      Mother’s Age                     29.10 6.57     19.89    4.82     24.87     6.00     30.11   8.84
      Mother’s Years of Education       9.42  2.20    10.23    1.84      12.40    2.42      8.96   2.62
      Mother Works                     20% 40%        73%      45%       34%      47%      40%     49%
      Father at Home                    53% 50%       29%      46%       56%      50%       87%    34%
      Father’s Age                     32.81 6.88     23.21    5.91      27.64    6.67     32.82 10.10
      Father’s Years of Education       8.60  2.40    10.95    1.76      13.16    2.89      9.59   2.75
      Father Works                      86% 35%       87%       34       51%       50       97%    17%
                                         1       1                                           1        1
      Household Income (2014 USD)        n       n    7,653 10,049      41,868 32,623        n        n
      Siblings                         4.28    2.59    0.64    1.10       1.02    1.17      3.59    2.21
      Treatment                        47%     50%    52%      50%       39%      49%       48%     50%
   Source: Own calculations. Note: This table displays baseline characteristics of the control group of the
   demonstration programs we study. Mother and father’s years of education are counted as the number
   of years of schooling completed by the mother and father, respectively, at the time of program entry.
   The number of siblings is reported at program entry. PPP: Child’s IQ at age 3 is measured using the
   Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale. ABC: Child’s IQ at age 2 is measured using the Stanford-Binet
   Intelligence Scale. Mother’s age is reported at the time of program entry. IHDP: Child’s IQ at age 3
   is measured using the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale. ETP: Child’s IQ at age 4 is measured using
   the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale. Test scores are constructed to have a national mean of 100 and
   a standard deviation of 15. We only report characteristics of the control group, because for programs
   that started at birth (ABC and IHDP), we do not observe treatment baseline characteristics. House-
   hold income was not an eligibility criteria in any of the programs in this table. n1 indicates this data
   was not available.



3.3      Possible Limitations in the Evidence from Demonstration Pro-

         grams

Age of Programs

The programs we study are valuable for analyzing the effectiveness of early childhood edu-
cation because long-term follow-ups of their participants are available. Though it is natural
to question the relevance of older programs to current policy, we argue that the lessons from
them are still highly relevant.
      The basic principles of enhancing the investments in, and the environments of, disad-
vantaged children that were laid down fifty years ago remain intact. Objections to relying on
evidence from early high-quality programs are made by analysts who think that the outcome


                                                      24
of an evaluation study should be an up or down assessment of that program, rather than a
contribution to understanding the general principles from multiple programs that can guide
the construction of future programs. The effectiveness of any particular program is presum-
ably a lower bound on the effectiveness of new programs that build on and improve that
program. Evidence for the success of a program should not be a call for slavish application
of that program.
      We make four additional points on the relevance of the evidence from older programs.
First, all of the demonstration programs we analyze have school-readiness as a main goal.
This goal is shared with most contemporary early education programs. Second, the suc-
cess of some of these demonstration programs influenced the creation and design of the
most important current early childhood education programs. ETP and PPP influenced the
creation of Head Start (Zigler and Muenchow, 1994), and ABC motivated policymakers to
consider programs that targeted even younger children and inspired the creation of Early
Head Start (Schneider and McDonald, 2006). Third, and most important, as documented
in Section 4.1, although demonstration programs were very high-quality for their time, they
bear strong resemblance to current high-quality early childhood education programs in terms
of their structure, staffing, and curricula. For example, a version of HighScope is the sec-
ond most commonly used curriculum in Head Start, utilized by roughly 30% of Head Start
centers.37 Contemporary programs share other features with the programs we study, such
as teacher-to-child ratios (Heckman et al., 2014). Finally, some of the programs studied
have long-term follow-ups. Understanding the impacts of early childhood education on skill
formation requires analysis of effects on adult outcomes. This research requirement neces-
sitates analysis of older programs. Positive long-term outcomes are a strong indication of a
well-designed program.
 37
      Our own calculations using HSIS data.




                                              25
Small Sample Sizes

Samples are often small. Several recent studies use exact small sample inference to estimate
multiple treatment effects with precision, even when dividing samples by gender and account-
ing for the biases arising in testing multiple hypotheses (“cherry picking”).38 Application
of small sample inference methods produces results that are often not substantively differ-
ent from the results using bootstrap or standard asymptotic inference procedures (Heckman
et al., 2010a; Campbell et al., 2014). The methodologies employed to analyze IHDP, PPP,
and ABC are conservative.


Control Contamination

The extent to which the control group received center-based care varies across ETP, PPP,
ABC, and IHDP. There was no control contamination in ETP or PPP because of a lack
of center-based substitutes, whereas there was control contamination in ABC and IHDP
which were launched after Head Start was founded. In ABC, the control group had access
to non-center-based and center-based childcare, especially during ages 0–5 (Elango et al.,
2015). This included high-quality care provided in churches and even care at one Head Start
center. In IHDP, 39% of the children attended substitute programs, though their quality is
unknown (Garcı́a et al., 2014). None of the studies we discuss address the issue of control
contamination, even though most of the control groups had access to high-quality alterna-
tives. This practice makes conservative reported estimates of the effects of the programs
(compared to the home alternative).
  38
    See Romano et al. (2010). If a 10% significance level is used in a sample with 100 outcomes, and thus
100 null hypotheses of no treatment effects, roughly 10 would be “statistically significant” even if all null
hypotheses are true, i.e., treatment had no effect on any outcome. Heckman et al. (2010a); Gertler et al.
(2014); Campbell et al. (2014) and Heckman et al. (2014) use methods to correct for this multiplicity of
hypotheses.




                                                     26
Attrition and Non-Response

PPP and ABC data are used for assessing long-term benefits because they have high-quality
follow-ups. Follow-ups are available through age 40 in PPP and through age 34 in ABC.
Attrition and non-response complicate the interpretation of the evidence. Reliable analyses
adjust for these features of the data.


3.4    Effects on IQ, Achievement Test Scores, and Conscientious-

       ness

Table 4 presents estimated treatment effects on early IQ, early and late achievement test
scores, and early conscientiousness pooled over genders. Tables 5 and 6 display the same
information by gender. We adjust all test statistics for the effects of multiple hypothesis
testing using procedures applied in Heckman et al. (2010a). We base our interpretation on
non-parametric, permutation-based, one-sided p-values to test if the programs had positive
effects on the outcomes described. However, we also report results using two-sided tests.
Effects are shown for two measures of cognition: IQ and achievement test scores. All effects
are presented in units of standard deviations. In the case of IQ, we follow the convention and
use standardized scores that normalize the population mean and standard deviations of 100
and 15, respectively. Also shown are effects on conscientiousness, a non-cognitive skill that
is of interest due to its low correlation with cognition and high correlation with important
later-life outcomes (Borghans et al., 2008; Heckman et al., 2014).




                                             27
                                Table 4: Treatment Effects on Early-life Skills for Samples Pooled Across Gender
                                                    Treatment Effect    Permutation, one-sided   Permutation, two-sided    Stepdown, one-sided    Stepdown, two-sided
      Perry    IQ, Age 5                                 11.422                 0.000                     0.000                   0.000                  0.000
               IQ, Age 8                                 1.254                  0.080                     0.430                   0.080                  0.430
               Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10          0.394                 0.000                     0.000                   0.010                  0.010
               Conscientiousness, Ages 4–7                0.273                 0.040                     0.060                   0.050                  0.070
               Achievement Test Score, Age 27            1.795                  0.020                     0.070                   0.080                  0.060
      ABC      IQ, Age 5                                 6.398                  0.030                     0.030                   0.030                  0.030
               IQ, Age 8                                 4.500                  0.080                     0.080                   0.180                  0.180
               Achievement Test Score Ages 5–10           0.544                 0.010                     0.010                   0.020                  0.020
               Conscientiousness Ages 4–7                 0.047                 0.400                     0.680                   0.860                  0.890
               Achievement Test Score, Age 21            0.422                  0.010                     0.010                   0.120                  0.120
      IHDP     IQ, Age 3                                 8.475                  0.000                     0.000                   0.000                  0.000
               IQ, Age 8                                 -0.671                 0.680                     0.420                   0.910                  0.430
               Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10         -0.012                 0.570                     0.840                   0.830                  0.870




28
               Conscientiousness, Ages 4–7                0.075                 0.060                     0.140                   0.180                  0.190
               Achievement Test Score, Age 18            0.108                  0.470                     0.950                   0.730                  0.930
      ETP      IQ, Age 7                                  6.343                 0.020                     0.080                   0.050                  0.050
               IQ, Age, 8                                5.743                  0.100                     0.240                   0.150                  0.200
               Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10         0.534                  0.380                     0.820                   0.510                  0.800
     Source: Own calculations. Note: Initial sample sizes are: PPP: 123; ABC: 122; IHDP: 985; ETP: 91. Non-parametric permutation p − values account for compromised
     randomization, small sample size, and item non-response. See Heckman et al. (2010a) and Campbell et al. (2014, appendix) for details. Stepdown p − value accounts
     for the same and for multiple hypotheses testing. All school-age and adult achievement and conscientiousness measures have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. All IQ
     measures have mean 100 and standard deviation 15 and they are standardized using the national population mean and standard deviation. For PPP, IHDP, and ETP at
     ages 5, 3, and 7 we use the Stanford-Binet IQ test. For ABC at 5 we use the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence. For PPP and ETP at age 8 we use
     the Stanford-Binet IQ test. At this same age, we use Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children for ABC and IHDP. School Age Achievement is a factor measured through
     a factor of items at ages 5, 6, and 7. The items analyzed come from the California Achievement Test (ABC, PPP); Metropolitan Achievement Test (ETP); Peabody
     Individual Achievement Test (ABC); Woodcock-Johnson Test of Achievement (ABC, IHDP). School Age Conscientiousness is a factor constructed through a battery of
     items from various questionnaires: Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (ABC); Classroom Behavior Inventory (ABC); Walker Problem Behavior Identification Checklist
     (ABC); Teacher rating (PPP, IHDP); Reputation test (PPP, IHDP). Adult achievement is measured by Adult Performance Level (PPP); WoodcockJohnson Test (ABC);
     Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (IHDP). Adult achievement and conscientiousness measures are not available in ETP.
                                               Table 5: Treatment Effects on Early-life Skills for Females
                                                       Treatment Effect   Permutation, one-sided   Permutation, two-sided   Stepdown, one-sided   Stepdown, two-sided
      Perry   IQ, Age 5                                     12.666                0.000                    0.000                  0.000                 0.000
              IQ, Age 8                                      4.240                0.410                    0.900                  0.700                 0.940
              Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10              0.564                0.180                    0.400                  0.300                 0.390
              Conscientiousness, Ages, 4–7                   0.515                0.380                    0.850                  0.610                 0.860
              Achievement Test Score, Age 27                 0.407                0.110                    0.390                  0.330                 0.430
      ABC     IQ, Age 5                                      3.051                0.050                    0.050                  0.060                 0.060
              IQ, Age 8                                      4.573                0.110                    0.150                  0.360                 0.360
              Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10              0.822                0.260                    0.280                  0.410                 0.410




29
              Conscientiousness, Ages 4–7                    0.110                0.600                    0.960                  0.910                 0.960
              Achievement Test Score, Age 21                0.737                 0.240                    0.600                  0.790                 0.840
      IHDP    IQ Age 3                                      9.877                 0.000                    0.000                  0.000                 0.000
              IQ Age 8                                      -0.158                0.780                    0.490                  0.940                 0.600
              Achievement Test Score Ages 5–10              -0.034                0.500                    0.920                  0.790                 0.970
              Conscientiousness, Ages 4–7                    0.089                0.240                    0.440                  0.500                 0.530
              Achievement Test Score, Age 18                0.517                 0.650                    0.790                  0.840                 0.910
      ETP     IQ, Age 7                                      8.611                0.120                    0.140                  0.180                 0.180
              IQ, Age 8                                     9.056                 0.290                    0.540                  0.440                 0.550
              Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10             0.448                 0.810                    0.350                  0.980                 0.270
     Source: Own calculations. See notes in Table 4.
                                                 Table 6: Treatment Effects on Early-life Skills for Males
                                                       Treatment Effect   Permutation, one-sided   Permutation, two-sided   Stepdown, one-sided   Stepdown, two-sided
      Perry   IQ, Age 5                                     10.607                0.000                    0.000                  0.010                 0.010
              IQ, Age 8                                     -0.721                0.060                    0.250                  0.150                 0.190
              Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10              0.269                0.000                    0.020                  0.050                 0.050
              Conscientiousness, Ages4–7                     0.087                0.030                    0.040                  0.040                 0.040
              Achievement Test Score, Age 27                 0.214                0.110                    0.230                  0.160                 0.200
      ABC     IQ, Age 5                                      9.962                0.530                    0.540                  0.890                 0.890
              IQ, Age 8                                      4.174                0.410                    0.410                  0.760                 0.760
              Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10              0.277                0.010                    0.010                  0.030                 0.030




30
              Conscientiousness, Ages 4–7                    0.009                0.590                    0.690                  0.980                 0.980
              Achievement Test Score, Age 21                 0.095                0.070                    0.070                  0.120                 0.120
      IHDP    IQ, Age 3                                     6.988                 0.000                    0.000                  0.000                 0.000
              IQ, Age 8                                     -1.206                0.450                    0.930                  0.810                 0.950
              Achievement Test Score Ages 5–10               0.012                0.720                    0.650                  0.900                 0.740
              Conscientiousness, Ages4–7                     0.065                0.090                    0.170                  0.250                 0.270
              Achievement Test Score, Age18                 -0.456                0.500                    0.820                  0.710                 0.840
      ETP     IQ, Age 7                                      4.111                0.100                    0.200                  0.160                 0.170
              IQ, Age 8                                     2.333                 0.140                    0.210                  0.260                 0.280
              Achievement Test Score, Ages 5–10             -0.795                0.180                    0.280                  0.260                 0.280
     Source: Own calculations. See notes in Table 4.
       All programs have positive effects on early measures of IQ. For both females and males
in PPP, this effect is approximately 3/4 of a population standard deviation. The effects
are also sizable for ABC and IHDP. For ETP, the effects are weaker—less than 1/2 of a
standard deviation. Nevertheless, these effects are substantial compared to the short-term
effects reported for Head Start and for the universal programs discussed in Sections 4 and
5, respectively.
       In contrast to the IQ measures, the achievement measures used weight both cognitive and
non-cognitive skill components more equally.39 Achievement outcomes for ABC and PPP
are strong. There is evidence of program effects on non-cognitive skills, but the different
programs do not report strictly comparable measures. Furthermore, defining and measuring
non-cognitive skills accurately is an open challenge that presents difficulties in detecting
effects even when they are present.


Fadeout of Effects for Cognitive Skills

A general pattern for IQ and achievement test scores is that they tend to surge while children
are in pre-K and then fade. In some cases, they completely dissipate. In two documented
cases, IQ effects persist long after school entry: for the whole ABC sample (see Appendix D)
and for some subgroups of IHDP (Duncan and Sojourner, 2013). Even in those cases, the
impacts during the program were stronger than the long-term impacts. All other studies in
this paper that report the dynamics of impacts on test scores find that IQ or achievement
gains dissipate. This is true for other demonstration programs (Weikart, 1970; Gray et al.,
1982), Head Start (see Deming, 2009; Zhai et al., 2014), and state programs (see Lipsey
et al., 2013).
       Figure 2a illustrates the fadeout phenomenon using evidence from PPP. IQ tests are
usually scaled to show the level of a child relative to that of the overall population of their
age. The decrease in standardized IQ for children in the treatment group after entering
  39
       See Heckman and Kautz (2012).



                                               31
elementary school indicates that the gap between them and an average US child increases.
The figure does not reveal whether skills gained by the treatment group depreciate or those
gained by the control group catch up. Figure 2b presents the raw scores in terms of total
questions answered. They increase uniformly during childhood (Hojman, 2015). Additional
figures illustrating the evolution of IQ and achievement scores over the life-cycle are presented
for all programs in Appendix D.
    Hojman (2015) analyzes the causes of fadeout in cognition measured by IQ for PPP and
ETP. He finds that the gains experienced by the treatment group occur rapidly during the
first months of treatment and are followed by small or zero gains in the subsequent years
of treatment. He also finds that almost all of the fadeout happens during the first year
of elementary school. The gap between treatment and control groups narrows because the
control group gains more from schooling. Measured IQ improves as a direct consequence of
the initial formal educational experiences and the increase is roughly independent of the age
at which entry into preschool or formal education begins. The laggard growth of IQ for all
disadvantaged children may be consequences of the low quality of the schools they attend,
the lack of stimulation in their home environments, or some combination of those factors.
The precise causes are not known.




                                               32
                                                                          Figure 2: Dynamics of IQ in PPP
                    95
                                             (a) Standardized IQ                                                                                      (b) Raw IQ




                                                                                                                  120
       Number of Correct Answers




                                                                                                     Number of Correct Answers
                                                                                                                          100
                          90




                                                                                                                 80
            85




                                                                                                        60        40
                    80




                                   36   48    60   72      84     96     108       120   132   144                               36   48   60   72      84     96     108       120   132   144
                                                          Age (Months)                                                                                 Age (Months)

                                                        Treated          Control                                                                     Treated          Control




Source: Reproduced from Hojman (2015). Note: The solid line represents the trajectory of the treated
group, and the dotted line represents the trajectory of the control group. Thin lines surrounding
trajectories are asymptotic standard errors. It shows standardized IQ as measured by the Stanford-Binet
test in each year. IQ is age-standardized based on a national sample to have a US national mean of 100
points and standard deviation of 15 points. In Figure 2b, the scores are not standardized. The scores in it
represent the raw scores, or the sum of the number of correct questions in each year.



Differences by Gender

A consistent finding across all four programs is the difference in treatment effects for males
and females. This difference is substantial enough to create important gender differences
in both benefit-cost ratios and internal rates of return for PPP and ABC. This pattern is
consistent with the literature on differences in development between girls and boys.40 Girls
develop earlier. Uniform curricula across genders appears to benefit the laggard boys on
many dimensions, but girls benefit as well, as we document in our discussion of the long-
term treatment effects of ABC and PPP. In addition, all programs (except IHDP) target
ages 3–4 when aggressive behavior that predicts adult aggression and participation in crime
begins to manifest itself (White et al., 1994). Gender-specific curricula in preschool may be
an appropriate strategy.
  40
    Lavigueur et al. (1995); Kerr et al. (1997); Mâsse and Tremblay (1997); Nagin and Tremblay (2001);
Bertrand and Pan (2011).




                                                                                                     33
Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Socio-Economic Status

IHDP served a more heterogeneous population compared to the other demonstration pro-
grams. A consistent policy-relevant finding for this program is the heterogeneity in treatment
effects across socio-economic groups. The literature finds much higher treatment effects for
the low-low birth-weight children (≤ 2000 grams) when compared to the effects for the high-
low birth-weight children (> 2000 grams, ≤ 2500 grams).41 For example, the effects on IQ
at age 18 are negative but not statistically significant for the latter and are significantly
positive for the former. Treatment effects are also heterogeneous by socio-economic status.
      Brooks-Gunn et al. (1992) discuss the effects of the programs on IQ at age 3 and find that
children whose mothers had a college degree or higher experienced no treatment effects on IQ,
while children with relatively uneducated mothers had sizable effects. A recent study shows
that program effects on IQ exhibit a gradient corresponding to household income, suggesting
that poorer children experience the greatest benefits. Duncan and Sojourner (2013) find that
at age 2, the treatment effect for cognition accounts for .82 standard deviations for children
of families with relatively low income with a standard error of .30, while the estimated effect
is .46 for children of families with relatively high income with a standard error of .23.


3.5       Long-Term Outcomes

PPP and ABC are the only demonstration programs with follow-up during adulthood. A
summary of their most important effects is given in Table 7, which is based on results from
Heckman et al. (2010a, 2013); Campbell et al. (2014), and Elango et al. (2015). The results
reported in the table are statistically significant after accounting for multiple hypotheses
testing across relevant, related outcomes. PPP caused a 56% increase in the high school
graduation for females and a 29% increase in employment at age 40 for males. Other bene-
ficial effects include criminal activity, employment, health behavior, and welfare take-up. In
general, the table shows that PPP and ABC had statistically significant positive outcomes
 41
      Brooks-Gunn et al. (1994); McCormick et al. (2006).


                                                    34
that persist into adulthood. Non-cognitive outcomes are notably absent due to lack of data.
In PPP and ABC, and for early education programs in general, non-cognitive skills are not
typically followed in the long term.

                             Table 7: Life-Cycle Outcomes, PPP and ABC
                                                                   PPP                               ABC
                                                        Age      Female       Male        Age       Female       Male

             Cognition and Education
               Adult IQ                                  -            -          -         21c       10.275      2.588
                                                         -            -          -                  (0.005)     (0.130)

               High School Graduation                   19a        0.56       0.02         21c       0.238      0.176
                                                                 (0.000)     (0.416)                (0.090)    (0.100)

             Economic
              Employed                                  40a       -0.01        .29         30c       0.147      0.302
                                                                 (0.615)     (0.011)                (0.135)    (0.005)

              Yearly Labor Income, 2014 USD             40a      $6,166      $8,213        30c       $3,578     $17,214
                                                                 (0.224)     (0.150)                (0.000)     (0.110)

              HI by Employer                            40a       0.129       0.206       31b        0.043      0.296
                                                                 (0.055)     (0.103)                (0.512)    (0.035)

              Ever on Welfare                         18–27a      -0.27        0.03        30c       0.006      -0.062
                                                                 (0.049)     (0.590)                (0.517)    (0.000)

             Crime
              No. of Arrestsd                          ≤40a       -2.77       -4.88       ≤34c       -5.061      -6.834
                                                                 (0.041)     (0.036)                (0.051)     (0.187)

              No. of Non-Juv. Arrests                  ≤40a       -2.45       -4.85       ≤34c       -4.531      -6.031
             One-sided permutation                               (0.051)     (0.025)                (0.061)     (0.181)

             Lifestyle
               Self-reported Drug User                   -            -          -         30c       0.031      -0.438
               -                                         -            -          -                  (0.590)    (0.030)

              Not a Daily Smoker                        27a       0.111       0.119         -          -           -
                                                                 (0.110)     (0.089)        -          -           -

              Not a Daily Smoker                        40a       0.067       0.194         -          -           -
                                                                 (0.206)     (0.010)        -          -           -

              Physical Activity                         40a       0.330       0.090       21b        0.249       0.084
                                                                 (0.002)     (0.545)                (0.004)     (0.866)

             Health
              Obesity (BMI >30)                          -            -          -       30–34c      0.221      -0.292
                                                         -            -          -                  (0.920)    (0.060)

              Hypertension I                             -            -          -       30–34c      0.096      0.339
                                                         -            -          -                  (0.380)    (0.010)
            Source: a Heckman et al. (2010a). b Campbell et al. (2014). c Elango et al. (2015). Note: This table displays
            statistics for the treatment effects of PPP and ABC on important life-cycle outcome variables. Hypertension
            I is the first stage of high blood pressure—systolic blood pressure between 140 and 159 and diastolic pressure
            between 90 and 99. “HI by employer” refers to health insurance provided by the employer and is conditional
            on being employed. d “No. of Arrests” includes offenses in the case of ABC, even where more than one of-
            fense was charged per arrest. For the further definitions of the outcomes, see the respective web appendices
            of the cited papers. Outcomes from Heckman et al. (2010a) are reported with one-sided p − value which is
            based on Freedman-Lane procedure, using the linear covariates of maternal employment, paternal presence
            and SB (Stanford-Binet) IQ, and restricting permutation orbits within strata formed by a Socio-economic
            Status index being above or below the sample median and permuting siblings as a block. p − values for the
            outcomes from Campbell et al. (2014) are one-sided single hypothesis constrained permutation p − value’s,
            based on the IPW (Inverse Probability Weighting) t-statistic associated with the difference in means be-
            tween treatment groups; probabilities of IPW are estimated using the variables gender, presence of father in
            home at entry, cultural deprivation scale, child IQ at entry (SB), number of siblings and maternal employ-
            ment status. p − values for the outcomes from Elango et al. (2015) are bootstrapped with 1000 resamples,
            corrected for attrition with Inverse Probability Weights, with treatment effects conditioned on treatment
            status, cohort, number of siblings, mothers IQ, and the ABC high risk index.




                                                                 35
3.6     Connecting Short-Term and Long-Term Effects

Dissipation of initial IQ gains is a common finding across programs. In some cases, IQ gains
completely dissipate by the teenage years. Analysts focusing solely on IQ as a measure of
program effectiveness confront a puzzle: Why do early childhood education programs have
long-term effects if the effects on IQ dissipate? Heckman et al. (2013) present a solution to
this puzzle by considering the process through which skills form and develop. They find that
program effects on non-cognitive skills are important determinants of later-life outcomes.42
This conclusion highlights the importance of skill formation as a multi-skill dynamic process
in which different skills complement each other.
      Heckman et al. (2013) decompose the effects of PPP on later-life outcomes using a
mediation analysis. The results of this are reported in Figures 3 and 4.43 They find that
boosts in non-cognitive skills are substantial determinants of long-term effects. For females,
academic motivation mediates 30% and 40% of the effects on achievement and employment,
respectively. Further, reductions in externalizing behavior explain 65% of the reduction
in lifetime violent crimes and reduce lifetime arrests and unemployment by 40% and 20%,
respectively. There are persistent effects of boosts in non-cognitive skills even though in the
short run, cognitive effects fade out.
  42
     We use the term mediation analysis to refer to the exercise of decomposing effects of policies or programs
on an outcome into distinct components. The outcome is usually thought of as an output and the components
are the inputs generating this output. For a formal definition and analysis, see Heckman and Pinto (2015).
  43
     See Heckman et al. (2013).




                                                      36
      Figure 3: Decompositions of Treatment Effects of PPP on Male Adult Outcomes
                                                                 0.161                                                                                 0.013
          CAT total at age 14, end of grade 8 (0.566*)
                                                                  0.071                    0.557                                                       0.114
           # of misdemeanor arrests, age 27 (-1.21**)
                                                                 0.071                                                                                 0.246
                      # of felony arrests, age 27 (-1.12)
                                                                 0.062                                                                                 0.144
        # of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 27 (-2.33**)
                                                                 0.089                                                                                 0.027
                     Monthly income, age 27 (0.876**)
                                                                 0.046                                                                                 0.141
                          Use tobacco, age 27 (-0.119*)
                                                                 0.136                                                                                 0.088
           # of misdemeanor arrests, age 40 (-3.13**)
                                                                 0.056                                                                                 0.403
                     # of felony arrests, age 40 (-1.14*)
                                                                 0.086                                                                                 0.149
        # of adult arrests (misd.+fel.), age 40 (-4.26**)
                                                                 0.077                                                                                 0.204
                   # of lifetime arrests, age 40 (-4.20*)
                                                                 0.085                                                                                 0.018
                             Employed, age 40 (0.200**)
                                                               0%                  20%                    40%                60%          80%            100%
                   Cognitive Factor                    Externalizing Behavior                                    Academic Motivation                   Other Factors



Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al. (2013). Note: The total treatment effects are shown in
parentheses. Each bar represents the total treatment effect normalized to 100 percent. One-sided
p − values are shown above each component of the decomposition. See the Web Appendix of Heckman
et al. (2013) for detailed information about the simplifications made to produce the figure. “CAT total”
denotes California Achievement Test total score normalized to control mean 0 and variance of 1. Asterisks
denote statistical significance: * – 10% level; ** – 5% level; *** – 1% level. Monthly income is adjusted to
thousands of 2006 dollars using annual national CPI.


    Figure 4: Decompositions of Treatment Effects of PPP on Female Adult Outcomes
                                                                               0.153                     0.057                                          0.283
                                                 CAT total, age 8 (0.565*)
                                                                               0.256        0.528                                                       0.232
                                               CAT total, age 14 (0.806**)
                                                                               0.344     0.533                                                          0.071
                                 Any special education, age 14 (-0.262**)
                                                                               0.339             0.042                                                  0.109
                       Mentally impaired at least once, age 19 (-0.280**)
                                                                               0.099                                                                    0.305
                      # of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 27 (-0.423**)
                                                                               0.120                                                                    0.319
                                     # of felony arrests, age 27 (-0.269**)
                                                                               0.497                                                                    0.127
                            Jobless for more than 1 year, age 27 (-0.292*)
                                                                               0.199                0.228                                               0.150
            Ever tried drugs other than alcohol or weed, age 27 (-0.227**)
                                                                               0.066                                                                    0.371
                      # of misdemeanor violent crimes, age 40 (-0.537**)
                                                                               0.050                                                                    0.369
                                     # of felony arrests, age 40 (-0.383**)
                                                                               0.046                                                                    0.320
                            # of lifetime violent crimes, age 40 (-0.574**)
                                                                               0.185                   0.224     0.269                                  0.352
                                   Months in all marriages, age 40 (39.6*)
                                                                              0%                 20%                40%            60%         80%        100%
                                            Cognitive Factor              Externalizing Behavior                         Academic Motivation         Other Factors




Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al. (2013). See note in Figure 3.




                                                                                       37
    Conti et al. (2015) conduct a similar analysis for both PPP and ABC but focus on health
outcomes. According to their findings, externalizing behavior is the primary mediator for
the outcomes found in PPP, which is consistent with the findings in Heckman et al. (2013).
For ABC, they find that task orientation and childhood BMI mediate approximately half
of the improvements in blood pressure and hypertension found for males in the treatment
group. Figures 5a and 5b illustrate the results from their mediation exercises.




                                             38
Figure 5: Decompositions of Treatment Effects of PPP and ABC on Male Adult Outcomes
                                                                                     (a) PPP
                                                                        0.052

                                No. of cigs/day (M: 40 y.o.)
                                                                        0.046

                            Not a heavy smoker (M: 40 y.o.)
                                                                        0.066                        0.257

                             Not a daily smoker (M: 40 y.o.)
                                                                        0.075                               0.295

                                 Never smoker (M: 40 y.o.)
                                                                       0.075

                                No. of cigs/day (M: 27 y.o.)
                                                                        0.153

                            Not a heavy smoker (M: 27 y.o.)
                                                                        0.084                                                0.207

                             Not a daily smoker (M: 27 y.o.)
                                                                        0.095

                                Physical Activity (F: 40 y.o.)


                                                                 0%        10%       20%     30%           40%         50%         60%         70%      80%       90%   100%

                                                                      Cognition     Externalizing Behavior           Income          Residual


                                                                                    (b) ABC

                                                                                  0.081                      0.049

                            Systolic blood pressure (M: 35 y.o.)

                                                                                  0.092              0.095


                            Diastolic blood pressure (M: 35 y.o.)

                                                                                   0.083           0.147

                                      Hypertension II (M: 35 y.o.)

                                                                                   0.076          0.078


                                      Hypertension I (M: 35 y.o.)

                                                                                   0.100               0.179


                                 HI by the employer (M: 30 y.o.)

                                                                                   0.163                         0.203


                                          HI coverage (M: 30 y.o.)


                                                                            0%       10%    20%       30%        40%         50%         60%     70%     80%      90%   100%


                                                   Task Orientation               BMI      Employment                BMI‐Employment                    Residual




Source: Reproduced from Conti et al. (2015). Note: This graph provides a simplified representation of the
results of the dynamic mediation analysis of the statistically significant outcomes for PPP and ABC. Each
bar represents the total treatment effect normalized to 100%. One-sided p − values that test if the share is
statistically significantly different from 0 are shown above each component of the decomposition. The
mediators displayed are: externalizing behavior, as in Heckman et al. (2013) among the early childhood
inputs; and income as in Heckman et al. (2010a) among the adult inputs. The complete mediation results
and the definition of each outcome is reported in the Web Appendix of Conti et al. (2015). The sample the
outcomes refer to (M = males; F = females) and the age at which they have been measured (y.o. = years
old) are shown in parentheses to the left of each bar, after the description of the variable of interest. ***:
significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level; *: significant at the 10% level.


     Garcı́a (2014) decomposes the ABC treatment effects pooling males and females. He
analyzes three outcomes at age 30: high school graduation, ever being enrolled in a four-year
college, and employment. See Figure 6. He shows that the more relevant the outcome is


                                                                                            39
for economic success, the less it is mediated through cognition and the more it is mediated
through non-cognitive skills.

Figure 6: Decompositions of Treatment Effects of ABC on Male and Female (Pooled) Adult
Outcomes




         High School Grad at 30                          0.50                0.20

                                   Treatment Effect: .189 (p−value: .027)




         Ever 4 Yr College at 30                         0.52                 0.20                 0.28

                                   Treatment Effect: .193 (p−value: .016)




              Employment at 30         0.12                     0.38                       0.56

                                   Treatment Effect: .19 (p−value: .016)


                                   0                .2                  .4    .6              .8          1

                                       ∆ Cognitive Level                            if p−value < .10
                                       ∆ Character Level                            if p−value < .10
                                       ∆ Unobserved Skills Level                    if p−value < .10




Source: Own calculation. Note: This plot decomposes the total treatment effect ABC has on graduating
high school, ever enrolling in a four year college, and employment at age 30. The figure presents the
components of Laspeyres decomposition of the relevant outcome on a measure of cognition and a factor
summarizing character skills. Cognition is measured at age 21 using the Woodcock-Johnson Test of
Achievement. Character is measured at age 15 by a factor created using measures of conscientiousness.
The numbers inside the bars represent the proportion explained by each component. They do not sum to
1, because the decompositions condition on socio-demographic variables which are not displayed above. See
Garcı́a (2014) for more details.



3.7     Cost-Benefit and Rate of Return Analyses

Cost-benefit and rate of return analyses produce concise, policy-relevant statistics for as-
sessing the social benefits of programs. While there is a vast literature evaluating treatment
effects for demonstration programs, cost-benefit analyses are scarce (Currie, 2001). This


                                                                   40
scarcity arises from the difficulty in securing the relevant data. Cost-benefit analyses require
comprehensive data in order to account for impacts over the life-cycle. Very few programs
have been evaluated rigorously using cost-benefit analysis. In fact, only PPP and ABC have
the data required to conduct such exercises, accounting for the variety of outcomes including
criminal activity, income, and health.
      Heckman et al. (2010b) substantially improve on an earlier cost-benefit analysis of PPP
by Belfield et al. (2006) that does not report standard errors, does not disaggregate by gender,
and uses an ad hoc method for forecasting out of sample earnings gains. Heckman et al.
(2010b) use a broader base of data and substantially refine the estimates in Belfield et al.
(2006). Both papers incorporate costs of education and estimates of benefits. Heckman et al.
(2010b) additionally account for the deadweight loss created by collecting public funds. They
calculate standard errors for their estimates. They invoke standard assumptions about the
deadweight losses associated with collecting tax revenue to support programs, the social costs
of crime, and the procedures used to extrapolate future benefits. The range of estimates for
the annual rate of return pooled across genders is 7-10% per annum. The corresponding range
for the benefit-cost ratio is 3.9-6.8. Disaggregating by gender produces higher estimates. All
of these estimates are statistically significant. Their preferred estimates are presented in the
columns under “PPP” in Table 8.
      Elango et al. (2015) present the benefit-cost analysis of ABC through age 35.44 Their
study demonstrates the social efficiency of this program. The benefit-cost estimates are
lower when compared to PPP, in part because the costs of the program are higher. It is
the first study to account for life-cycle gains in health using age 34 biomarkers to project
future health. Other important sources of benefit from the program are gains in parental
income while participants are young, gains in later-life income, and decreases in criminal
activity. The study finds an overall benefit-cost ratio of 3.2:1 and an internal rate of return
of 11%.45 When decomposed by gender, the results are much stronger for males because
 44
      This paper extends the methodology in Heckman et al. (2010b).
 45
      The estimates are statistically significant at the 10% level.


                                                   41
the main benefits are reduced criminal activity and improved health, both of which show
stronger effects for males.46
     Table 8 displays the main components of the cost-benefit analyses of PPP and ABC.
Lifetime earnings and health benefits are crucial components of the benefits of ABC, as well
as reductions in criminal activity corresponding to serious crimes for males (Elango et al.,
2015).47
     Gains in parental income are an important component of the returns to ABC because
the program provided care for up to nine hours a day, thus enabling mothers to increase their
labor supply. Early childhood education has effects not only on the children, but also on
the economic lives of their families. It is a form of enriched childcare that enables mothers
to work and to provide additional resources for disadvantaged families. There are likely
intergenerational effects on the children of participants in both programs as well. Data being
collected on PPP will enable analysts to compute the gains to the children of participants
(Heckman, 2015).
     Our evidence on the social benefits of ABC and PPP does not suggest that these pro-
grams should be slavishly imitated. It suggests guiding principles for future policy which can
only benefit from the knowledge acquired since the time these programs were implemented.
It shows the promise of such programs and provides a lower bound on what is possible.
  46
     Barnett and Masse (2007) provide an estimate of the benefit-cost ratio for ABC of 2.5:1, but give no
standard error for their estimate, do not aggregate by gender, and use an ad hoc method to forecast future
benefits of treatment. Their calculation does not account for the most recent follow-up of ABC, including
the substantial boost in health of participant males. Its main components are gains on parental income when
the children are young and individual income up to age 21, but their estimates of earnings impacts are not
credible.
  47
     Health data were not collected for PPP.




                                                    42
                                    Table 8: Costs and Benefits of PPP and ABC, 2014 USD

                                                               PPP                                             ABC
      Net Present Value                    Female          Male            Pooled          Female          Male            Pooled
      Parent Incomea                       -               -               -               $88,358         $88,358         $88,358
      Control Group Preschoolb             -               -               -               $1,832          $1,292          $1,469
      Program Cost per Recipientc          $31,168         $31,168         $31,168         $91,519         $91,519         $91,519
      Education Costsd                     $9,626          $(19,678)       $(7,528)        $28,715         $5,083          $12,586
      Subject Labor Incomee                $149,157        $50,269         $91,272         $36,270         $89,417         $70,798
      Subject Transfer Incomef             $9,656          $4,248          $6,490          $2,614          $1,729          $2,256
      Savings in Medical Expendituresg     -               -               -               $9,920          $22,236         $19,604
      Savings in Crimeh                    $26,400         $131,330        $87,823         $9,924          $219,911        $101,726
      Quality of Life (QALY) Benefitsi     -               -               -               $2,997          $21,845         $19,985
      Net Benefit                          $144,420        $174,358        $161,944        $31,671         $358,352        $200,009
      Benefit-Cost Ratio                   7.3:1           5.4:1           6.6:1           1.4:1           4.9:1           3.2:1




43
      S.E.                                 (3.2)           (3.0)           (2.7)           (0.98)          (3.19)          (1.53)
      Internal Rate of Return (%)          9.5             9.7             7.7             4.1             12.7            11
      S.E.                                 (2.7)           (3.0)           (2.6)           (0.10)          (0.06)          (0.05)
     Source: PPP estimates from Heckman et al. (2010b); ABC estimates from Elango et al. (2015). Note: PPP results use a 3%
     discount rate, and ABC results use a 4% discount rate. All results take into account deadweight loss of public spending of 50%.
     Cost-benefit ratios in PPP do not exactly reflect the net benefits and costs, because the ratios and the internal rates of return
     are adjusted for compromised randomization. [a] Parental income: annual labor income during children’s ages 0 to 15. [b] Costs
     incurred by parents of the control group children for sending them to preschool. [c] Cost per recipient of either PPP or ABC. [d]
     Education costs from elementary school up to latest education over the life-cycle. [e] Labor income from ages 21 to 65. [f] Total
     income transferred from the government to the individual. Given this is a transfer from one agent of society (government) to
     another (individual), this number only accounts for the deadweight loss generated by the transfer. [g] Total medical expenditures
     from age 34 up to expected death. Treatment group individuals spend more, on average, because they live longer due to positive
     treatment effects on multiple health measures. [h] Savings due to crime reduction, accounting both for costs to victims and prison
     costs. [i] QALY stands for quality-adjusted life years. Quality of life is measured by an index of activities of daily life and takes
     values between 0 and 1, where 0 represents death and 1 represents full health. Each year of life is valued at $150,000 and weighted
     by the quality of life. Standard errors are obtained using bootstrapping.
3.8      Summary of the Evidence from Demonstration Programs

The evidence on demonstration programs supports several general conclusions. High-quality
early childhood education programs targeted to disadvantaged children have long-term pos-
itive effects on important social and economic outcomes. Although the short-term effects on
IQ tend to fade, a careful examination of program effects on multiple skills and dynamic skill
formation demonstrates how improvements in non-cognitive skills generate lasting effects on
many later-life outcomes. The strong estimated effects and the evidence on social efficiency
supported by cost-benefit analysis suggest that provision of high-quality targeted programs
can yield large returns on investment. These programs also provide childcare and facilitate
working by the mothers of disadvantaged children.



4       Evidence from Head Start

Head Start is the largest and oldest public early childhood education program in the US.48
Evidence on it is important for understanding the benefits of early education. There are
multiple evaluations of Head Start based on different methodologies and data sources. Stud-
ies use evidence from both nationally representative datasets and a randomized controlled
trial designed to evaluate Head Start.49
       The evaluations of Head Start report contradictory evidence, in part because they fail
to articulate the different policy questions that they implicitly answer. Project Head Start
(1969) and McKey et al. (1985) are two highly-cited studies claiming to find no long-term
effects on relevant socio-economic outcomes. On the other hand, Ludwig and Miller (2007)
and others claim that the program recovers its costs and then some through the gains it cre-
ates in the educational attainments of participants. As a group, these studies are imprecise
  48
     Other large-scale, targeted early childhood education programs in the US include the Chicago Parent-
Child Centers and Early Head Start. Reynolds and Temple (1998, 2006), Reynolds et al. (2011), and Love
et al. (2005) respectively evaluate them. Reynolds refuses to release his full data set, so it is impossible to
verify his claims.
  49
     The Head Start Impact Study (HSIS) is reported in Puma et al. (2012).



                                                      44
about the counterfactuals being estimated. They typically do not discuss the alternative
childcare arrangements available to participants at the time they were enrolled. This section
presents evidence from evaluations with rigorous methodologies. We discuss studies that
address well-defined policy questions that consider the availability of alternative childcare
arrangements. These studies find that Head Start has positive effects in the short term on
measures of cognitive and non-cognitive skills. They are reinforced by the evidence from
several studies evaluating long-term outcomes, using many different datasets and method-
ologies, all of which find impacts in substantive adult outcomes.


4.1       Overview of Head Start

Head Start is a means-tested, federal preschool program founded in 1965. It is the largest
ongoing early childhood education program in the US. Children aged 3 or 4 are eligible if
family income is below or at the poverty line (though there is a designated quota for children
whose families are above the poverty line). Children who enter the program at age 3 receive
two years of treatment, which is mainly given in center-based programs. Its objective is to
foster cognitive and non-cognitive development and school-readiness with a “whole child”
approach. It pursues these objectives by granting funds to qualified centers. In turn, these
centers are required to maintain high performance standards.
      Performance standards within Head Start mandate minimal quality levels for health,
nutrition, and family partnerships. Head Start centers must verify the child’s health status
and screen for behavioral or mental health problems. Head Start centers also provide services
to parents and families in order to improve the “whole” environments of the children.50
      Despite its uniform minimum standards, there is substantial heterogeneity in the quality
of Head Start centers, both in services and in the skills of the staff. While many categorize
Head Start as a high-quality program, we cannot make an absolute judgment of “the” effect
of Head Start due to the substantial heterogeneity in treatment effects.
 50
      Administration for Children and Families, Office of Head Start (2009).



                                                     45
Early Head Start

Early Head Start is an offshoot of Head Start. Established in 1994, it serves pregnant
women and children under age 3 who meet Head Start’s income eligibility criteria. All
Early Head Start programs offer full-day, full-year treatment and have center-based and/or
home-visiting components. Like Head Start, it has a “whole child” approach with the goal
of preparing children for future growth and development. Notably, it focuses on nurturing
healthy attachments between children and their parents and caregivers. Both Early Head
Start and Head Start offer transition services to help children adjust and move smoothly
from Early Head Start to Head Start and from Head Start to kindergarten. We do not
review results from Early Head Start due to the scarcity of rigorous evaluations of it, their
short-term follow-up, and high heterogeneity of the treatments offered.51


Comparability with Demonstration and Universal Programs

Like the demonstration programs previously discussed, Head Start is means-tested and pro-
vides services beyond center-based care. In fact, Head Start shares important features with
PPP and ABC, including curricular and extracurricular program components. There is a
relationship between Head Start and previous early childhood education programs, such as
PPP and ABC. Roughly 30% of the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS) centers use the High-
Scope curriculum, which was developed from the PPP curriculum. This curriculum seeks to
improve school-readiness by targeting age-appropriate developmental tasks such as gross/fine
motor, language and literacy, cognitive, and social-emotional development. It emphasizes the
importance of a supportive learning environment and the relationship between caretaker and
  51
     One evaluation of Early Head Start is by Love et al. (2005). They use an instrumental variable approach
to assess the effects of program participation on a variety of outcomes at age 3. Early Head Start had three
types of implementations: (i) center-based programs; (ii) home-based programs; and (iii) mixed approach
programs. When pooling the sample, they find important gains on mental development, cognition, and
some measures of child behavior. Unfortunately, the results are not as clear when the samples are broken
down into type of implementation. The available Early Head Start evaluations do not isolate the effects by
treatment stream. Furthermore, it fails to provide estimates of the effects of the program in the long-term
because data are not available. Given its similarities with Head Start, future evaluations should discuss
whether control contamination is an issue.


                                                    46
child.52 Second, ABC and Head Start share extracurricular components, including medical
and nutritional services. 88% of the children who participated in HSIS received nutritional
services through the program. Some 80% received medical services. ABC and Head Start
also share operational similarities (Puma et al., 2012). 45% of Head Start centers offer care
from birth to age 5 by combining Head Start and Early Head Start.53 Further operational
similarities include access to full-day care and transportation to the center. 68% of children
who participated in HSIS were offered the option of attending full-day care, and 63% had
the option of being transported to the center, as in ABC.54
      Head Start also has similarities with the universal programs we discuss in Section 5. It
is a wide-ranging program that serves diverse disadvantaged populations. Analyses of Head
Start are not subject to questions of large-scale reproducibility that burden the evidence
from demonstration programs.


4.2     Data

There are two sources of evidence on Head Start: (i) HSIS, which is the largest randomized
control trial on early childhood education in the US; and (ii) studies based on nationally
representative observational data, such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID; see
Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 2015), the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979
(NLSY79; see Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2015), and the Children of the National Lon-
gitudinal Survey of Youth (CNLSY; see Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2011), which record
participation in Head Start and have long-term follow-up data. As the largest randomized
control trial of an early childhood education program in the US, HSIS is a preferred source of
data for analysts. It does not suffer from the small sample size problems that plague demon-
stration programs. Moreover, it is nationally representative of Head Start centers across the
nation, which implies generalizability of its results. Yet, it suffers from some major limita-
 52
    Puma et al. (2012).
 53
    Administration for Children and Families, Office of Head Start (2014).
 54
    Puma et al. (2012).



                                                   47
tions that complicate the estimation of meaningful policy parameters, namely: heterogeneous
treatments across centers, lack of long-term follow-up, and control contamination.


Heterogeneous Populations and Treatment Alternatives

Head Start provides funding to local centers, which attempt to tailor treatment of the prob-
lems of the populations they serve. Thus, the quality of the centers, the populations served,
and the alternatives available to parents vary among centers.


Lack of Long-Term Follow-Up

HSIS has follow-up until age 9 and cannot be used to evaluate long-term effects of Head Start.
Lack of long-term follow-up in HSIS is mitigated by the availability of long-term outcomes
in nationally representative data such as the PSID, NLSY79, and CNLSY. However this
results in an additional limitation on evaluations of Head Start, as long-term evaluations
need to address the methodological challenges of integrating non-experimental data with
experimental data.


Control Contamination

An important challenge emerges from the extensive control contamination that is present in
HSIS. While the control group was denied treatment in the study centers—that is, the cen-
ters participating in HSIS—nothing prevented control (or treatment) families from seeking
alternative options. This alternative could even include other centers providing Head Start.
In fact, 15% of the control group attended other Head Start centers. In the HSIS study,
some 40% of the control group used center-based care. Therefore, estimates of treatment
effects that do not account for control contamination compare Head Start to Head Start for
many participants. Such estimates—unsurprisingly—are close to zero and do not speak to
the efficacy of Head Start compared to the home care provided by parents.
    We present short-term and long-term evidence on the impacts of HS in the following


                                             48
section. We summarize the evidence from all sources in Table 9.


4.3      Short-Term Outcomes

Puma et al. (2012) report a battery of mean differences between the treatment and “control”
groups followed in HSIS using data through the age 9 follow-up. They report estimates for
an age 3 cohort and age 4 cohort. The age 3 cohort received at least one year of treatment;
after the first year of treatment, 63% of the treatment group remained at a Head Start center,
and 26% of the treatment group were in some other center-based care arrangement. The
age 4 cohort received only one year of treatment. For both cohorts, they report short-term
positive effects for most measures of cognition which disappear by age 9. There are some
treatment effects for non-cognitive skills, but the measures used are unreliable.55 There are
positive effects on parenting quality, especially for the age 3 cohort. Parents of the age 3
cohort spanked their children 14% less than control parents after the first year of treatment;
by the age 6 follow-up, they spanked their children 9% less. The authors report that these
estimates are significant at the 10% level but do not report exact p-values or standard errors.
The control group had access to early childhood education alternatives, including other Head
Start centers, so the reported treatment effect does not compare Head Start to home-based
childcare.
       Ludwig and Phillips (2008) use cognitive outcomes measured at the end of the first
year of treatment and attempt to improve the interpretation of the estimates by statistically
adjusting for the presence of control children who attend a Head Start center not in the
HSIS study. To account for differences in enrollment to Head Start in the treatment and
control group, they use a Bloom (1984) estimator to adjust intent-to-treat estimates reported
in Administration for Children and Families (2005). They find effect sizes of .346 for the
age 3 cohort with standard error .074 and an effect size of .319 for the age 4 cohort with
  55
    Treatment effects on the same measures of non-cognitive skills vary in sign depending on whether the
measure was parent- or teacher-reported. Parent-reported measures yield favorable treatment effects, while
teacher-reported measures yield unfavorable treatment effects.



                                                   49
standard error .147.56 Their study does not address control contamination of other types.
These estimates can be understood as estimates of the effects of offering Head Start in one
center: the impact of Head Start at the center against the next best alternative which may
be another Head Start center. When considering the effectiveness of providing public early
childhood education programs compared to no programs at all, it is not the policy-relevant
parameter.
       Two recent studies address control contamination in HSIS more systematically. They
relate their estimates to theoretical parameters in order to answer well-defined and relevant
policy questions.57 Both studies provide estimates of the average treatment effects in Head
Start compared to different alternatives available to parents: (i) other preschool programs;
and (ii) home care. Their estimates are based on five exhaustive and mutually exclusive
groups: (i) those who are always Head Start users (11%); (ii) those who are always preschool
users (11%); (iii) those who always keep children at home (12%); (iv) those who enroll in
Head Start58 (20%); and (v) those who stay at home after randomization into the program
(45%).59
       Identification in both papers relies on strong functional form assumptions. Feller et al.
(2014) use a version of the standard econometric selection model and rely heavily on normal-
ity assumptions on the observed variables driving selection into treatment to identify their
reported treatment effects. Kline and Walters (2014) present a much richer interpretive
framework but rely on normality to characterize dependence among choices and outcomes,
although they do not impose normality on the full model as do Feller et al. (2014). These
studies discuss the identification problems present when using a single randomization to
identify the effects of multiple choices.60
  56
     Literacy is measured by the Woodcock-Johnson letter identification test.
  57
     Feller et al. (2014); Kline and Walters (2014).
  58
     “Compliers” in the language of LATE.
  59
     We take these numbers from Feller et al. (2014). Kline and Walters (2014) report very similar percent-
ages.
  60
     See Heckman and Vytlacil (2007) for a general analysis of multiple competing choices and the use of
instruments in this context.



                                                    50
       Both papers give estimates of the effect of Head Start relative to staying at home,
which is the closest estimate of the parameter assessing the effect of Head Start relative to
no treatment at all. The magnitudes of their preferred estimates on cognition are different:
0.23 of a standard deviation in Feller et al. (2014) (standard error .038) and 0.38 of a standard
deviation in Kline and Walters (2014) (standard error .047).61 Kline and Walters (2014) find
negative selection into the program. Individuals who gain the most are the least likely to
participate. After correcting for selection, the average treatment effect on the population is
as high as 0.47 standard deviations of test scores (standard error .110), which approaches
the effect that demonstration programs have on early measures of cognition. Both papers
conclude that the effect of Head Start is similar to that of the alternative, local, center-based
preschool alternatives and are both better than home care. This underscores the importance
of carefully defining the alternative against which Head Start is compared.
       Another recent study (Zhai et al., 2014) uses HSIS data to evaluate the short-term effects
of Head Start. They compare individuals assigned to the treatment group with individuals
assigned to the control group. The control group received care from three alternatives: (i)
parental care; (ii) care from relatives; and (iii) care from another center. For comparison,
they match individuals in the treatment group to three subsamples of the control group
using standard methods for controlling for selection on observables.62 They assess measures
of both cognitive and non-cognitive behavior, as reported by the parents. Their findings on
cognition are similar to the findings of Feller et al. (2014) and Kline and Walters (2014). They
find that children who would have been cared for by their parents or relatives benefit the
most from Head Start. The effects sizes on PPVT are .30 (parental care) and .19 (care from
relatives) points at age 3 and .15 (parental care) and .30 (care from relatives) points at age
4, for the respective comparison groups. The evidence is somewhat ambiguous on program
effects for non-cognitive outcomes, but using parent reports, children generally become less
  61
     One of the reasons for this discrepancy is the use of different measures of cognition. Feller et al. (2014)
use the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), while Kline and Walters (2014) use an index of various
measures.
  62
     Inverse probability weighting.


                                                      51
aggressive and hyperactive at ages 3 and 4.63 Teacher-reported measures of non-cognitive
outcomes have negative treatment effects (see Puma et al., 2012). Zhai et al. (2014) do not
report standard errors for their estimates.


4.4      Long-Term Outcomes

HSIS has no long-term follow-up. Evaluating the long-run impacts of Head Start requires
use of non-experimental methods. We present results from such methodologies and discuss
their policy implications.
       Currie and Thomas (1995), Garces et al. (2002), and Deming (2009) use longitudi-
nal data in conventional, but controversial, panel data “fixed-effects” models that assume
that the unobserved characteristics driving selection into treatment—and into preschool in
general—are constant across time and are identical across children within families. They
control for access to alternative early education programs to address the problem of control
contamination.
       Currie and Thomas (1995) find short-term effects on cognition for both African-American
and white children. However, these gains fade out for African-American children. Deming
(2009) finds short-term effects for African-American but not for white children, and also
finds a fadeout pattern consistent with that reported in Currie and Thomas (1995). These
studies are inconclusive about the effectiveness of the program because they do not consider
their benefits on the multiple skills known to be important predictors of life outcomes.
       Garces et al. (2002) and Deming (2009) measure treatment effects on outcomes dur-
ing adulthood. Both studies find positive effects on high school completion and college
attendance—the former for white enrollees and the latter for African-American enrollees.
Garces et al. (2002) document positive effects on crime for African-American participants,
  63
     Bitler et al. (2014) present evidence relevant to our discussion using quantile instrumental variable
methods. Children with relatively low skill endowments or from disadvantaged backgrounds benefit the most
from treatment in Head Start. A serious limitation of these methods is the assumption of rank preservation
in treatment and control distributions. When tested, this assumption is usually rejected. (See, e.g., Cunha
et al., 2005 and Kline and Tartari, 2015.)


                                                    52
but Deming (2009) finds no effects on crime. Although these studies attempt to account
for selection into treatment, they only allow for a single additive unobserved component
generating selection within the family and across time. Therefore, they cannot determine
if the differences in their results are due to heterogeneity in treatment, problems in the
specification of the models, differences in the populations, or something else.
    Ludwig and Miller (2007) exploit variation in access to technical assistance for imple-
menting Head Start in 300 poor counties, offered by the Office of Economic Opportunity
in the 1960s. These counties were 50–100% more likely to participate in Head Start when
compared to similarly situated counties. They find no notable differences in baseline char-
acteristics between their 300 poor counties and their comparison counties. The authors find
that Head Start has beneficial effects on mortality and schooling, although these findings are,
at best, suggestive because they are based on limited data. Their reported effects are iden-
tified by comparing the outcomes in the 300 poor counties with other poor counties where
alternatives to early childhood education are very limited. Their evidence is consistent with
the finding that treatment is especially effective for disadvantaged children.
    In the best available study, Carneiro and Ginja (2014) examine the long-term effects
of Head Start by exploiting discontinuities in eligibility rules using the NLSY79 (Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2015) and the CNLSY79 panel data sets. They show that there are multiple
eligibility thresholds across years, states, family size, and family structure. This distinguishes
their study from standard regression discontinuity designs with a single threshold. They
estimate the marginal effect of relaxing eligibility requirements for different groups of the
population. This methodology is important when relating their findings to policy questions
because it allows for comparison of the effects across individuals with different alternatives.
    The authors report long-term positive effects on health behaviors, such as the number
of visits to the doctor, use of medicine, and reduced smoking, as well as on behavioral
outcomes, such as grade repetition and special education. They also find that the program
reduces obesity at ages 12 and 13, depression and obesity at ages 16 and 17, and crime


                                               53
at ages 20 and 21. As in the case of demonstration programs, Head Start is judged to
be effective when it is evaluated using multiple outcomes, rather than focusing solely on
cognitive outcomes.


4.5     Cost-Benefit Analyses

Although a formal cost-benefit analysis for Head Start is not available, several studies present
limited calculations of the social benefits of the program. Currie and Thomas (1995) find that
effects on African-American enrollees are not sufficient to recover the costs of the program,
while the results for whites are sufficient to do so. Ludwig and Miller (2007), Deming (2009),
Kline and Walters (2014), and Carneiro and Ginja (2014) argue that the social returns of
the program are positive. They do not account for many relevant benefit components and
interpret their results as lower bounds. We consider this evidence as, at best, suggestive,
since it is based on rough calculations and approximations and therefore is less definitive than
the evidence on effectiveness from the demonstration programs. Nonetheless, it is consistent
with their estimate. An example of this sort of analysis is the study by Kline and Walters
(2014), who use the estimated effects reported for the Tennessee Star Study on earnings
to link the short-term effects on cognition to earnings in Head Start.64 Their calculation
is, at best, approximate, because the programs have different objectives and did not serve
comparable populations.65




  64
    The earnings estimates for their calculations come from Chetty et al. (2011).
  65
    This practice is widely used in the literature. Many of the current analyses of the long-term gains
generated by early education use ad hoc relationships between short-term measurements and long-term
outcomes to forecast future gains from the program (see Barnett and Masse, 2007 and Bartik et al., 2012),
a practice of questionable value. Elango et al. (2015) present a more principled extrapolation analysis and
a discussion of general procedures.


                                                    54
                                                                       Table 9: Evidence Across Studies of the Impacts of Head Start
 Study                             Currie and          Garces et al.       Ludwig and         Deming (2009)      Carneiro and        Feller et al.       Kline and          Zhai et al.           Perry Preschool           Abecedarian
                                   Thomas (1995)       (2002)              Miller (2007)                         Ginja (2014)        (2014)              Walters (2014)     (2014)               (Various sources)        (Various sources)
 Dataset                              C-NLSY                PSID               Multiple           C-NLSY            C-NLSY                 HSIS               HSIS               HSIS
 Subpopulation                           AA              AA, mother                                 AA                Males                                                                       AA, low child            98% AA, low
                                                           edu. ≤                                                                                                                               IQ at entry & SES      mother IQ, & low SES
                                                         high school
 Years of birth                       1979-1987           1966-1977           1960-1975          1979-1986          1977-1996           1998-1999           1998-1999          1998-1999             1959-1964               1972-1977
 Impacts
                                                                                                                                                                                      a
 IQ/achievement, ages 3-4                  -                   -                  -                   -                   -                0.230              0.375               0.30                   -                     0.880b
                                           -                   -                  -                   -                   -               (0.038)            (0.047)                -                    -                     (0.147)
 Behavior, ages 3-4                        -                   -                  -                   -                   -                  -                  -              0.35-0.19a                -                        -
                                           -                   -                  -                   -                   -                  -                  -                   -                    -                        -
 IQ/achievement, ages 5-6                0.46                  -                  -                0.287                  -                  -                  -                   -                 0.763c                   0.427c
                                       (0.129)                 -                  -               (0.095)                 -                  -                  -                   -                 (0.127)                  (0.227)
 IQ/achievement, ages 7-21              0.201                  -                  -                0.031                  -                  -                  -                   -                 0.084c                  0.300 c
                                         (NA)                  -                  -               (0.076)                 -                  -                  -                   -                 (0.059)                  (0.213)
 Grade retention ever                   -0.008                 -                  -               -0.107                  -                  -                  -                   -                    -                    -0.244b
                                       (0.098)                 -                  -               (0.056)                 -                  -                  -                   -                 (0.151)
 High School Grad. (no GED)                -                 0.00               0.117              0.067                  -                  -                  -                   -                  0.56 d                  0.185b
                                           -               (0.071)             (0.080)            (0.044)                 -                  -                  -                   -                 (0.093)                  (0.210)
 Attended some college                     -                0.031               0.028              0.136                  -                  -                  -                   -                    -                        -
                                           -               (0.067)             (0.019)             0.049                  -                  -                  -                   -                                             -
 Earnings, ages 23-40                      -                0.051                 -                   -                   -                  -                  -                   -                 $6,166d                 $8,499b
                                           -               (0.357)                -                   -                   -                  -                  -                   -                  (8244)                  (8018)
 Idle                                      -                   -                  -                -0.030                 -                  -                  -                   -                     -                       -
                                           -                   -                  -               (0.053)                 -                  -                  -                   -                     -                       -
 Ever booked crime                         -               -0.126                 -                0.051                  -                  -                  -                   -                 -2.77d                  -5.739b
                                           -                (0.05)                -                0.050                  -                  -                  -                   -                 (1.590)                  (4.250)
 Behavior Index, ages 12-13                -                   -                  -                   -                -0.647                -                  -                   -                     -                       -
                                           -                   -                  -                   -               (0.582)                -                  -                   -                     -                       -
 Depression Scale, ages 16-17              -                   -                  -                   -                -0.552                -                  -                   -                     -                       -
                                           -                   -                  -                   -               (0.489)                -                  -                   -                     -
Note: Impacts are in bold whenever they would be significant in a t-test at the 10% significance level. SES stands for sociso-economic status. Impacts on IQ/achievement scores are reported in standard deviations. Currie and Thomas
(1995) originally report impacts on IQ/achievement in terms of test scores: PPVT at age 8 in Currie and Thomas (1995) is calculated using their interaction of Head Start and Peabody Picture Vocabulary Tests coefficient. The SE for the
predicted impact at this age is not reported. Our calculations use bootstrapped standard errors. Grade retention is measured at age 5 in Currie and Thomas (1995) and at age 18 in all other studies. Earnings in Garces et al. (2002) are
measured in logs. Ludwig and Miller (2007) use census data, Vital Statistics, and the NELS. For the sake of brevity, we limit the number of estimates we present from Ludwig and Miller (2007) to only one per data set: the impact of
treatment on mortality is from the Vital Statistics, impact on high school completion is from the NELS, and impact on attending some college is from the census. Impact on high school completion and college attendance are for children
roughly 18-24 years old. Feller et al. (2014) originally reported 95% posterior intervals of 0.15, 0.30 during the Head Start Program. Impacts reported in Kline and Walters (2014) are estimated from a summary index created from Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Tests and Woodcock-Johnson III Preacademic Skills tests taken in Spring 2003; this index is standardized to have mean 0 and a standard deviation of 1. The Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale in
Carneiro and Ginja (2014) measures symptoms of depression in percentile scores, where higher scores are negative. AA: African-American. a For IQ in Zhai et al. (2014), we report effect sizes on PPVT at ages 3 and 4 (they coincide).
For behavior we report hyperactiveness at these same ages. Only Zhai et al. (2014) accounts for multiple hypotheses testing, across similar outcomes. For the studies using HSIS data, all treatment effects are reported in terms of effect
sizes and, thus, are comparable across studies. For the estimation results that are reported separately for 3-year-old and 4-year-old cohorts, we use simple averages. For ages 3–4, we report the results in Feller et al. (2014), Kline and
Walters (2014) and Zhai et al. (2014), measured after the Head Start year. For ages 5–6, we report the results in Zhai et al. (2014) measured after the children finish kindergarten. The comparable results in Puma et al. (2012) are 0.135 for
ages 3–4 and 0.085 for ages 5–6. b Impacts are reproduced from the Web Appendix for Elango et al. (2015). IQ is reported at age 3 using the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale. Grade retention is reported for K-12 schooling. High school
graduation is reported at age 19. Income is reported at age 30 in 2014 dollars. “Ever booked crime” represents total arrests by age 34. c Own calculations. See Table 4; impacts are in bold whenever they have a significant one-sided,
permutation p − value. IQ for ABC is reported at age 5 and 8 using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale. d Results taken from Table 7; see the corresponding table note for details. This table only displays results for females from PPP. “Ever
booked crime” represents total arrests by age 40.
4.6       Summary of the Evidence from Head Start

We summarize the estimates for Head Start that are reported in the literature in Table 9.
As previously noted, the counterfactuals identified in these studies are not clearly specified.
We also present comparable estimated effects from PPP and ABC by way of comparison.
The effects reported in demonstration programs are typically stronger.
      It is important to note that: (i) the studies based on HSIS only evaluate the impact of
a single year of Head Start; (ii) the Head Start population is less disadvantaged than the
populations served by ABC and PPP; and (iii) the quality offered at Head Start centers
is heterogenous but on average is probably lower then the quality offered by ABC or PPP.
Thus, it is not surprising that even after control contamination is taken into account, and
a more clearly defined counterfactual identified, the estimated short-term impacts of Head
Start are smaller than the impacts of the demonstration programs.
      Long-run studies of Head Start based on observational data show substantial effects on
later-life, socio-economic outcomes. These findings reinforce the need to consider multiple
skills when evaluating early childhood programs. Dismissing Head Start as a failure because
of a documented fadeout of IQ ignores the fact that early education has effects on multiple
important dimensions of individual lifetimes. This is especially important because these
dimensions may be complementary and self-productive. Negative assessments of Head Start
ignore an important body of evidence.66


4.7       The Tennessee Voluntary Pre-Kindergarten Program

A recent evaluation of a means-tested local program in the US (The Tennessee Voluntary
Pre-kindergarten Program) has recently captured public attention. This program is not a
Head Start program. However, like Head Start, it is large-scale and targets children on the
basis of socio-economic status. A handful of sites affiliated with the program are Head Start
centers, although it is not clear whether any of these are included in the program’s evaluation.
 66
      An illustrative example is Fox Business News (2014).


                                                     56
This program is used as evidence against the effectiveness of large-scale preschool programs
like Head Start (see Barshay, 2015). The Tennessee Voluntary Pre-kindergarten Program
(TN-VPK) is a statewide kindergarten program, targeting disadvantaged 4 year-old children
one year before kindergarten. It began as a pilot program in 1998 and became statewide in
2005. More details on its implementation, quality, and funding are reported in Appendix B.
       The program is evaluated by a randomized control trial. However, the evaluation has
major flaws and the interpretation of its results is clouded by the presence of control con-
tamination. Program implementers requested parental consent after performing the ran-
domization, causing substantial selective attrition from the study. The subsample for whom
they received consent is called the Intensive Substudy. For the first cohort of participants,
only 46% of the parents in the treatment group consented to enter the study and 32% of the
parents in the control group consented. The rates of consent for the second cohort were 74%
for the treatment group and 68% for the control group. This sampling plan creates a ma-
jor problem of selective attrition. Experimental methods to evaluate this program become
invalid, so the evaluators rely on non-experimental methods (Lipsey et al., 2013, 2015).67
       The evaluation of TN-VPK does not account for control contamination. In their sample,
27% of the children in the control group attended Head Start or a private, center-based
preschool program (Lipsey et al., 2015). The evaluation of this program does not address
these confounds and does not identify a clear counterfactual.
       A reduced set of measures were reported for the full sample, including grade repetition,
attendance, disciplinary action, and special education. Estimates of these outcomes do not
rely on flawed non-experimental methodology. The authors find that the treatment group
was .77 percentage points less likely to repeat kindergarten. Short-term effects on cognition
for the intensive substudy sample fade out or become negative as children age. The treat-
ment group was 4 percentage points less likely to repeat a school grade. Short-term effects on
  67
    To correct the selection problem caused by differential consent across control and treatment groups,
the authors match on observable covariates. However, differential consent changed the composition of each
group, and this methodology does not account for the resulting differences in unobserved characteristics.



                                                   57
cognition fade out. This evaluation does not represent strong evidence against the effective-
ness of early childhood education programs. Instead, it illustrates that interpreting effects
without accounting for flaws in experimental design or estimating clear counterfactuals pro-
duces misleading policy conclusions. It cautions against the use of randomized control trials
as a gold standard. Evidence from non-experimental studies should not be outweighed by
evidence from a randomized control trial without serious consideration of the methodologies
of the individual studies.



5       Evidence from Large-Scale Programs

Evidence from demonstration programs and Head Start provides a strong case for the effec-
tiveness of means-tested early childhood education in promoting child development. More-
over, the evidence from PPP and ABC shows that programs targeting disadvantaged children
are socially and economically efficient. They also support work by mothers with young chil-
dren. In this section, we study large-scale means-tested programs other than Head Start, and
the evidence from universal programs.68 Proposals have been made for universal programs
(Office of the Mayor, 2014) and different forms of means-tested programs (The White House,
2014b).
       The US government funds a variety of large-scale programs and initiatives. Table 10
describes the components of some major sources of federal funding for early childhood initia-
tives. There are two other major sources of funding: (i) Race to the Top: a source of funding
for states, in which they compete on the basis of the quality, outcomes, and progress of their
programs. States are selected for awards between 37.5 and 75 million 2014 USD (The White
House, 2014b); and (ii) Preschool for All: an initiative providing 75 billion 2014 USD over
ten years targeting low income (≤ 200% of the federal poverty line) 4 year-olds, with the aim
of expanding the program to moderate-income children. Its goal is to increase the quality
  68
    A universal program is available to a general population of children in a local setting (e.g., county, state,
country) when the only eligibility requirement is age.



                                                       58
and quantity of available preschool and to support voluntary home visiting programs for the
most disadvantaged families by providing grants to states to expand their existing preschool
infrastructure and Head Start options (The White House, 2014b).
       Though the evidence on preschool programs is limited by a dearth of non-cognitive and
long-term measures, a clear pattern emerges. Universal programs are not universally effec-
tive. Results from several large-scale programs show that early childhood education is most
effective when targeted toward disadvantaged children. Studies of childcare arrangements of
children in the US indicate that impacts depend on the quality of the program being taken-up
relative to the quality of the next best alternative. Because disadvantaged children typically
have low-quality alternatives compared to advantaged children, they gain more from early
childhood education.
       The studies discussed in this section shed light on the potential benefits from universal
programs and provide two major insights: (i) though they offer access with no eligibility
constraints besides age, universal programs do not produce universal take-up; and (ii) dis-
advantaged children benefit the most from universal programs. This is a consequence of
their having lower-quality alternatives compared to more advantaged children. There is also
a hint that at current quality levels, universal programs may harm the children of affluent
parents who have better alternatives. The magnitude of effects depends on the quality of
the program relative to a child’s alternative.69
       The rest of this section proceeds as follows. First, we summarize studies of universal
subsidies to childcare in Quebec, Canada and Norway (Section 5.1). Second, we summarize
studies of a group of universal preschool programs in Oklahoma, Georgia, and Boston (Sec-
tion 5.2). We then summarize the findings of the section (Section 5.3). We present detailed
descriptions of these programs in Appendix B.
  69
    Blau (2003) refers to center-based programs as formal programs and to non-center-based programs as
informal programs. He notes that, generally, the quality of the former is higher than that of the latter. This
section follows his characterization of childcare.




                                                     59
                              Table 10: Federal Funding Streams for Childcare

                    Eligibility             Program Description           Program Requirements          Scope
                                            Grants given to centers
                                            that provide development
                                            services, child care,                                       2013 Federal
                                            parenting education, case                                   Appropriation
                                            management, health care       Centers must follow           (including local
                    Children aged 3-5.      (including referrals),        curricular guidelines and     projects and
 Head Start,        Family income ≤         nutrition, and family         pass teacher/staff            support activities):
 1965-present       190% Fed. income        support. Can be               qualification requirements    $7.74 billion (2014
                    level.                  Home-based (which             and program quality and       USD). 2013
                                            includes weekly home          compliance evaluations.       Enrollment
                                            visits and group                                            (including Migrant
                                            socialization),                                             programs): 903,679.
                                            center-based, family care,
                                            and mixed-approach.

                                            Grants given to centers
                                            that provide development
                                            services, child care,
                                            parenting education, case
                                            management, health care       Centers must follow           2014 Federal
                    Expectant mothers
                                            (including referrals),        curricular guidelines and     Appropriation:
 Early Head         and children under
                                            nutrition, and family         pass teacher/staff            $1.37 billion (2014
 Start,             age 3. Family
                                            support. Can be               qualification requirements    USD). 2014
 1994-present       income ≤ 190% Fed.
                                            Home-based (which             and program quality and       Enrollment:
                    income level.
                                            includes weekly home          compliance evaluations.       115,826.
                                            visits and group
                                            socialization),
                                            center-based, and
                                            mixed-approach.

                                                                                                        2013 CCDF
                                                                                                        Federal-Only
                                                                          Few restrictions.             funding: $5.10
                    Family income ≤
 Child Care                                 Funds are granted to          Childcare facilities must     billion (2014 USD).
                    85% of the state
 Development                                states that provide           meet state health/safety      2013 National
                    median income for a
 Fund                                       subsidies to families for     regulations. 2 % of funds     “average monthly
                    family of the same
 (CCDF),                                    the purpose of paying for     must be allocated to          adjusted number of
                    size. Children under
 1990-present                               childcare.                    educating families on         families and children
                    13.
                                                                          childcare options.            served”: 874,200
                                                                                                        families and
                                                                                                        1,455,100 children.

                                            Funds are provided to
 Individuals                                states on the basis of the
                    Preschool-aged (3-5)
 with                                       state’s proportion of
                    children who are                                                                    2014 Federal
 Disabilities                               disabled children. They       Children with disabilities
                    experiencing                                                                        allocations: $353
 Education                                  must be used on               must be educated with
                    developmental                                                                       million (2014 USD).
 Act (IDEA)                                 educational programs that     children who are not
                    delays (as defined by                                                               2014 Enrollment:
 Preschool                                  promote school readiness      disabled.
                    state law) and need                                                                 749,971 children.
 Grants,                                    and incorporate
                    special education.
 1977-present                               pre-literacy, language, and
                                            numeracy skills.


 Source: HS and EHS : Vogel et al. (2006), Love et al. (2002), Administration for Children and Families, Office of Head Start
(2009). There are some exceptions to the income requirements for special needs children and certain minorities. Furthermore, up
to 10% of enrollees in each center may have family income higher than the cutoff. IDEA: Administration for Children and Fam-
ilies, Office of Head Start (2014). CCDF: U.S. Department of Education (2015). Note: This table compares some of the major
federal funding streams for public childcare. CCDF is also known as the Child Care and Development Block Grant (CCDBG).
IDEA was passed in 1990 but was a continuation of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, which was passed in 1975.




                                                             60
5.1      Universal Subsidies to Childcare

5.1.1     Norway

In 1975, the Norwegian parliament approved the Kindergarten Act, a reform which promoted
a large-scale expansion of subsidized childcare. The reform was universal: all children from
ages 3 to 6 were eligible, regardless of their family background. It led to a staged expansion
inducing time and regional variation across 400 municipalities. The reform assigned respon-
sibility for childcare provision to municipalities that followed federal quality standards, e.g.,
educational content, group size, staff skill composition, and physical environment. As a con-
sequence of the reform, childcare coverage for children ages 3 to 6 increased from 10% in
1975 to 28% in 1979 (Havnes and Mogstad, 2011).70
       Havnes and Mogstad (2011) exploit regional and time variation across municipalities in
the roll-out of the reform to identify its effects using a standard difference-in-difference frame-
work. They find positive effects of the program on a battery of long-term outcomes measured
when participants were in their mid-30s, including years of education, college attendance,
probability of being a high-school dropout, welfare dependency, and single parenthood.71
They present two estimates. First, the intent-to-treat estimate, which simply compares eli-
gible and ineligible children, given the time and regional variation. Second, they use a Bloom
estimator to adjust the intent-to-treat estimate by the increase in childcare coverage.72 In
all cases, the effects are larger when adjusting for take-up. Applying the Bloom estimator
produces a 7% increase in the probability of attending college, a 6% decrease in the probabil-
ity of being a high school dropout, and a 5% decrease in the probability of being on welfare.
When they decompose results for a subsample of children of high school dropouts and high
  70
      The two main studies from which we draw results do not provide details on the characteristics of the
families of children who used center-based care compared to those that did not. Thus, we cannot characterize
the children who take-up the program and distinguish from those who did not. Drange et al. (2012) provide
some related description of childcare take-up in Norway. As recently as 1996, relatively disadvantaged
children under age 6 were under-represented in early childhood education participation.
   71
      Examples of treatment effects include: an increase of .06 (s.e. .02) years of education; an increase of 1%
(s.e. .3%) in college attendance; a decrease on the probability of being a dropout of 1% (s.e. .3%); and a
decrease in welfare dependency of 1% (s.e. .3%).
   72
      See Bloom (1984).


                                                      61
school graduates they find that the effects on education are driven primarily by children
whose mothers are less educated. Estimates by gender show that females who received the
treatment are less likely to be low earners and more likely to be average earners. This finding
aligns with the evidence from ABC, indicating a positive treatment effect on age 30 income
for women.
    Although the authors do not explore the mechanisms driving their results, they provide
a set of estimates that shed light on this. As discussed so far, they point out the relevance of
considering children’s next best alternative when the reform rolled out. They show that the
reform had no effect on the amount of hours mothers work. However, it changes childcare
take-up. The authors conclude that the reform crowds out informal childcare and increases
the quality of the formal childcare taken up. Parents sent more children to center-based or
formal childcare and less to informal care. Thus, the positive effects are a consequence of
moving children from informal to formal care.
    Havnes and Mogstad (2014) expand the analysis of Havnes and Mogstad (2011). They
use the characteristics of the children who were affected by the reform and note that relatively
disadvantaged children benefited the most from it. They allow for non-linearity in the
differences-in-differences framework of Havnes and Mogstad (2011). Specifically, they explore
variation in the effects of the reform on children along the earnings distribution once they
become adults. They find that “upper-class children suffer a mean loss of $1.15 for every
dollar spent on subsidized child care, whereas children of low-income parents experience an
average gain of $1.31 for every dollar spent” (Havnes and Mogstad, 2014), which produces
an increase in social mobility across the participating cohorts.
    The evidence from this reform relates to two of the policy implications on which we
present evidence throughout the paper. First, disadvantaged children benefit the most from
early childhood education. In the case of Norway, it is very plausible that the reform crowded
out poor informal alternatives for disadvantaged children, resulting in a relatively large
improvement in their early environments compared to those of advantaged children. This


                                              62
interpretation is further supported by the relatively larger effects for children of high school
dropouts compared to children of high school graduates.
       This point relates to the second implication. The quality of the early environments
of children is fundamental. The reform in Norway made more slots available in formal or
center-based care, which is relatively high-quality. This produces gains in short- and long-
term outcomes for the neediest children.


5.1.2     Quebec

In 1997, the government of Quebec introduced a universal policy for families with children
of ages 0 to 4. Regulated, center-based childcare was subsidized to have an effective price
of at most 5.00 Canadian dollars73 a day. All children aged 5 have access to free public
kindergarten.74
       Before 1997, only low-income families in Quebec received childcare subsidies. Further,
low-income families (≤ 57,680 2014 USD) received a 75% tax credit for childcare expenditures
(Baker et al., 2005). This implies that the gain low-income families had from the 1997
reform was relatively small compared to the gain of high-income families. There are three
components to the reform. First, for children younger than age 2, all previously informal
childcare centers were certified and the staff was trained. Second, for children older than 2 but
younger than kindergarten age, center-based childcare was subsidized. Third, kindergarten
was made free.
       Baker et al. (2008) evaluate the effects of the policy exploiting cross-Canada regional
variation around the years of its implementation, comparing the pre- and post-policy out-
comes of families in Quebec with the outcomes of families in the rest of Canada. They find
that the effects of these reforms on child behavior and parent-child interactions are negative.
The policy caused a sizable increase in maternal labor supply (around 10 percentage points)
  73
     1997 dollars.
  74
     Classroom size, caregiver education, and similar standards were imposed as part of the reform, one of
its objectives being to improve the quality of childcare. More details are in Appendix B.



                                                   63
with its effect mainly being experienced by high-income families, which the program dra-
matically changed the cost of childcare for. As a result, it crowded out parental care, which
may be of a higher quality than center-based arrangements for some high-income families.
      The policy increased emotional disorder and physical aggression at ages 2 and 3 and
decreased social development at ages 0 to 3. Furthermore, it had negative effects on families
in terms of effective parenting and maternal depression when children were between 0 and 4
years old.
      Offsetting these negative findings, in later work, Baker et al. (2015) find that the policy
had small, but beneficial effects for disadvantaged children. These include reduced hyperac-
tivity, anxiety, and aggression at ages 2–3. Effects on non-cognitive outcomes are particularly
strong for boys. Moreover, Baker et al. (2015) find evidence of decreased criminal activity
as measured by apprehensions and convictions. The benefits reported in adolescence for dis-
advantaged boys is consistent with other evidence from programs targeted to disadvantaged
families.
      The 1997 reform in Quebec was implemented on top of existing subsidies to low-income
families. It attracted more affluent families into the program by subsidizing childcare but not
providing high-quality services at the level offered in affluent homes. The negative early-life
results arise because: (i) disadvantaged families were already being offered a subsidy before
the policy and centers for children above age 3 were certified and presumably high-quality;
and (ii) the program crowded out maternal time spent on child care by relatively affluent
families. This evidence underscores the importance, in any evaluation, of considering who
took up the policy and what their next best alternative would have been in the absence of
the policy.


5.2      Local Universal Programs in the US

For the universal public programs provided in Georgia and Oklahoma, some data on program
take-up by socio-economic status are available. Universal access to programs does not imply


                                                64
universal take-up. In these programs, low socio-economic status is measured by eligibility
for free or reduced price lunch, which requires that the child’s family is at or below 185%
of the federal poverty line. In Georgia, 59% of all preschool-age children in the state took
up the program. Of these, 60% were eligible for free or reduced price lunch. In Oklahoma,
74% of all preschool-age children took up the program. Of these, 61% were eligible for free
or reduced price lunch. Take-up is substantially lower among more affluent families.75
       Cascio and Schanzenbach (2013) provide further evidence on take-up. By pooling data
from Georgia and Oklahoma to make a comparison with the rest of the states in the US,
they find that take-up differs across maternal education levels. Specifically, they find that
between 4 and 5 out of every 10 children enrolled in public schools would have otherwise been
enrolled in private preschools if their mothers had at least some college education. Thus,
they project that the increase in preschool attendance in this relatively advantaged group is
between 11 and 14 percentage points, compared to an increase of between 19 and 20 points
for the pooled sample.
       Georgia and Oklahoma sponsor preschool programs which have a relatively high score
in the National Institute for Early Education Research (NIEER) quality index (Cascio and
Schanzenbach, 2013), which is claimed to measure the quality of a state preschool program.76
Georgia and Oklahoma have a high score because they require the teachers in every classroom
to hold a bachelor’s degree and have a certificate in early education. They also have class size
requirements—class size is capped at 20 children and a 1:10 teacher-student ratio is enforced.
Both programs are partially funded through the Preschool for All initiative, though they also
receive funding from other sources. Oklahoma’s preschools are provided by public schools
  75
      Family poverty is defined in terms of family income starting below the 200% poverty line. Using elemen-
tary probability calculations and data on the percentage of children eligible for free or reduced price lunches
(for which eligibility is determined by family income at or below the 185% poverty line), 49% of children in
Oklahoma and Georgia were in poverty (American Community Survey) United States Census Bureau, 2014.
Using the total take-up and take-up by socio-economic status statistics, the probability of taking-up the
program for a child in a poor household is 79% in Georgia and 99% in Oklahoma. Similarly, the probability
of taking-up the program for a child in a non-poor household is 40% in Georgia and 49% in Oklahoma.
   76
      We note, however, that the Tennessee Program previously discussed also had a high NIEER quality
index. See Lipsey et al., 2015. The validity of the NIEER score has not been established.



                                                      65
and they receive funding from state and federal sources. Though Georgia’s preschools are
publicly funded, the services are provided by private centers.
    Cascio and Schanzenbach (2013) evaluate the Georgia and Oklahoma programs using a
strategy similar to that of the evaluations of the Norway and Quebec reforms by exploiting
regional and time variation across these and the rest of the states in the US. They estimate
intent-to-treat effects of the policy on children up to eighth grade. Their findings indicate
that disadvantaged children, as measured by their eligibility for free lunch, have substantial
gains in reading and math test scores by fourth grade. The effects on reading vanish by
eighth grade, but the effects on math scores remain statistically precise and are economically
significant. For advantaged children, the effects become small by fourth grade and vanish
by eighth grade. The authors present evidence on the mechanisms producing the effects.
Disadvantaged children spend less time with their mothers, but the quality of the interaction
increases because they spend more time reading, playing, and doing other activities together.
That is, there is a relatively large improvement in the quality of the early environment for
disadvantaged children.
    The strategies used to identify the effects of the reforms in Norway and Quebec and the
state programs in Georgia and Oklahoma are very similar. They exploit time and regional
variation in program roll-out. In Norway, the reform was gradual and had time and regional
variation across 400 municipalities. Thus, the estimates compare regions that differ in time
of the policy implementation. In Quebec, the reform was introduced in the whole province
and the estimates are identified by comparing outcomes in Quebec with those in the rest
of Canada. Similarly, the state programs in the US are evaluated by comparing outcomes
across Georgia and Oklahoma and the rest of the states in US.
    There is a crucial drawback to this strategy, which is inherent in difference-in-difference
strategies. If there are any differences in trends of unobserved local characteristics across
treatment and comparison group regions, then difference-in-difference estimates do not rep-
resent the effects of the reform, but rather differences in trends that would cause these effects


                                               66
even in the absence of the reform. In the example of Quebec, if previous policies uniquely
changed the way in which the market for female labor increased in that province, and this
caused the childcare decisions observed in the period after the reform, then the estimates of
program effects on labor supply are contaminated by this pre-existing trend.
      To assess this concern, in their study, Havnes and Mogstad (2011) perform a battery of
robustness checks. These include different calculations of standard errors, such as clustering,
to allow for various scenarios of unobserved correlation across municipalities, excluding cities
from the sample, adding municipal fixed effects, and adding time trends interacted with
multiple observed characteristics at municipality level. Their results are not sensitive to
any of these sensitivity exercises. The fact that the reform in Norway was rolled out at
municipality level provides a large amount of variation with which to perform many forms
of sensitivity analyses.
      Unfortunately, this is not the case for Quebec, as the reform was at the provincial level.
Nevertheless, the authors of the Quebec study perform sensitivity analyses and report robust
results. In the study of Cascio and Schanzenbach (2013), the authors perform sensitivity
analysis by controlling for state trends and use a battery of observed characteristics. They
also explore sensitivity with respect to the window of observations they consider. While these
three studies differ in the degree to which they test for sensitivity, all find little evidence for
it.
      Gormley and Gayer (2005) and Gormley et al. (2005) evaluate Oklahoma’s preschool
program in a local setting. They use administrative data from Tulsa and exploit a sharp
regression discontinuity design on age eligibility. Namely, children are eligible to attend
preschool if they are 4 years of age by September 1st of the school year. Thus, they compare
children of very similar ages who were just barely eligible with those who are just barely
ineligible. Data include tests measuring cognition for both groups. For the children who were
not eligible, they use tests at preschool entry the following year. For the children who were
eligible, they use tests at the end of preschool. They report a gain of 0.39 and 0.24 standard


                                                67
deviations in language and motor skills, respectively. However, this estimate is short-run
in nature. The program accelerates academic competence but has no long-run effect. This
evidence suggests that children in some form of schooling do better on tests than children
not in school. After all children enter school, the effects vanish by grade 3 .77
      Weiland and Yoshikawa (2013) evaluate a universal preschool program in Boston using a
similar strategy. The program served 2,045 children in 69 elementary schools within the city.
Any child turning 4 years-old before September 1st was eligible. Participants of the program
received a year of free full-day pre-kindergarten in an urban public school. The children
received a common curricula: full implementation of the literacy and language curriculum,
Opening the World of Learning, and the mathematics curriculum, Building Blocks. Reports
indicate that the curricula were implemented with high fidelity across preschools (Weiland
and Yoshikawa, 2013).
      The nature of the data makes it straightforward to compare children who were arbi-
trarily close to the eligibility cohort, but still not eligible, with those who were eligible and
participated in the program. The reported results are positive on mathematics, reading, and
some measures of social skills at the beginning of the first school year immediately following
program completion. However, when they are disaggregated, these positive results show con-
siderable variability. While children eligible for free lunch had impacts on self-control (0.3
effect size), ineligible children had no impacts on this dimension. Impacts in numeracy were
very strong for both groups. The magnitudes of the effect sizes are .66 and .47, respectively.
      We are skeptical about the interpretation of the estimates reported in Gormley and
Gayer (2005), Gormley et al. (2005), and Weiland and Yoshikawa (2013). Their reported
effects are short-run in nature and simply compare exposed children to unexposed children
at the end of one year of the program. They do not account for catch-up in the scores when
the unexposed children eventually enter school. Effects vanish by grade three in the Gormley
studies. (Weiland and Yoshikawa, 2013 only analyze short-term outcomes measured in the
 77
      See Hill et al. (2012).



                                               68
fall after preschool completion.) An additional problem with these regression discontinuity
studies is the large bandwidth often employed (i.e., a broad band of ages of children on which
either side of the discontinuity point is used). There are few children available to identify the
impact in the vicinity of the cutoff and there is selective attrition of children from samples.


5.3     Summary of the Evidence from Universal Programs

The evidence on universal programs supports a general finding consistent with the entire
body of evidence in this paper. Disadvantaged children benefit more from early childcare
education than do advantaged children. This is due to a larger improvement in the quality of
the early environment for disadvantaged children compared to advantaged children. When
children attend programs with higher quality care than they would have received at home
or at an alternative setting, the effects of the programs are generally positive. Given that
disadvantaged children have less access to alternatives, they benefit the most from universal
programs. Programs that crowd out high-quality alternatives for advantaged children, as in
Quebec, produce weak or even negative effects.
      Further research is required to strengthen this body of evidence. In particular, the
most rigorous analyses study policy changes and estimate their effects through reduced form
estimates. Some of them shed light on the mechanisms driving the policy by exploring long-
term effects, effects on maternal labor supply, etc. However, this literature could benefit
from models that investigate the mechanisms through which estimated effects are generated.



6      The Importance of Quality

The studies discussed thus far indicate that when the childcare options for families are low
in quality, center-based policies tend to have positive effects. This is especially true for dis-
advantaged families for whom alternatives are of relatively low quality. Following the recent
literature, this section uses attendance to center-based care as an indicator for participation


                                               69
in a high-quality program and attendance to non-center-based care as an indicator for partic-
ipation in a low-quality program. Generally speaking, center-based childcare establishments
are required to be certified to be funded or run (see Appendix B). Disadvantaged children
have less access to center-based childcare. All programs found to have positive effects have
relatively high quality standards (see Appendices A and B). Blau and Currie (2006) present
an extensive survey of the market for childcare. They find that standards such as low staff-
child ratios, small classroom size, and higher levels of teacher education contribute to the
effectiveness of childcare centers.
    Bernal (2008) and Bernal and Keane (2011) reinforce the evidence on the importance of
quality by comparing the effects of center-based and non-center-based arrangements. They
use the NLSY79 to examine childcare decisions in the US and their impacts on parental
labor force participation and child development. They analyze the range of childcare op-
tions available in the US, including formal and informal care options. They use different
methodologies to assess the impact of childcare on cognitive and non-cognitive development:
(i) an approach using a fully structural model and (ii) an instrumental variables approach.
The first paper uses a sample of married women. The second paper uses a sample of single
mothers and exploits exogenous changes in welfare program structures as sources of varia-
tion affecting the probability of a child being in childcare. The papers show that childcare
has negative effects on cognition at ages 5 to 8, with a magnitude of 0.13-0.14 standard
deviations, and a standard error of .049. The negative effects arise from non-center-based
childcare, while center-based childcare has no effect.
    Garcı́a et al. (2014) provide new insights using data from a demonstration program,
IHDP. Using a methodology similar to that of Bernal and Keane (2011), but utilizing a more
complete set of measures, they find that: (i) time spent with the mother and center-based
childcare have positive effects that are very similar in magnitude on average; (ii) policies
that give access to center-based childcare crowd out maternal time; and (iii) maternal time
has strikingly different consequences for more or less disadvantaged children, reflecting the


                                              70
quality of home interactions; better home environments promote child development. Adverse
home environments retard it.



7     Summary

Our analysis is based on three important principles from the literature on the economics
of human development: (i) multiple skills beyond just cognition are important and are
produced by effective programs; (ii) the skill formation process is dynamic and early home
environments play a major role in shaping child lives; and (iii) answering policy questions
requires consideration of the alternatives available to the targeted population.
     Our main conclusion is that at current levels of quality provided, disadvantaged children
benefit the most from early childhood education. The services offered improve on what is
offered to them at home. The high-quality means-tested demonstration programs that we
have examined are socially efficient as measured by benefit-cost ratios and rates of return.
There is a strong case for high-quality means-tested early childhood education (using a broad
definition of means-tested). The evidence for universal programs is somewhat ambiguous.
The evidence from Quebec suggests that standard childcare programs supporting the mar-
ket labor supply of affluent women may harm their children, but may aid the children of
disadvantaged families.
     These conclusions are based on the following bodies of evidence:


    1. From our primary analysis of the data on high quality demonstration programs, we
      conclude:


       (a) Increases in cognition, as measured by IQ, generally fade out, but do not always
           disappear. However, gains in early life non-cognitive skills generate success later
           in life, boosting outcomes such as education, employment, health, and reduced
           criminal activity.



                                              71
   (b) Methodology is available to assess demonstration programs with compromised
       randomizations, small sample sizes, and attrition. Applying it shows that high
       quality demonstration programs have positive effects over the life-cycle. These
       effects survive conservative tests, adjusting test statistics for the effects of multiple
       hypotheses testing.

   (c) When evaluated comprehensively, demonstration programs targeting disadvan-
       taged populations are socially efficient, as measured by their rates of return and
       benefit-cost ratios.


2. Head Start


   (a) Head Start provides heterogeneous treatment to heterogeneous populations. There-
       fore, when assessing its impacts, it is crucial for researchers to study the available
       alternatives in the settings where children take up treatment.

   (b) Studies accounting for control group contamination—i.e., control group families
       that find alternative early childhood education environments outside the home—
       show that the short-run effects of Head Start on cognitive and non-cognitive skills
       are positive and moderate to strong.

   (c) Studies evaluating long-term outcomes from Head Start find that the program
       has persistent beneficial effects on important later-life outcomes, such as health
       and education based on nationally representative data sets.

   (d) Crude cost-benefit analyses of Head Start hint that the program might be so-
       cially efficient. More comprehensive evaluations likely imply high internal rates
       of returns, as current estimates only include gains in earnings.


3. Universal Programs

  Disadvantaged children benefit the most from universal programs offered at current
  quality levels. Advantaged children have enriched environments available to them and

                                            72
their parents are less likely to use them. In contrast, without access to such programs,
disadvantaged children spend time in low-quality environments or informal settings.




                                       73
References
Administration for Children and Families (2005, May). Head Start Impact Study: First year
 findings. Technical report, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Washington,
 DC.
Administration for Children and Families, Office of Head Start (2009). Head Start Program
 performance standards and other regulations. Technical report, U.S. Department of Health
 and Human Services, Washington, DC.
Administration for Children and Families, Office of Head Start (2014). Head Start Program
 facts fiscal year 2014. Technical report, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
 Washington, DC.
Baker, M., J. Gruber, and K. Milligan (2005, December). Universal childcare, maternal
  labor supply, and family well-being. Working Paper 11832, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Baker, M., J. Gruber, and K. Milligan (2008, August). Universal child care, maternal labor
  supply, and family well-being. Journal of Political Economy 116 (4), 709–745.
Baker, M., J. Gruber, and K. Milligan (2015, September). Non-cognitive deficits and young
  adult outcomes: The long-run impacts of a universal child care program. Working Paper
  21571, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Barnett, W. S. and L. N. Masse (2007, February). Comparative benefit-cost analysis of the
  Abecedarian program and its policy implications. Economics of Education Review 26 (1),
  113–125.
Barshay, J. (2015, October 5). Studies shed light on fleeting benefits of early childhood
  education. U.S. News & World Report News. Produced by The Hechinger Report.
Bartik, T. J., W. Gormley, and S. Adelstein (2012). Earnings benefits of Tulsa’s pre-K
  program for different income groups. Economics of Education Review 31 (6), 1143–1161.
Belfield, C. R., M. Nores, W. S. Barnett, and L. Schweinhart (2006). The High/Scope Perry
  Preschool Program: Cost-benefit analysis using data from the age-40 followup. Journal of
  Human Resources 41 (1), 162–190.
Bernal, R. (2008). The effect of maternal employment and child care on children’s cognitive
  development. International Economic Review 49 (4), 1173–1209.
Bernal, R. and M. P. Keane (2011). Child care choices and children’s cognitive achievement:
  The case of single mothers. Journal of Labor Economics 29 (3), 459–512.
Bertrand, M. and J. Pan (2011). The trouble with boys: Social influences and the gender
  gap in disruptive behavior. Working Paper 17541, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bitler, M. P., H. W. Hoynes, and T. Domina (2014). Experimental evidence on distributional
  effects of Head Start. Working Paper 20434, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                            74
Blau, D. (2003). Child care subsidy programs. In R. A. Moffitt (Ed.), Means-Tested Transfer
  Programs in the United States, Chapter 7, pp. 443–516. Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press.

Blau, D. and J. Currie (2006). Preschool, daycare, and afterschool care: Who’s minding the
  kids? In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education,
  Volume 2 of Handbooks in Economics, Chapter 20, pp. 1163–1278. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Bloom, H. S. (1984). Accounting for no-shows in experimental evaluation designs. Evaluation
  Review 82 (2), 225–246.

Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel (2008, January). The role of noncognitive skills
  in explaining cognitive test scores. Economic Inquiry 46 (1), 2–12.

Brooks-Gunn, J., R. Gross, H. Kraemer, D. Spiker, and S. Shapiro (1992, June). Enhancing
  the cognitive outcomes of low birth weight, premature infants: For whom is the interven-
  tion most effective? Pediatrics 89 (6, Part 2), 1209–1215.

Brooks-Gunn, J., C. M. McCarton, P. H. Casey, M. C. McCormick, C. R. Bauer, J. C.
  Bernbaum, J. Tyson, M. Swanson, F. C. Bennett, D. T. Scott, et al. (1994). Early inter-
  vention in low-birth-weight premature infants: Results through age 5 years from the Infant
  Health and Development Program. Journal of the American Medical Association 272 (16),
  1257–1262.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011). National longitudinal surveys: NLSY79 children and
  young adults. Website.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2015). National longitudinal surveys: The NLSY79. Website.

Campbell, F. A., G. Conti, J. J. Heckman, S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, and E. P. Pungello (2014).
  Early childhood investments substantially boost adult health. Science 343 (6178), 1478–
  1485.

Carneiro, P. and R. Ginja (2014). Long-term impacts of compensatory preschool on health
  and behavior: Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal: Economic Pol-
  icy 6 (4), 135–173.

Cascio, E. U. and D. W. Schanzenbach (2013). The impacts of expanding access to high-
  quality preschool education. Working Paper 19735, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Caucutt, E. M. and L. J. Lochner (2012). Early and late human capital investments, bor-
  rowing constraints, and the family. Working Paper 18493, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan (2011).
 How does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project Star.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4), 1593–1660.


                                            75
Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, and R. Pinto (2015). The long-term health effects of early childhood
  interventions. Forthcoming, Economic Journal.

Conti, G., J. J. Heckman, J. Yi, and J. Zhang (2015). Early health shocks, intrahousehold
  resource allocation, and child outcomes. Under Revision, Economic Journal.

Cunha, F. (2015). Subjective rationality, parenting styles, and investments in children. In
 P. R. Amato, A. Booth, S. M. McHale, and J. Van Hook (Eds.), Families in an Era of
 Increasing Inequality: Diverging Destinies, National Symposium on Family Issues Series,
 Chapter 6, pp. 83–94. New York: Springer.

Cunha, F., I. T. Elo, and J. Culhane (2013, June). Eliciting maternal expectations about
 the technology of cognitive skill formation. Working Paper 19144, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. American
 Economic Review 97 (2), 31–47.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008, Fall). Formulating, identifying and estimating the tech-
 nology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4),
 738–782.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2009, April). The economics and psychology of inequality and
 human development. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2–3), 320–364.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. Navarro (2005, April). Separating uncertainty from het-
 erogeneity in life cycle earnings, The 2004 Hicks Lecture. Oxford Economic Papers 57 (2),
 191–261.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010, May). Estimating the technology of
 cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.

Currie, J. (2001, Spring). Early childhood education programs. Journal of Economic Per-
 spectives 15 (2), 213–238.

Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1995, June). Does Head Start make a difference? American
 Economic Review 85 (3), 341–364.

Deming, D. (2009, July). Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development:
  Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3), 111–
  134.

Drange, N., T. Havnes, and A. M. J. Sandsør (2012, November). Kindergarten for all: Long
  run effects of a universal intervention. Discussion Paper 6986, Institute for the Study of
  Labor.

Duncan, G. J. and K. Magnuson (2013). Investing in preschool programs. Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives 27 (2), 109–132.


                                             76
Duncan, G. J. and R. J. Murnane (2014). Restoring Opportunity: The Crisis of Inequality and
 the Challenge for American Education. Cambridge, MA/New York: Harvard Education
 Press/Russell Sage Foundation.

Duncan, G. J. and A. J. Sojourner (2013). Can intensive early childhood intervention pro-
 grams eliminate income-based cognitive and achievement gaps? Journal of Human Re-
 sources 48 (4), 945–968.

Eckenrode, J., M. Campa, D. W. Luckey, C. R. Henderson, R. Cole, H. Kitzman, E. Anson,
  K. Sidora-Arcoleo, and D. L. Olds (2010, January). Long-term effects of prenatal and in-
  fancy nurse home visitation on the life course of youths: 19-year follow-up of a randomized
  trial. Journal of the American Medical Association 164 (1), 9–15.

Elango, S., J. L. Garcı́a, J. J. Heckman, A. Hojman, D. Ermini, M. J. Rados, J. Shea, and
  J. C. Torcasso (2015). The internal rate of return and the benefit-cost ratio of the Carolina
  Abecedarian Project. University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Feller, A., T. Grindal, L. Miratrix, and L. Page (2014). Compared to what? Varation in the
  impacts of early childhood education by alternative care-type setting. Harvard University,
  Department of Statistics.

Fox Business News (2014). Head Start has little effect by grade school? Video.

Garber, H. L. (1988). The Milwaukee Project: Preventing Mental Retardation in Children
 at Risk. Washington, DC: American Association on Mental Retardation.

Garces, E., D. Thomas, and J. Currie (2002, September). Longer-term effects of Head Start.
 American Economic Review 92 (4), 999–1012.

Garcı́a, J. L. (2014). Ability, character, and social mobility. University of Chicago, Depart-
 ment of Economics.

Garcı́a, J. L. (2015). Childcare and parental investment: Short and long-term effects. Uni-
 versity of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Garcı́a, J. L., A. Hojman, and J. Shea (2014). The opportunity cost of early childhood
 education: Formal, informal and maternal care. University of Chicago, Department of
 Economics.

Gertler, P., J. J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeersch, S. Walker, S. Chang, and
 S. M. Grantham-McGregor (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation
 intervention in Jamaica. Science 344 (6187), 998–1001.

Gilhousen, M. R., L. F. Allen, L. M. Lasater, D. M. Farrell, and C. R. Reynolds (1990).
  Veracity and vicissitude: A critical look at the Milwaukee Project. Journal of School
  Psychology 28 (4), 285–299.

Gormley, Jr., W. T. and T. Gayer (2005). Promoting school readiness in Oklahoma: an
 evaluation of Tulsa’s pre-K program. Journal of Human Resources 40 (3), 533–558.

                                              77
Gormley, Jr., W. T., T. Gayer, D. Phillips, and B. Dawson (2005). The effects of universal
 pre-K on cognitive development. Developmental Psychology 41 (6), 872–884.

Gray, S. W., B. K. Ramsey, and R. A. Klaus (1982). From 3 to 20: The Early Training
  Project. Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.

Gross, R. T., D. Spiker, and C. W. Haynes (1997). Helping Low Birth Weight, Premature
  Babies: The Infant Health and Development Program. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
  Press.

Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2011). No child left behind: Subsidized child care and children’s
  long-run outcomes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (2), 97–129.

Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2014). Is universal child care leveling the playing field? Journal
  of Public Economics 127, 100–114.

Heckman, J. J. (1992). Randomization and social policy evaluation. In C. F. Manski and
  I. Garfinkel (Eds.), Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs, Chapter 5, pp. 201–230.
  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Heckman, J. J. (2008, July). Schools, skills and synapses. Economic Inquiry 46 (3), 289–324.

Heckman, J. J. (2015, October). Analyzing the impacts of two influential early childhood
  programs on participants through midlife. Proposal submitted to the National Institutes
  of Health on October 5, 2015.

Heckman, J. J., N. Hohmann, J. Smith, and M. Khoo (2000, May). Substitution and dropout
  bias in social experiments: A study of an influential social experiment. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 115 (2), 651–694.

Heckman, J. J., A. Hojman, and J. C. Torcasso (2014). Forecasting the long-term impacts
  of early interventions. University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., M. Holland, T. Oey, D. L. Olds, R. Pinto, and M. Rosales (2014). A
  reanalysis of the Nurse Family Partnership Program: The Memphis randomized control
  trial. University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.) (2014). The Myth of Achievement
  Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.

Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2012, August). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour Eco-
  nomics 19 (4), 451–464. Adam Smith Lecture.

Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014). Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that
  improve character and cognition. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.),
  The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life,
  Chapter 9, pp. 341–430. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                             78
Heckman, J. J., S. Kuperman Rothkopf, and C. Cheng (2015). Understanding and comparing
  the mechanisms producing the impacts of major early childhood programs with long-term
  follow-up. University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010a, August).
  Analyzing social experiments as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence from the
  HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Quantitative Economics 1 (1), 1–46.

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010b, Febru-
  ary). The rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public
  Economics 94 (1–2), 114–128.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2014). The economics of human development and social
  mobility. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 689–733.

Heckman, J. J. and R. Pinto (2015). Econometric mediation analyses: Identifying the
  sources of treatment effects from experimentally estimated production technologies with
  unmeasured and mismeasured inputs. Econometric Reviews 34 (1–2), 6–31.

Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2013). Understanding the mechanisms through
  which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American Economic
  Review 103 (6), 2052–2086.

Heckman, J. J. and E. J. Vytlacil (2007). Econometric evaluation of social programs, part II:
  Using the marginal treatment effect to organize alternative economic estimators to evaluate
  social programs and to forecast their effects in new environments. In J. J. Heckman and
  E. E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6B, Chapter 71, pp. 4875–5143.
  Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Hill, C. J., W. T. Gormley, Jr., and S. Adelstein (2012). Do the short-term effects of a strong
  preschool program persist? Working paper, Center for Research on Children in the U.S.

Hojman, A. (2015). Evidence on the fade-out of IQ gains from early childhood interventions:
 A skill formation perspective. University of Chicago, Center for the Economics of Human
 Development.

Kagitcibasi, C., D. Sunar, S. Bekman, N. Baydar, and Z. Cemalcilar (2009). Continuing
 effects of early enrichment in adult life: The Turkish Early Enrichment Project 22 years
 later. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 30 (6), 764–779.

Kerr, M. A., R. E. Tremblay, L. Pagani, and F. Vitaro (1997). Boys’ behavioral inhibition
  and the risk of later delinquency. Archives of General Psychiatry 54 (9), 809–816.

Kline, P. and M. Tartari (2015). Bounding the labor supply responses to a randomized
  welfare experiment: A revealed preference approach. Revise and resubmit, American
  Economic Review.




                                              79
Kline, P. and C. Walters (2014). Evaluating public programs with close substitutes: The
  case of Head Start. IRLE Working Paper 123-14, Institute for Research on Labor and
  Employment, University of California–Berkeley.

Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff (2006, July). Economic,
 neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce. Pro-
 ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155–10162.

Lavigueur, S., R. E. Tremblay, and J.-F. Saucier (1995). Interactional processes in families
  with disruptive boys: Patterns of direct and indirect influence. Journal of Abnormal Child
  Psychology 23 (3), 359–378.

Lipsey, M. W., D. C. Farran, and K. G. Hofer (2015). A randomized control trial of the
  effects of a statewide voluntary prekindergarten program on children’s skills and behaviors
  through third grade. Research report, Peabody Research Institute, Vanderbilt University,
  Nashville, TN.

Lipsey, M. W., K. G. Hofer, N. Dong, D. C. Farran, and C. Bilbrey (2013). Evaluation of the
  Tennessee Voluntary Prekindergarten Program: Kindergarten and first grade follow-up
  results from the randomized control design. Research report, Peabody Research Institute,
  Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.

Love, J. M., E. Eliason Kisker, C. Ross, H. Raikes, J. Constantine, K. Boller, R. Chazen-
  Cohen, J. Brooks-Gunn, L. B. Tarullo, C. Brady-Smith, A. Sidle Fuligni, P. Z. Schochet,
  D. Paulsell, and C. Vogel (2005). The effectiveness of early Head Start for 3-year-old chil-
  dren and their parents: Lessons for policy and programs. Developmental Psychology 41 (6),
  885–901.

Love, J. M., E. E. Kisker, C. M. Ross, P. Z. Schochet, J. Brooks-Gunn, D. Paulsell, K. Boller,
  J. Constantine, C. Vogel, A. S. Fuligni, and C. Brady-Smith (2002, June). Making a
  difference in the lives of infants and toddlers and their families: The impacts of early
  Head Start. Volumes I-III: Final technical report and appendixes and local contributions to
  understanding the programs and their impacts. Technical Report ED472186, Mathematica
  Policy Research.

Ludwig, J. and D. L. Miller (2007). Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evi-
  dence from a regression discontinuity approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1),
  159–208.

Ludwig, J. and D. A. Phillips (2008). Long-term effects of Head Start on low-income children.
  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1136 (1), 257–268.

Mâsse, L. C. and R. E. Tremblay (1997). Behavior of boys in kindergarten and the onset of
 substance use during adolescence. Archives of General Psychiatry 54 (1), 62–68.

Mayer, S. E. (1997). What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


                                             80
McCormick, M. C., J. Brooks-Gunn, S. L. Buka, J. Goldman, J. Yu, M. Salganik, D. T.
 Scott, F. C. Bennett, L. L. Kay, J. C. Bernbaum, C. R. Bauer, C. Martin, E. R. Woods,
 A. Martin, and P. H. Casey (2006, March). Early intervention in low birth weight prema-
 ture infants: Results at 18 years of age for the Infant Health and Development Program.
 Pediatrics 117 (3), 771–780.

McKey, R. H., S. S. Aitken, and A. N. Smith (1985). The Impact of Head Start on Children,
 Families and Communities. Washington, DC: United States Head Start Bureau.

McLanahan, S. (2004, November). Diverging destinies: How children are faring under the
 second demographic transition. Demography 41 (4), 607–627.

McLanahan, S. and C. Percheski (2008, August). Family structure and the reproduction of
 inequalities. Annual Review of Sociology 34 (1), 257–276.

Nagin, D. S. and R. E. Tremblay (2001, April). Parental and early childhood predictors
  of persistent physical aggression in boys from kindergarten to high school. Archives of
  General Psychiatry 58 (4), 389–394.

Noll, S. and J. Trent (Eds.) (2004). Mental Retardation in America: A Historical Reader
  (The History of Disability). New York: NYU Press.

Office of the Mayor (2014). Ready to launch: New York City’s implementation plan for free,
  high-quality, full-day universal pre-Kindergarten. Technical report, New York Department
  of Education.

Olds, D. L. (2006). The Nurse-Family Partnership: An evidence-based preventive interven-
  tion. Infant Mental Health Journal 27 (1), 5–25.

Olds, D. L., C. R. Henderson, R. Chamberlin, and R. Tatelbaum (1986). Preventing child
  abuse and neglect: A randomized trial of nurse home visitation. Pediatrics 78 (1), 65–78.

Olds, D. L., C. R. Henderson, and H. Kitzman (1994). Does prenatal and infancy nurse
  home visitation have enduring effects on qualities of parental caregiving and child health
  at 25 to 50 months of life? Pediatrics 93 (1), 89–98.

Page, E. B. (1972). Miracle in Milwaukee: Raising the IQ. Educational Researcher 1 (10),
  8–10,15–16.

Panel Study of Income Dynamics (2015). PSID: A national study of socioeconomics and
  health over lifetimes and across generations. Website.

Project Head Start (1969). The Impact of Head Start: An Evaluation of the Effects of Head
  Start on Children’s Cognitive and Affective Development. Bladensburg, MD: Westinghouse
  Learning Corporation.

Puma, M., S. Bell, R. Cook, and C. Heid (2012). Head Start Impact Study: Final report.
  Technical report, Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation, Administration for Children
  and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC.

                                            81
Puma, M., S. Bell, R. Cook, C. Heid, P. Broene, F. Jenkins, A. Mashburn, and J. Downer
  (2012). Third grade follow-up to the Head Start Impact Study: Final report. OPRE Report
  2012–45, Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation, Administration for Children and
  Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC.

Putnam, R. D. (2015). Our Kids: The American Dream in Crisis. New York: Simon and
  Schuster.

Raine, A., J. Liu, P. H. Venables, S. A. Mednick, and C. Dalais (2010). Cohort profile: The
  Mauritius Child Health Project. International Journal of Epidemiology 39 (6), 1441–1451.

Ramey, C. T., G. D. McGinness, L. Cross, A. M. Collier, and S. Barrie-Blackley (1982).
  The Abecedarian approach to social competence: Cognitive and linguistic intervention
  for disadvantaged preschoolers. In K. M. Borman (Ed.), The Social Life of Children in a
  Changing Society, Chapter 7, pp. 145–174. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Reardon, S. F., G. J. Duncan, and R. J. Murnane (2011). Whither Opportunity? Rising
  Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Reynolds, A. J. and J. A. Temple (1998, February). Extended early childhood intervention
  and school achievement: Age 13 findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study. Child
  Development 69 (1), 231–246.

Reynolds, A. J. and J. A. Temple (2006). Economic returns of investments in preschool
  education. In E. F. Zigler, W. S. Gilliam, and S. S. Jones (Eds.), A Vision For Universal
  Preschool Education, pp. 37–68. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, B. A. B. White, S.-R. Ou, and D. L. Robertson (2011,
  January–February). Age 26 cost-benefit analysis of the Child-Parent Center early educa-
  tion program. Child Development 82 (1), 379–404.

Ricciuti, A. E., R. G. St. Pierre, W. Lee, and A. Parsad (2004). Third national Even Start
  evaluation: Follow-up findings from the experimental design study. Technical report, U.S.
  Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education
  Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Washington, DC.

Romano, J. P., A. M. Shaikh, and M. Wolf (2010). Multiple testing. The New Palgrave
  Dictionary of Economics. Forthcoming.

Schneider, B. and S.-K. McDonald (Eds.) (2006). Scale-Up in Education, Volume 2: Issues
  in Practice. Blue Ridge Summit, PA: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

Sommer, R. and B. A. Sommer (1983). Mystery in Milwaukee: Early intervention, IQ, and
  psychology textbooks. American Psychologist 38 (9), 982–85.

St. Pierre, R. G., B. D. Layzer, L. Goodson, and L. S. Bernstein (1999). The effectiveness of
  comprehensive case management interventions: Evidence from the national evaluation of
  the Comprehensive Child Development Program. American Journal of Evaluation 20 (1),
  15–34.

                                             82
St. Pierre, R. G., J. I. Layzer, B. D. Goodson, and L. S. Bernstein (1997). National impact
  evaluation of the Comprehensive Child Development Program: Final report. Technical
  report, Abt Associates Inc., Cambridge, MA.

The White House (2014a). The economics of early childhood investments. Technical report,
 Executive Office of the President of the United States, Washington, DC.

The White House (2014b). Fact sheet: Invest in US: The White House Summit on Early
 Childhood Education. Technical report, Office of the Press Secretary, Washington, DC.

United States Census Bureau (2014). American Community Survey. Technical report, United
 States Census Bureau.

U.S. Department of Education (2015). Preschool grants for children with disabilities: Fund-
  ing status. Website.

Vogel, C. A., N. Aikens, A. Burwick, L. Hawkinson, A. Richardson, L. Mendenko, and
  R. Chazan-Cohen (2006, December). Findings from the survey of early Head Start pro-
  grams: Communities, programs, and families. Final report. Technical Report ED498072,
  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Weikart, D. P. (1967). Preliminary results from a longitudinal study of disadvantaged
 preschool children. ERIC No. ED 030 490. Presented at the 1967 convention of the Council
 for Exceptional Children, St. Louis, MO.

Weikart, D. P. (1970). Longitudinal Results of the Ypsilanti Perry Preschool Project, Vol-
 ume 1 of Monographs of the High/Scope Educational Research Foundation. Ypsilanti, MI:
 High/Scope Educational Research Foundation.

Weiland, C. and H. Yoshikawa (2013). Impacts of a prekindergarten program on children’s
 mathematics, language, literacy, executive function, and emotional skills. Child Develop-
 ment 84 (6), 2112–2130.

White, J. L., T. E. Moffitt, A. Caspi, D. J. Bartusch, D. J. Needles, and M. Stouthamer-
 Loeber (1994). Measuring impulsivity and examining its relationship to delinquency. Jour-
 nal of Abnormal Psychology 103 (2), 192–205.

Yoshikawa, H., C. Weiland, J. Brooks-Gunn, M. R. Burchinal, L. M. Espinosa, W. T. Gorm-
  ley, J. Ludwig, K. A. Magnuson, D. Phillips, and M. J. Zaslow (2013). Investing in our
  future: The evidence base on preschool education. Technical report, Society for Research
  in Child Development, Ann Arbor, MI.

Zhai, F. H., J. Brooks-Gunn, and J. Waldfogel (2014, December). Head Start’s impact is con-
  tingent on alternative type of care in comparison group. Developmental Psychology 50 (12),
  2572–2586.

Zigler, E. and S. Muenchow (1994). Head Start: The Inside Story Of America’s Most
  Successful Educational Experiment. New York: Basic Books.


                                            83
