                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHEN DO FIRMS GO GREEN? COMPARING COMMAND AND CONTROL REGULATIONS
                    WITH PRICE INCENTIVES IN INDIA

                                         Ann Harrison
                                       Benjamin Hyman
                                         Leslie Martin
                                        Shanthi Nataraj

                                      Working Paper 21763
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21763


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2015, Revised October 2019




We are grateful to Michele De Nevers, Rema Hanna, Gil Metcalf, David Popp and seminar
participants at Harvard Business School, the University of Hawaii, the Wharton International
Lunch, Johns Hopkins SAIS, and the Indian School of Business for helpful comments and
suggestions. We also thank Michael Greenstone and Rema Hanna for generously providing us
with city-level pollutant data for India, and acknowledge Karen Ni for outstanding research
assistance. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. SES-0922332. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation. We further acknowledge support from the Mack Institute for Innovation
Management at the Wharton School and the financial support of the Australian Research Council
through the Discovery Early Career Research Award DE190101167. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All
errors remain our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ann Harrison, Benjamin Hyman, Leslie Martin, and Shanthi Nataraj. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When do Firms Go Green? Comparing Command and Control Regulations with Price Incentives
in India
Ann Harrison, Benjamin Hyman, Leslie Martin, and Shanthi Nataraj
NBER Working Paper No. 21763
November 2015, Revised October 2019
JEL No. O14,O33,O44,Q4,Q52

                                          ABSTRACT

There are two commonly accepted views about command-and-control (CAC) environmental
regulation. First, CAC delivers environmental outcomes at very high cost. Second, in a
developing country with weak regulatory institutions, CACs may not even yield environmental
benefits: regulators can force firms to install pollution abatement equipment, but cannot ensure
that they use it. We examine India's experience and find evidence that CAC policies achieved
substantial environmental benefits at a relatively low cost. Constructing an establishment-level
panel from 1998 to 2009, we find that the CAC regulations imposed by India's Supreme Court on
17 cities improved air quality with little effect on establishment productivity. We document a
strong effect of deterred entry of high-polluting industries into regulated cities; however little
effect on the overall level of manufacturing output, employment, or productivity in those cities.
We also find sustained reductions in within-establishment coal use, with no evidence of leakage
into other fuels. To benchmark our results, we use variation in coal prices to compare the CAC
policies to price incentives. We show that CAC regulations were primarily effective at reducing
coal consumption of large urban polluters, while a coal tax is likely to have a broader impact
across all establishment types. Our estimated coal price elasticity suggests that a 15-30% excise
tax would be needed to generate reductions in coal consumption equivalent to those produced by
these CAC policies.

Ann Harrison                                    Leslie Martin
Haas School of Business                         Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley              111 Barry Street
2220 Piedmont Ave                               3010 Victoria, Australia
Berkeley, CA 94720                              leslie.martin@unimelb.edu.au
and NBER
harrison@haas.berkeley.edu                      Shanthi Nataraj
                                                RAND Corporation
Benjamin Hyman                                  1776 Main Street
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                Santa Monica, CA 90407
Research and Statistics Group                   snataraj@rand.org
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
ben.hyman@ny.frb.org
1        Introduction

In 2018, the WHO estimated that 13 of the 20 cities in the world with the highest levels of air pollution were
in India, underscoring India’s importance as a contributor to global emissions.1 India’s pollution outcomes
persist despite hundreds of pieces of environmental legislation at the national, state, and municipal level
for air and water emissions and waste disposal. Most of this environmental legislation has taken the form
of command-and-control (CAC) directives implemented by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
and the State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) which impose specific requirements on automobiles,
factories, and power plants. But while India has a wide range of environmental regulations, it has
relatively weak institutions (Bertrand et al. (2007), Duflo et al. (2013), Duflo et al. (2014), Greenstone
and Hanna (2014)).

    A long-standing view among economists is that market-based instruments like taxes and emissions
trading systems are more effective at addressing pollution than CAC regulation like emissions standards,
process or equipment specifications, and limits on input use or discharges. Market-based instruments give
firms flexibility in their approach to managing pollution and, unlike CAC regulation, provide incentives
for innovation. But when institutions are weak and reliable information on emissions and damages is
difficult to obtain, it is less clear which system performs best. In developing countries, limited regulatory
capacity, accountability, commitment, and scale efficiency can change the nature of optimal regulation
(Laffont (2005), Estache and Wren-Lewis (2009)). Higher prices on polluting inputs can be easier to
implement than CAC regulation (Blackman and Harrington (2000)). However, pricing polluting inputs
penalizes all users of the input equally, regardless of where or who they are, and efficient outcomes require
that emissions or effluent fees reflect marginal damages. If damages are heterogeneous, it could be more
efficient to use CAC measures to ensure that abatement occurs in locations where marginal damages
of pollution are particularly high, such as residential areas, or areas where local populations are more
susceptible or less able to take precautionary measures. And in an environment with many small, family-
owned firms, regulators may find it more politically-feasible to focus exclusively on a subset of emitters,
like large firms, public enterprises, or facilities with a known history of environmental damages.

    This paper documents a case where CAC policies appear to have achieved significant environmental
benefits at what may be surprisingly low cost. In 1996, India’s Supreme Court issued mandates requiring
17 cities to enact Action Plans aimed at reducing air pollution through a set of CAC regulations. These
directives circumvented the usual process of environmental rule-making at the local level, which was
typically more responsive to local business interests. The associated CAC regulations forced high-polluting
    1
        World Health Organization, Ambient (Outdoor) Air Pollution Database, v14, January 22, 2019.



                                                              2
manufacturing firms in targeted cities to install pollution control equipment, relocate to different areas
within each city, and in some cases shut down entirely. We use a nationally representative panel dataset
of manufacturing establishments from India’s Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) over the period between
1998 and 2009 to examine how the Supreme Court Action Plans (SCAP) affected establishment-level
pollution abatement equipment, coal use, exit, entry, and total factor productivity (TFP). We also merge
these establishment-level data with city-level air quality readings to examine ambient environmental
outcomes.

   A central challenge in estimating behavioral responses to environmental regulations has been a lack of
panel-linked establishments with ample information on both pollution control equipment and input use
(including prices), as well as production function variables needed for identifying potential TFP costs.
We assemble a new dataset that contains all of these rich features, and leverage the varied timing of city
mandates to identify plausibly causal effects. We use a multi-pronged approach to address the possibility
that the national Supreme Court selected cities in a way that is correlated with subsequent manufacturing
outcomes. First, we mine historic Times of India newspaper references to regulatory and pollution
keywords to establish that the timing of action plans and cities selected were largely unanticipated. This
motivates our main difference-in-differences (DID) specification with establishment-level fixed effects,
which show a lack of pre-trends for key outcomes. We also implement a nearest-neighbor (NN) matching
strategy throughout the draft as a robustness check, again demonstrating flat pre-trends and tests for
standard overlap and unconfoundedness assumptions associated with NN estimators. We further present
robustness of our results to an alternative control group: the subset of cities that was targeted for
environmental sanctions a decade later when the net was broadened. Finally, we conduct falsification
tests on our main results, reestimating placebo effects by altering the timing and set of Action Plan cities
treated across all possible permutations, and show that the true Action Plan estimates far exceed those
generated from random permutations.

   The environmental benefits of the SCAP policies took several forms. First, the SCAPs induced a
small increase in the share of large, establishments in high-polluting industries (HPI) with pollution
control abatement equipment and sustained reductions in within-establishment coal use, with no evidence
of leakage into other fuels. Coal is one of the dirtiest fuels with both local and global consequences
associated with its use. India is now the world’s second largest coal consumer; the 2018 World Energy
Outlook projects that India will surpass China as the world’s biggest coal importer by 2025. (International
Energy Agency, 2018). Using comprehensive emissions data collected by Greenstone and Hanna (2014)
and supplemented with additional reports from India’s The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), we
find that the SCAP policies translated into lower levels of particulate matter and sulfur dioxide (SO2) in


                                                     3
populous areas.

   However, even when environmental mandates are effective, policymakers often express the concern that
those mandates could prove particularly costly in terms of foregone growth and competitiveness, especially
in developing countries. In contrast, supporters of environmental legislation point to a “double dividend”
from abatement investment, suggesting that legislation to improve environmental outcomes can also foster
innovation and productivity growth.2 The Porter Hypothesis is an extension of this idea, arguing in its
“weak” form that environmental regulation stimulates environmental innovations, and in its “strong” form
that environmental regulation can increase productivity due for example, to positive spillovers from R&D
or first-mover advantages relative to unregulated firms. In developed countries, there is some evidence
for the “weak” Porter Hypothesis (Jaffe and Palmer (1997), Lanjouw and Mody (1996)), but in contrast
to the “strong” Porter hypothesis, regulated firms experience foregone earnings (Walker (2013)), TFP
decreases (Greenstone et al. (2012)), and less entry / higher exit in response to regulations (Becker and
Henderson (2000) and List et al. (2003)). The sparse evidence from developing countries is mixed. Liu
and Martin (2014) evaluate a large industrial energy efficiency program in China and show that the
difference in productivity growth rates between participating and counterfactual non-participating firms
is very small (less than 1%), despite evidence of positive air quality impacts. Furthermore, Tanaka et al.
(2014) find evidence that SO2 and acid rain regulation increased industrial productivity in China due to
both selection effects (entry of more efficient and exit of less efficient firms) and within-firm adoption of
cleaner technologies.

   In the Indian case, we find no evidence of a strong Porter hypothesis, but also no evidence of large
productivity costs: the SCAP policies had little to no impact on within-establishment TFP. We do,
however, document that these CAC regulations reduced the likelihood of entry by establishments in high-
polluting industries in targeted areas by 31% relative to non-targeted areas. The finding contrasts with
early evidence that location choice is not greatly affected by spatially-targeted environmental regula-
tion (Henderson (1996), Levinson (1996)) but is in line with more recent studies that explicitly address
the possibility that local environmental regulation is correlated with unobserved determinants of loca-
tion choice, like the availability of tax breaks, public infrastructure, lax enforcement of regulation more
broadly, or corruption (List et al. (2003), Millimet and Roy (2016)). Despite deterred entry among highly
polluting establishments, we find little effect on the overall level of manufacturing output, employment,
or productivity in the regulated cities. Our results thus identify deterred entry into populated areas as a
   2
    A related literature on price-induced technological change, first proposed by Hicks in 1932, suggests that high energy
prices can lead to both adoption of cleaner technologies and positive R&D spillovers. This induced innovation has been
shown to decrease energy demand of new entrants (Linn (2008)), affect the mix of durables offered by the firm (Newell et al.
(1999)), and to increase energy-related patents (Popp (2002)).



                                                             4
potentially large margin of local damage abatement for countries that are still experiencing rapid growth
in manufacturing.

   To benchmark our results, we use variation in coal prices to compare the CAC policies to price
incentives. Although Indian states impose fuel taxes, explicit price mechanisms for pollution control were
not used by the Indian government during our sample period.3 Instead we identify the role of price
mechanisms in reducing coal consumption using geographic variation in coal prices. That variation is
driven by establishment distances from coal deposits within India, state level differences in coal supply
regulations, and long standing policies that generate firm-specific price differences in coal access. Using
a leave-one-out “jackknife” coal price and cost-shifter instrumental variable strategies, we document that
higher coal prices were associated with significantly lower consumption in terms of tons of coal and
intensity of coal use for all firm types. Our estimated price elasticity is in line with US estimates: a
10 percent increase in the price of a ton of coal leads to an approximately 5 to 10 percent reduction of
tons of coal consumed. One related contribution of our paper is to highlight the enormous differences in
coal prices paid by establishments—with often the lowest coal prices paid by the most highly polluting
establishments or sectors.

   The large price elasticity suggests significant scope for reductions in coal use. In a thought experiment,
we consider what level of coal tax would be needed to achieve the same reduction in coal use as the SCAP
policies. We estimate that a 15-30% tax would be needed—in comparison, the current coal cess (Rs.
400/ton) is at the low end of this range. This suggests that while a coal tax is likely to have a broader
impact, it needs to be sufficiently sizable in magnitude to induce reductions in dirty fuel use commensurate
with CAC regulations.

   We also note that the SCAP policies had a more targeted effect on coal use, compared with coal prices.
First, the SCAP policies mainly reduced coal use among large establishments, while higher coal prices
reduced coal use among establishments of all sizes. Second, using measures of state-level environmental
compliance rates prior to SCAP announcements reported by State Pollution Control Boards, we find that
the SCAP policies were most effective in reducing coal use among states with low levels of prior compliance,
whereas higher coal prices reduced coal use in states with both high and low levels of environmental
compliance. Finally, while SCAP policies reduced particulate matter (PM) and sulfur dioxide (SO2) in
populous areas, higher coal prices improved SO2 outcomes in all regions. Our findings suggest that the
CAC regulations were effective at targeting large urban polluters, while coal prices decreased SO2 (by
decreasing coal use) across a wider range of establishments and regions.
   3
    In an effort to generate a National Clean Energy Fund, the Indian government added a cess on coal in 2010 – at roughly
50 Rs. per metric ton of coal. By 2016, this cess had risen to Rs. 400 per ton (IISD (2017)).



                                                            5
    To our knowledge, this paper is the first attempt to analyze the effectiveness of environmental legis-
lation on a comprehensive dataset of Indian establishments, as well as the first to use nationally repre-
sentative microdata to estimate both the benefit and cost sides of CAC regulations in a large emerging
market setting. Our study builds on recent work by Greenstone and Hanna (2014), who collected de-
tailed information on the timing and location of the Action Plans and merged them with district level
emissions data. They also compared the impact of Action Plans with other measures to address water
pollution and explicit policies which encouraged the use of catalytic converters for vehicles. Greenstone
and Hanna (2014) find that the most effective of these CAC plans was the legislation for reducing air
pollution through the mandated adoption of catalytic converters by vehicles. Their findings point to a
smaller impact of the SCAP policies, with one potential explanation being that establishments simply
failed to respond to the Action Plan mandates. We are able to directly evaluate the effectiveness of the
Action Plans on establishment behavior, and find that the Action Plans did indeed affect establishment
behavior along several dimensions.

    This remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the different environmental
policies we study in details. Section 3 describes the original plant panel and emissions data used in the
project, while Section 4 discusses our econometric identification strategy. Section 5 through Section 7
present the main results and robustness tests, while Section 8 concludes.



2    Policy Background

In 1991 the MoEF identified 17 industries for special monitoring at both the central government and state
government levels. These industries are: aluminum smelting; basic drugs and pharmaceuticals; caustic
soda; cement; copper smelting; dyes and intermediates; fermentation (distillery); fertilizers; integrated
iron and steel; leather processing; oil refining; pesticides; pulp and paper; petrochemicals; sugar; thermal
power plants; and zinc smelting. In certain cases, new standards were imposed on specific industries from
the HPI list (for example, stricter PM standards for small cast iron foundries in Lucknow); in several
instances, cities adopted the “Corporate Responsibility for Environmental Protection” (CREP) charter
for HPI. This charter was established by MoEF and CPCB in 2003, and set specific new standards for
the 17 HPI.

    In 1996, the Supreme Court of India, partly in response to perceptions of inadequate action by gov-
ernment ministries, ordered Action Plans (often referred to as Supreme Court Action Plans, or SCAP)
to be developed, submitted, and implemented in seventeen cities, starting with the national capital. The



                                                     6
Action Plans were mandated for different sets of cities in three distinct waves, and typically targeted
industrial and vehicular pollution. The plans typically included a variety of restrictions on manufacturing
firms, including requirements to install pollution control equipment, to close or relocate polluting facto-
ries, and to use cleaner fuels. A number of Action Plans also specifically targeted the 17 HPI industries
as designated in 1991. We summarize the implementation of these Action Plans in Table 1, which shows
that pollution control equipment adoption and relocations received the most attention throughout these
three waves of Action Plans. (See Appendix A.1 for a full delineation of Action Plan details for each city).
Earlier work suggests that the Action Plans may have reduced nitrogen dioxide (NO2) pollution slightly,
but had no impact on suspended particulate matter (SPM) or sulfur dioxide (SO2); in contrast, a policy
requiring catalytic converters was linked with a reduction in PM and SO2 (Greenstone and Hanna, 2014).

   The Action Plans were implemented on top of an extensive set of central, state, and municipal environ-
mental policies to which we cannot do justice in this short section. We have omitted a discussion of some
policies either because they are not easily quantified or because their enactment falls outside the scope of
our time period.4 However, given our focus on coal use as an outcome of interest, and our comparison of
the Action Plans with the impacts of higher coal prices, we provide a brief overview of the coal industry
in India.

   The coal industry is highly regulated and a major player in meeting the country’s energy needs. Coal
accounts for more than half of India’s commercial energy needs, with larger domestic reserves than any of
the country’s other major fuel sources. While the share fluctuates, around eighty percent of the country’s
coal needs are satisfied through local mining efforts.

   India’s coal mines were nationalized in 1972 and 1973. Coal India Limited (CIL), created in 1975, is
one of the largest State Owned Enterprises in India and manages the mining, distribution, and sales of
domestic coal in conjunction with the Ministry of Coal. Expectations for CIL are that its role is likely to
become even more important in an effort to meet India’s growing energy needs. Coal production by CIL
   4
    For example, one of the first attempts to address pollution were the Problem Area Action Plans (PAAPs). These
were comprehensive plans targeting industrial pollution in 26 different cities, implemented by the CPCB and the state-level
branches. However, these PAAPs were first identified in 1990, when 16 areas were designated as problem areas, then again
in 1995 (an additional six) and in 1996 (4 more). While likely important, there is no evidence to date that these PAAPs
were enforced by the Supreme Court or funded by the CPCB or the development banks. Since these designations were made
before our sample begins, we have chosen to subsume their probable outcomes into fixed effects in our baseline specifications.
However, we have also explored specifications in which we interact PAAP designation with SCAP designation, and we find
broadly similar effects of the SCAP in areas that were previously designated as PAAP and those that were not. Another key
policy outside of the scope of our time frame and analysis was the introduction in 1994 of the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS). These standards, formulated by the CPCB, introduced benchmarks for seven pollutants. The policy
also provided guidelines for calculating exceedence factors regarding ambient air quality, which are regularly published. The
NAAQS appear to primarily play the role of identifying, monitoring, and reporting on pollution levels. There are no rules for
monitoring compliance or imposing penalties. Exceedence Factors continue to be published annually by the CPCB, and in
2009, a new Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) was used for the first time to red-flag 43 non-attainment
areas as Critically Polluted Industrial Clusters for subsequent intervention.



                                                              7
is expected to increase from around 600 million tons annually to one billion tons by 2026 (Coal India,
Coal Vision 2030 ). However, individual companies within the manufacturing sector also engage in coal
mining. Following nationalization, all individual leases allowing companies to mine coal were terminated
with the exception of the iron and steel industry.

    Beginning in 1992, India initiated a policy to expand so-called “captive mining” beyond the iron and
steel industry. The motivation behind this policy was to increase coal mining capacity through coal users
in the private sector. This policy was first extended to power companies (in 1993), then cement producers
(in 1996), and finally to other Indian companies in 1997. In practice, captive mining has been problematic
as many coal blocks allocated to individual companies were not effectively utilized and pricing has not
been systematically designed. Combined with significant differences in railway capacity, taxes, and state
level environmental policies, the consequences have been enormous variation in levels of coal extraction,
extraction costs, and coal prices across India. We discuss this variation in more detail in Section 3.3.



3       Data

3.1     Establishment-Level Data

We use 12 years of establishment-level panel data (1998 through 2009) from the Annual Survey of Indus-
tries (ASI), comprising 90,795 unique factories after sample restrictions at the establishment-level.5 The
ASI data are, for the most part, at the level of the establishment or factory; owners of multiple factories in
the same state and industry are allowed to furnish a joint return, but fewer than 5 percent of observations
in our sample report multiple factories. Thus, all of our analyses should be interpreted as being at the
establishment rather than the firm level.

    The ASI panel includes 9 years of data on pollution control investment, pollution control capital stock,
and expenditures on repair and maintenance of pollution control stock (2001 through 2009). Examples
of specific types of stock include fabric filters, dry electrostatic precipitators, spray dryer absorbers, dry-
lime injection systems, dry powdered activated carbon injection systems, liquid waste treatment systems,
sludge treatment systems, hazardous waste treatment and recycling systems, solid waste incinerators, and
gas analyzers. Note that, as defined, pollution control represents undifferentiated investments to address
air pollution, water pollution and/or hazardous waste. We use reported pollution control investment to
    5
    The ASI surveys establishments in March after the calendar year in which economic activity occurred, and develop
sampling weights for smaller firms which are sampled with lower probability in the survey. In our analysis, we attain
nationally-representative estimates by probability-weighting regressions by these sampling weights.




                                                         8
calculate pollution control stock according to a perpetual inventory method.6

   For each establishment we also observe annual expenditures on fuels, including expenditures on coal,
petrol / diesel, and electricity, as well as quantities of coal consumed, and quantities of electricity con-
sumed, generated and sold. We use these data to construct several outcome measures that we expect to be
closely linked to the environmental policies we study: the stock of pollution control assets, coal use in tons,
and intensity of coal use (tons of coal use per rupee of output). We also draw on the establishment-level
data to calculate total factor productivity (TFP) using several methods: Ackerberg et al. (2006), Levin-
sohn and Petrin (2003), Olley and Pakes (1996), and Solow Residual (OLS).7 Output values are deflated
using the appropriate industry-specific wholesale price index (WPI). We have detailed product-level price
and quantity data for primary outputs and inputs, which allows us to calculate material input deflators
by weighting commodity-specific WPI by commodity-specific input shares.8 Investment in machinery,
transport equipment and computer systems are deflated separately by commodity-specific WPI, while
fuel inputs are deflated by the fuel-specific WPI.

   Establishment location is identified at the district-area level, with 605 unique districts and two areas
within each district (urban and rural). The ASI panel data do not contain district-level identifiers, but
the cross-sectional data do.9 We are the first researchers to have purchased and merged both cross-section
and panel datasets to integrate district identifiers into the ASI panel. For further details on the merged
panel / cross-sectional ASI data, including data quality, see Martin et al. (2014).

   We also know the primary industry in which an establishment operates at the 5-digit level, representing
476 unique 5-digit industries. We manually match all of the HPI industries to 97 5-digit NIC industries,
with the exception of “thermal power plants”,10 We construct a dummy variable indicating whether an
establishment operated in an HPI industry in the first year it is observed within its panel.11
   6
      We take the first year an opening pollution stock value is observed, and add within-year pollution investments plus the
year-to-year change in pollution stock taken from comparing the jump between closing and opening pollution stock values
across years to attain a new value for investment. We then add this (deflated) investment to the previous year’s opening
stock, and depreciate the new closing value by 10%, repeating for subsequent years.
    7
      For a more detailed discussion of the methodology used to calculate TFP, see Appendix C.5.
    8
      We use input shares from 2001 to avoid potentially endogenous changes in input mix due to the policies we study.
    9
      District level identifiers were not available for 2009, and were instead imputed from previous panel data. Our results
however, are robust to re-running the entire analysis omitting 2009.
   10
      As power plants are outside the scope of the ASI’s coverage of manufacturing sectors, we could not analyze thermal
plants in our main specifications. We were however, able to locate thermal power plant coal use data from India’s Central
Electric Authority’s Thermal Performance Reviews – an important control variable for our emissions specifications. However,
this dataset does not contain the dependent variables that would permit their inclusion in the main analysis.
   11
      While some establishments do appear to move into and out of operation in HPI industries, we show in Appendix D.7 that
on average, the Action Plans did not affect the likelihood that an establishment switched HPI status. When they do switch
however, this largely appears to be a function of small changes in product mix. For example, if an establishment reports a
primary industry of “casting of iron and steel” in a particular year and “casting of non-ferrous metals” in the following year,
it would be classified as an HPI in the first year but not the in second, even though the change in category likely reflects a
change in product mix rather than a substantial shift in industry or applicable regulations. This approach is a conservative
strategy for identifying targeted industries.


                                                              9
3.2    Action Plans

The Supreme Court Action Plans were mandated at the city level, which we match to districts from our
establishment-level dataset. Several Action Plans were implemented in cities spanning multiple districts;
in these cases we assume the Action Plans affected all of the districts. We observe establishments before
and after the implementation of 16 of the 17 Action Plans. Delhi was mandated to develop a Supreme
Court Action Plan in 1998 (following the 1996 city-led Action Plan), prior to the sample period. Therefore
we exclude Delhi from our analysis.

   Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of Action Plans overlaid on top of districts, which are coded
according to the total number of pollution monitors (SPM, NO2, SO2) ever active in each district. The
map shows good coverage of Action Plan districts by pollution monitors. Furthermore, Figure 1 also
reveals that the 11 Action Plans implemented in 2002 were concentrated in the northern region of the
country, while the 5 Action Plans mandated in 2003 were concentrated in southern India.12

   Examining hard-copy Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) reports, as well as a report on air
quality trends and action plans in 17 cities by the MoEF and CPCB, suggests that the Action Plans
targeted a variety of industries through different means (see Table 1 or Appendix A.1 for extended details).
Examples of action items include closure of clandestine units (Faridabad), moving various industries and
commercial activities outside of city limits (Jodhpur, Kanpur), installation of electrostatic precipitators
in all boilers in power generation stations (Lucknow), surprise inspections (Patna), and promotion of
alternative fuels in generators (Hyderabad).

   Many of the directives issued through the Action Plans targeted the extensive margin of establishment
activities. In other words, these directives encouraged establishments to either exit the industry, relocate,
or to invest in activities (like scrubbers) when they had previously not addressed the need to abate
pollution at all. Out of a total of 17 city-level action items we surveyed, 15 of these 17 had direct mention
of pollution control equipment, while 14 out of 17 had direct mention of relocation, exit, or closure.
A much smaller share of Action Plan activities appear to focus behavior at the intensive margin, such
as encouraging more investment by establishments that already engaged in abatement activities. This
is an important characteristic of Action Plan mandates as we turn to their effects on manufacturing
establishments.
 12
    As noted above, Problem Area Action Plans (PAAPs) were also targeted geographically. However, since PAAPs were
mandated in 1989, we do not identify policy variation within our sample period and have thus omitted them from the map.




                                                          10
3.3    Coal Prices

The Action Plans are examples of CAC regulation. Establishments may also respond to changing coal
prices through measures that increase efficiency and reduce coal use. Coal prices faced by manufacturing
firms in our dataset varied enormously across states and districts. Figure 2 indicates that coal prices
were generally lower in the eastern part of India, where many coal mines are located. Prices were higher
in the western parts and the densely populated regions. Variations in coal prices were large, with prices
in some regions five times higher on a per ton basis than in others. Many of the factors causing this
variation stem from locational advantages (closer to coal mines), state differences in pricing policies and
taxes, differences in transport costs, as well as differences in captive mining arrangements.

   There is some evidence that individual establishments have little market power in influencing these
prices. Chikkatur (2008) writes: “[E]ach coal company is allowed to set its own sale price based on
prevailing market prices. Nonetheless, the prices fixed by the coal companies still are perceived to be
“guided” by the government (Ministry of Coal, 2006b). One issue is that coal consumers do not directly
participate in price setting, nor are there any negotiations between consumers and producers (Ministry of
Coal, 2007b).” Despite these institutional conditions, we take precautions to partial out potential cases
where establishment-level coal prices could be endogenous to establishment-specific characteristics (for
example, if larger establishments command more market power and thus face lower prices).

   We have two strategies for circumventing these price endogeneity concerns. First, in base specifications
we measure the coal price faced by an establishment as the mean coal price in the establishment’s district,
excluding the establishment’s own price.13 This “jackknife” or leave-one-out measure is flexible as it
does not constrain estimation to the subset of establishments with non-missing coal prices.14 Second,
in our preferred specification we use an instrumental variable as a plausibly exogenous cost-shifter of
an establishment’s coal input price when estimating coal price demand elasticities. As is common in the
industrial organization literature, we use a variant of the mean input prices faced by similar establishments
in other markets that do not directly affect own-establishment demand. Following extensive exploration
of the determinants of coal price variation in our data (shown in Appendix A.2 and further supported by
Appendix D.6.A), we define our IV as the log mean price faced by establishments within the same 2-digit
industry and state. This market definition considers both the agglomeration patterns of 2-digit industries
  13
     If fewer than 10 establishments report coal use (and thus coal prices) in a particular district and year, we assign coal
users the mean state-level coal price (excluding own price).
  14
     Angrist et al. (1999) study the econometric properties of such leave-one-out measures in an instrumental variable (IV)
context. The current study can be thought of as implementing a “reduced form” 2SLS equation using a jackknife coal price.
For a more recent example of how reduced form leave-one-out measures have been used in similar specifications, see Hyman
(2018).




                                                             11
that may generate cost differences due to their distances from coal mines, as well as state-specific decisions
affecting coal use including for example, transportation infrastructure investments.15 We further explore
the identifying assumptions associated with this IV specific in Section 4.


3.4    Air Pollution Data

Although the Action Plans targeted not only air pollution, but also water pollution and land-based toxic
waste, we focus on three measures of air quality – SO2, NO2, and SPM – to compare the impact of Action
Plans with the effects of coal prices on environmental outcomes. SPM, or suspended particulate matter,
captures general air pollution levels. The CPCB website indicates that “RSPM levels exceed prescribed
NAAQS in residential areas of many cities... The reason for high particulate matter levels may be vehicles,
engine gensets, small scale industries, biomass incineration, resuspension of traffic dust, commercial and
domestic use of fuels, etc.”16

   SO2 levels are primarily attributable to burning of fossil fuels. In recent years, the the CPCB indicates
that India’s SO2 levels have been declining in major cities, in part because of efforts to introduce cleaner
fuels and new norms for vehicles and fuel quality. There have also been efforts to shift domestic fuel use
away from coal. In our paper, the comparison of Action Plan measures with coal price effects is most
likely to be relevant for SO2 levels, as they are most closely linked to fossil fuel use. NO2 levels are
generally attributable to vehicular exhaust and as such a reduction should be associated with efforts to
reduce pollution associated with vehicle exhaust. The CPCB’s website indicates that “NO2 levels are
within the prescribed National Ambient Air Quality Standards in residential areas of most of the cities.
The reasons for low levels of NO2 may be various measures taken such as banning of old vehicles, better
traffic management etc.”17

   Our air pollution data are based on city-level data provided by Greenstone and Hanna (2014) for 2000-
2007. We supplement their data with additional observations from The Energy and Resources Institute
(TERI) in its TERI Energy Data Directory Yearbook (TEDDY) for 2008.18 Figure 1 shows the locations
of air quality monitors. Air quality data are only available for a subset of cities; we mapped each city for
which the data are available to the corresponding district(s) in our dataset. We also show robustness to
using satellite measures of air pollution in Appendix D.3.
  15
     Defining the IV within industry-state-year cells also has the added advantage that coal quality differences across industries
are controlled for.
  16
     Website accessed on June 1, 2015 at http://cpcb.nic.in/Findings.php.
  17
     Website accessed on June 1, 2015 at http://cpcb.nic.in/Findings.php.
  18
     Results are robust to using the pollutant data from TERI / TEDDY for all years.




                                                               12
3.5    Establishment-Level Summary Statistics and Trends

In Table 2, we present summary statistics for the main variables of interest during the baseline period
prior to any SCAP announcement (1998 to 2001), after implementing our preferred sample restrictions
(which includes dropping Delhi throughout the analysis due to a lack of pre-SCAP data).19 Variable
means and standard deviations are broken out by two groups: whether or not an establishment was
ever in a district regulated by an Action Plan (SCAP versus Untreated), along with individual covariate
t-tests comparing baseline means across the two groups. While differences in levels are admissible in our
context, since establishment fixed effects will absorb any time-invariant effects in our DID specifications,
the summary statistics help anchor the magnitude of our estimates, and may be suggestive of potential
threats to identification due to differential pre-trends among the two groups.

   Panel A of Table 2 shows that SCAP and untreated districts had similar shares of HPI and HPIxLarge
establishments, where “Large” takes a value of 1 if the establishment had over 100 employees in the first
year it is observed, and zero otherwise.20 While SCAP districts had a slightly lower share of large polluting
establishments, a much higher share of these establishments operated in urban areas (81% versus 50%).
SCAP districts also had a larger number of employees per establishment, and higher revenue output
(but not productivity)—patterns consistent with SCAPs having targeted cities specifically. Notably, the
absence of meaningful differences in entry and exit rates suggests that SCAP regions were not necessarily
targeted based on underlying firm dynamics (insofar as these are captured by entry and exit rates).

   Panel B presents analogous statistics for environmental variables. The data show that establishments
in SCAP districts were slightly less likely to have installed pollution abatement equipment (stock) in the
baseline period; more notably, conditional on having equipment, they invested about 1/4 as much as
untreated establishments. SCAP establishments were also less likely to be coal users and, when they do
use coal, consumed less of it. However, establishments in both SCAP and non-SCAP districts faced similar
coal prices across several measures used in the analysis.21 As discussed above, there was large variation in
coal prices across districts, as indicated by the high standard deviations in establishment coal prices. We
further explore the determinants of this variation in Appendix A.2, and display the distribution of our
coal price instrument and endogenous coal prices visually in Appendix A.4. We also report average coal
  19
      As discussed in the next section, while the event years of the analysis run from -5 to +7 (with 0 being the year an SCAP
is announced), we restrict many of our specifications to the window from -4 to +6 such that no single policy exerts leverage
over the stacked results. This is analogous to imposing a balanced panel requirement for Action Plan-treated districts in
event time. We also drop the Delhi Action plan as our panel currently does not accommodate any data prior to 1998, the
year in which Delhi was mandated to adopt an Action Plan by the Indian Supreme Court.
   20
      This size definition is consistent with other Indian policies which use a size threshold to characterize establishment
heterogeneity.
   21
      These include “own” coal price faced by the establishment, the “jackknife” leave-one-out measure at the district level
(discussed above), and the preferred instrumental variable which we further discuss in Appendix A.4.


                                                             13
prices by selected 2-digit industries ownership type in Appendix D.6.A, which further highlight industry-
and state-driven sources of variation in coal prices.

   We then turn to Figure 3, which shows the underlying data for our main dependent variables of
interest by SCAP status and previews some of our results. Panel A focuses on the subgroup of HPIxLarge
establishments where we detect our main heterogeneous effects, while Panel B shows data collapsed at the
district-year level weighted by district population.22 The top-left plot reveals that while a lower share of
HPI-Large establishments in SCAP districts had pollution control stock prior to SCAP implementation,
SCAP-treated establishments partially closed this gap between 2003 and 2009. The second graph in Panel
A shows that the entry rate of HPI-Large establishments in non-SCAP districts increased post-SCAP;
in contrast, entry in SCAP districts was substantially lower.23 Lastly, the top-right panel shows similar
trends in mean establishment-level TFP before and after SCAP implementation.24

   Panel B of Figure 3 shows district-level pollutant trends collapsed by year and SCAP status, weighted
by the population of each district in our sample in 2000. These plots are constructed by aggregating
mean pollutant values in each district-year (averages across all pollution monitors in a given district and
year) by SCAP status, expressed as parts per million (of air volume). Trends in SPM show an increase in
non-targeted districts (commensurate with economic growth rates during the same period), while SPM
levels in SCAP districts remain flat. We observe similar patterns for SO2 and NO2. However, for SO2,
there is a pronounced declining pre-trend in the lead up to the SCAP announcements. In subsequent
regressions (where we consider average and not aggregate pollutant level), we thus also carefully control
for thermal power plant coal use which is not included in our universe of manufacturing establishments,
and we demonstrate that dynamic estimates across event time recover a flat pre-trend (shown in Figure
10).

   Taken together, the raw data suggest that the Action Plans had a mild effect on within-establishment
pollution control equipment installation, a reduction in pollutants, little effect on establishment-level
TFP, but a large effect on entry. With the exception of SO2, visual inspection of pre-trends suggests
that the SCAP policies were not necessarily selected on the basis of any observable baseline trend in
dependent variables. However, these means may be masking important unobservable heterogeneity which
could confound both pre- and post-SCAP estimates. In addition to showing stability to a robust Nearest
  22
     Both panels drop Delhi such that the first SCAP announcement occurs in 2002. In Panel A, sampling multipliers are
applied such that means are nationally representative, while Panel B district means are collapsed after expanding sampling
weights at the establishment-level.
  23
     Entry equals 1 in the first year an establishment appears in the data, if within three years of the observed ASI “initial
production year”. We interpret entry effects as SCAPs affecting the targeted group and not the “control” group here, as
additional tests confirm that establishments do not appear to be relocating to non-SCAP regions in response to the policy.
See discussion below and Appendix D.4 for further details.
  24
     We also show trends for aggregate output, and aggregate TFP in Figure 12.


                                                             14
Neighbor (NN) matching design, in the next section we use historic newspaper references to keywords to
test for anticipation effects, and further validate our research design.



Testing for Anticipation with Historic Times of India References

   To explore the extent to which SCAP cities were selected based on preexisting regulatory and pollution
trends, we leverage ProQuest’s Historical Times of India (TOI) newspaper database. The TOI database
contains all English-language articles published in India between 1990 and 2009, and digitizes article
keywords to be searchable at the monthly level. The TOI articles allow us to generate newspaper references
to keywords and specific Indian cities, which we aggregate to the calendar-year and calendar-year-cohort
levels (where cohort refers to cities in each of the three waves of SCAPs). The first 8 lines of each article
are classified as the article’s “abstract”, while the place of publication (first word of each article) is tagged
as the “dateline”. Figure 4 shows two examples of such articles, where keywords are highlighted in green,
dateline in blue, and cities in red. We use these classifications to study trends in two types of keywords:

   1. Pollution keywords: pollute, polluting, pollution, pollutant, polluted, emission, so2, sox, sulphur
       dioxide, sulphur oxide, no2, nox, nitrogen dioxide, nitrogen oxide, SPM, particulate matter, air
       quality, water quality, smog

   2. Regulatory keywords: supreme court, action plan, scap, sc, pollution control, cpcb

   Our TOI queries count a reference = 1 if a keyword appears anywhere in the article, and the SCAP city
or district is mentioned in the article abstract (including the dateline).25 We explore these trends across
all 17 SCAP cities, and include Delhi in this exercise as our TOI data go back to 1990, providing ample
pre-trend years prior to the 1998 Delhi SCAP.26 Figure 5 shows our results from this exercise. In Panel
A, we restrict attention to the balanced panel corresponding to the year coverage in our ASI analysis
sample, where 0 indicates the year an SCAP is announced. We first residualize annual city references by
calendar year to difference out noise common to all regions, and then mean-collapse by baseline city share
of overall references to account for different city sizes and TOI coverage, resulting in event-year weighted
means.

   Panel A shows that references to regulatory or “SCAP” keywords were flat in the run up to the Action
Plan announcements, and dramatically spike with a one to two year lag following the SCAP mandates,
resulting in double the initial press coverage at the peak. Interestingly, references to pollution keywords
  25
     Reference counts are calculated “with replacement” (we do not exclude an article from further queries if it was already
counted) to account for cases in which two distinct cities are associated with the same article.
  26
     For Delhi we use the initial city action plan year of 1996 which preceded the first round of Supreme Court Action Plans,
which officially began with the Delhi mandate in 1998.


                                                             15
trended downward in the run up to the SCAP policies. This runs counter to the concern that SCAPs
may have targeted cities based on growing public concern about pollution in those locations. There is
also no clear evidence of an “Ashenfelter dip” or anticipatory effects just prior to the announcements,
lending credence to the idea that the policies were largely unexpected.

    In Panel B of Figure 5, we also examine unstacked cohort trends by wave of SCAP mandate. These
data indicate that TOI coverage cumulatively spiked twice, first around the initial 1996-1998 Delhi plan,
then again for the 2003 cohort of cities mandated to adopt plans. Rather than reflecting a lack of
compliance among the 2002 cohort, the overall number of references are simply very small in those cities
due to a lack of Times of India English-language coverage in the northern part of India where the 2002
cohort was concentrated. To account for this, in Appendix A.3 we normalize references within cohort to
their level the year prior to SCAP announcement, and show that the 2002 cohort exhibits a 50% to 100%
spike in the number of references in the post-period for SCAP and pollution keywords respectively.

    All together, these trends suggest that there was very little anticipation of regulation in these specific
cities just prior to SCAP announcements, while references to pollutants were in fact declining in the run
up to the selection of SCAP cities.



4     Identification Strategy

Having shown that SCAP policies were largely unanticipated, our identification strategy exploits the
differential incidence and timing of the Action Plans. The Action Plans were mandated for certain cities
by the Supreme Court, and (with the exception of Delhi) announced in 2002 and 2003 and implemented
shortly thereafter. We compare districts that implemented an Action Plan against those that did not
(including those that would eventually be mandated to enact Action Plans in the 2003 cohort, prior to
2003), and separately examine effects on establishments in HPI versus non-HPI industries.

    For our main establishment-level regressions, we use a generalized difference-in-differences (DID)
method where we estimate the following for establishment i in district d in year t:


                           yidt = β × SCAPdt + λ × CoalP riceidt + αi + ηt + idt                         (1)


The variable SCAP is equal to 1 in a district that receives an Action Plan, in any year during and after
the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. In our baseline specification, the coal price is equal
to the mean district price, excluding own price, and hence varies at the establishment level. Except



                                                      16
when noted, our specifications include establishment fixed effects αi (absorbing any time-invariant effects
specific to the establishment and district) as well as accounting year fixed effects ηt . One concern with this
specification is that the SCAPs may affect coal prices themselves, introducing a “bad control” problem.27
For example, if the Action Plans induce adoption of pollution control equipment that requires higher-
quality and thus more expensive grades of coal (unobserved to the econometrician), this could introduce
complicated biases. We show in Appendix A.2 that the Action Plans appear completely unrelated to
establishment coal prices, and further find that point estimates for β are nearly identical when including
and excluding coal prices in subsequent tables.

   We also show coefficient estimate plots using a dynamic version of Equation 1 in event time, where ad
is the year an SCAP is announced in district d, and τ denotes the event year relative to the announcement
(normalizing τ = 0 for establishments in districts that are never mandated an Action Plan):

                          6
                                  βτ × EverSCAPd × 1{t − ad = τ } + λCoalP riceidt + αi + ηt + idt
                          X
                 yidt =                                                                                          (2)
                          τ =−4


Here, EverSCAPd is an indicator variable for any district that is eventually targeted by an Action Plan.
While full event years span -5 to +7, we restrict our analysis to the window from -4 to +6 such that no
single policy exerts leverage over the stacked results (a balanced panel requirement). We also omit event
year -1 as a reference variable in all dynamic specifications.

   As noted above, many of the Action Plans specifically targeted HPI industries. We might expect
effects to differ for HPI and non-HPI establishments simply because the HPI industries have historically
been major polluters, and have been regulated more heavily. In addition, like many other countries,
India tends to focus its environmental regulations on larger establishments; this ability to target is one of
the potential political economy benefits of CAC regulation. Thus, we also examine whether the Action
Plans had differential impacts for large and small establishments. This yields four HPI-size subgroups of
interest, where j indexes the the subgroup:


              yidt = δ1 × SCAPdt × HP Ii × Largei + δ2 × SCAPdt × HP Ii × N otLargei                             (3)

                   + δ3 × SCAPdt × N otHP Ii × Largei + δ4 × SCAPdt × N otHP Ii × N otLargei
                                              X
                   + λ × CoalP riceidt + αi +   ηjt + idt
                                                    j


Unlike previous equations, here we interact time fixed effects with the four HPI-size subgroups such that
 27
      The bad control problem is a subtle form of simultaneity bias, formalized in Angrist and Pischke (2008).




                                                             17
coefficients capture within-group effects of SCAP policies.28 To avoid the potentially endogenous reaction
of establishment HPI status and size to the Action Plans, we define an establishment as “HPI” if its
primary product was in an HPI industry the first year it is observed, and “large” if it has more than
100 employees in the first year in which is is observed. Thus, the establishment fixed effects absorb the
direct effects of the HPI and establishment size variables. Finally, we also estimate dynamic versions of
Equation 3 analogous to Equation 2 (not shown for conciseness), to produce heterogeneous coefficient
plots over event time.

   We begin by examining the impacts of the Action Plans in isolation (without coal prices) on establishment-
level variables. When the outcome variable is the probability that an establishment reports any pollution
control stock (estimated using a perpetual inventory method as described above) or any coal use, we
implement linear probability models where the outcome of interest yidt is a dummy equal to one if the
establishment reports a positive value of pollution control stock (coal use), and zero otherwise. We also
examine effects on the logarithm of pollution control stock, coal use, and coal intensity of output (tons of
coal per unit of real output), which are conditioned on the establishment having a positive value in the
baseline period.

   Other variables we consider at the establishment-level include TFP, entry, and exit. The entry variable
takes on a value of 1 in the first year an establishment appears in the data within three years of the observed
initial production date.29 The exit variable takes on a value of 1 in the year an establishment is officially
declared “closed” in the ASI, so long as it remains closed thereafter.30 When we estimate the effects of the
Action Plans and coal prices on the probability of establishment entry and exit using linear probability
models, we alter Equation 1 to exclude establishment fixed effects in order to identify the effect based on
all establishments, not just entrants and exiters. Finally, we conduct similar regressions at the district
level to examine the effects on district-level pollution measures (SPM, SO2, and NO2):


                               ydt = β × SCAPdt + λ × CoalP ricedt + αd + ηt + dt                                        (4)


   In this set of specifications, we also control for coal use by thermal coal power plants, which account
for approximately three-quarters of India’s coal use.31
  28
     This recovers the same point estimates (but different standard errors) as running regressions by each HPIxSize subgroup.
  29
     We do not ascribe an entry value of 1 if the factory was left-censored, and chose the threshold value 3 based on the mean
difference between the reported date of initial production and the establishment’s first appearance in the survey data.
  30
     This is a conservative definition of exit as any detection of exit will be understated with respect to establishments not
yet officially declared as closed in the ASI.
  31
     The ASI establishment-level data, however, unfortunately do not cover electricity units. Consequently, we cannot include
them in our main specifications as we do not observe any of the main variables of the analysis for thermal coal plants.




                                                             18
   For establishment-level results, we apply ASI-provided sampling multipliers in our analyses. For
district-level results, we first aggregate the establishment-level data to the district level using sampling
multipliers. We then present results in which each district is weighted by either the initial number of
establishments in the district (“InitEstab” in district-level tables) or the population of the district in the
year 2000 prior to SCAP announcements (‘Pop2000” in district-level tables). In all cases, standard errors
are clustered at the district level.



Nearest Neighbor Matching Estimates

   Throughout the analysis, we also present an alternative matched-sample strategy in which we use
a nearest-neighbor (NN) matching procedure to pair each SCAP-treated unit in our sample with an
untreated unit, and run our standard DID estimator using this newly matched control group following
closely the algorithm presented in Abadie and Imbens (2002).32 Intuitively, in establishment-level analy-
ses, our matching estimator finds establishments in untreated districts with similar district characteristics
to SCAP districts; however, it requires that establishments be matched exactly within each of the four
HPI x Size subgroups (which vary by establishment). In district-level analyses, we match only on district-
level variables. We discuss the details of this procedure in Appendix B, including a full list of matching
variables with rationale for their inclusion, discussion of overlap and unconfoundedness assumptions, and
balance tests.



Alternative Control Group

   As an additional robustness test, in Appendix C.1 we present results for all of our main regressions
using as a control group establishments located in cities that were identified in 2009-2010 as Polluted
Industrial Areas (PIA) but were not targeted for Action Plans in 2002-2003. A research team including
the CPCB, state pollution control boards, and IIT Delhi gave these industrial clusters and areas Com-
prehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) scores. The list of 88 industrial clusters included areas
with scores that led them to be flagged as critically-polluted areas, as well as those that improved their
scores. The intuition behind this control group is that it represents establishments in cities that would
have been next most likely to be treated at the time that SCAP cities were selected.



Coal Price Instrument
  32
     In regression tables, we use the header “NN” to distinguish this strategy from DID, though a more apt name is “matched
difference-in-difference estimator” (Heckman et al., 1997).




                                                            19
   In our preferred specification, we instrument for establishment coal prices in the equations above
using a Hausman (1996) stye cost shifter that plausibly identifies the coal price elasticity of demand from
common supply shocks unrelated to idiosyncratic coal use. We define our IV as the log mean price faced
by firms within the same 2-digit industry and state in a given year. This market definition captures
variation from both the agglomeration patterns of 2-digit industries that generate cost differences due to
distances from coal mines, as well as state-specific policies affecting coal supply such as infrastructure
investments (see Section 3.3 for further discussion).

   Like all instrumental variables, our IV must satisfy three main conditions to recover a local average
treatment effect (LATE): relevance, excludability, and monotonicity (Angrist et al., 1996). Toward rel-
evance, we report the first stage F-statistic on the excluded instrument in all 2SLS tables.33 We also
decompose our 2SLS estimate into its “reduced form” (2SLS numerator) and first stage (2SLS denomi-
nator) to show the extent of variation in both endogenous coal prices and our instrument, as well as to
provide some suggestive evidence that the monotonicty assumption is unlikely to be problematic in our
context (shown in Appendix A.4).34

   Regarding excludability, the 2SLS identifying assumption for this IV requires that state-industry-year
specific cost shifters are unrelated to other factors directly impacting coal use beyond the price channel.
One potential violation of this assumption would be if coal supply (including the availability of different
grades of coal quality or other fuel substitutes) were endogenously influenced by trends in the underlying
characteristics of establishments within highly specified industries and regions. While we cannot test
this directly, we show in Appendix A.2 that variation in the 3-digit industry Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
(HHI) within a given state has little influence over coal prices when conditioning on average establishment
price (idiosyncratic establishment fixed effects)—consistent with the claim discussed in Section 3.3 that
individual establishments cannot negotiate with coal providers (Chikkatur, 2008). This also suggests that
it is unlikely that a specific industry in a given state could influence for example, highway upgrades for
coal transportation or other cost shifters. Because all regressions are conditioned on establishment fixed
effects, endogeneity here would also need to originate from differential changes in prices, not just levels,
which makes finding a potential violation even more difficult. Due to these potential limitations on the
IV, however, we consistently show results using both the leave-one-out coal measure, as well as our 2SLS
estimate (which are qualitatively similar), and report a range of estimates.
  33
      We report the cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap statistic (equivalent to Angrist-Pischke test for one endogenous regres-
sion), and Cragg-Donaldson joint F-statistic in heterogeneous specifications where the IV is interacted by the four HPI-Size
subgroups.
   34
      Like excludability, monotonicity cannot be tested explicitly. However, one necessary condition is that compliers with the
instrument should appear to comply in the same direction—in our case, higher coal IV values should always weakly increase
with endogenous coal prices and decrease with coal use.



                                                              20
5     Establishment-Level Results

5.1    Pollution Control Equipment

Table 1 showed that pollution control equipment adoption received the most widespread attention in
Action Plan implementation. We begin by testing whether the Action Plans indeed increased the proba-
bility that an establishment reports a positive value for pollution control stock or increased the amount
invested in abatement equipment conditional on having equipment prior to the SCAP announcement. We
refer to these as the extensive and intensive margins respectively. Columns (1) and (4) of Table 3 report
the results from estimating Equation 1 for pollution control stock and log pollution control investment
respectively. These show that in the aggregate the Action Plans had no substantial impact on either
the probability that an establishment had pollution control equipment, nor intensive margin abatement
investments.

    When we check for CAC targeting, however, we find evidence that large establishments in HPI indus-
tries were indeed likely to have received additional targeting or scrutiny. Columns (2) and (4) of Table
3, present these estimates using the specification in Equation 3. Column (2) shows that Action Plans
are associated with a mild increase in the probability that large establishments in HPI industries—those
most likely to be targeted by the Action Plans—report any pollution control stock. The coefficient on
the interaction term (SCAP X HPI X Large) of 0.0350 in column (2), suggests that the Action Plans
increased the probability of non-zero abatement investment by about 3.5 percentage points, with standard
errors corresponding to significance at the 5.7% level (a p-value of 0.057). The point estimate remains
unchanged when using PIA districts as a control group (column 1 in Appendix Table C.2). Results are
also similar when using our nearest neighbor matching strategy in column (3). With 3,677 establishments
in the HPI-Large category in column (2), this effect represents 130 large HPI establishments starting to
invest in pollution control equipment.

    Turning to intensive margin results in column (5), we find that HPI-Large establishments with pre-
existing abatement equipment in the baseline in fact divest about 17% of their equipment in response to
the Action Plans. One potential explanation for the contrasting findings on pollution control investment
is that regulators may focus on a subset of large HPI establishments, thus allowing backsliding among
non-targeted establishments, including large HPI establishments that already possessed abatement equip-
ment. While data limitations prevent us from tracking specific types of pollution control equipment over
time, additional results (discussed later and shown in Table 7) suggest that effects were concentrated in
regions that were less compliant with previous environmental regulations in the baseline period, consistent


                                                    21
with regulators targeting low-hanging fruit. While NN matching estimates in column (6) do not detect
divestment effects, note that the observation count in this regression is much smaller due to subsetting
on the union of being in both the matched control group sample and having abatement equipment in the
baseline period. The PIA control group regressions also fail to detect significant divestment effects (see
Appendix Table C.2). In the latter case the coefficient is still negative, but more than halved relative to
our baseline specification.

   To examine the dynamic nature of the effects and assess pre-trends visually, we plot dynamic coeffi-
cient estimates corresponding to columns (2) and (4) using a variation of Equation 2 in Figure 6. Figure
6 first shows that pre-trends in heterogeneous subgroups appear relatively flat prior to the SCAP an-
nouncement year. In the case of extensive margin HPI-Large effects, plants install equipment with a one
year lag (consistent with the SCAP implementation rather than announcement year) and appear to retain
the equipment throughout the post-period. On the intensive margin, establishments instead gradually
divest their equipment over time; dynamics consistent with receiving a sharper signal that they are not
being targeted as more time elapses following the SCAP announcement. In Appendix B.3, we also show
corresponding nearest neighbor dynamic estimates, which exhibit similarly flat pre-trends.


5.2      Exit and Entry

The second largest stated target of the action plans was the use of plant relocations, including directives
issued by the Supreme Court to close specific plants and threaten future closure of noncompliant plants
(see Table 1 and associated institutional details). We test for evidence of such exit in Table 4. Following a
similar analysis structure as before, we present results both overall and by subgroups that were particularly
targeted by the SCAPs, followed by estimating dynamic exit rates over event time in Figure 7.

   In Table 4 columns (1) and (3), we find evidence that the SCAPs induced mild exit among estab-
lishments, particularly in non-HPI industries. While the exit rates are small, non-HPI establishments
are numerous, and it is possible that directives targeting their closures (such as relocating small brick
kiln plants as discussed above) occurred in a “one-shot” round of exit. Figure 7 appears to confirm this
interpretation, showing that exit was entirely concentrated in the period 2 years after the SCAPs were
announced (one year after they begun to be implemented). Our definition of exit is conservative: it may
understate true exit rates if establishments are not officially declared to be closed in the ASI (or if this
occurs with a lag). Because we cannot distinguish between whether this exit is a true economic outcome
or instead the result of a noisy measure of exit, we err on the side of caution in our interpretation here.35
 35
      In the dynamic version of the NN estimates in column (4) shown in Appendix B.3, we also see a similar dynamic exit



                                                           22
   Although the Action Plans were never explicitly about deterring entry, it is one of the margins along
which we see an unambiguously robust result. Column (6) of Table 4 provides evidence that new entry
into SCAP districts was strongly deterred in HPI industries. The point estimates imply that entry into
targeted cities decreased on average by 4.5 percentage points in the post period (on a base of roughly
19,000 total HPI establishments). This corresponds to a 31% decrease over a pre-SCAP baseline entry
rate of 14.37% for HPI establishments. The dynamic effects in the right panel of Figure 7 show that
this entry deterrence gradually increased over time among HPI establishments—possibly linked to an
increase in the perceived likelihood of costly regulation—and were sustained to the end of the sample
period. Note that when analyzing exit and entry, we present NN matching estimates for exit but not
entry, because we have no pre-entry data for establishments. The results are, however, robust to our
PIA control group specification (Appendix Table C.2 column 7) and NN matching done exclusively with
district-level variables (results available upon request).

   One natural question that arises when finding effects on entry and exit, is what happens to targeted
establishments that would have remained in, or entered into, SCAP districts absent the intervention.
If large HPI establishments simply escape a targeted city by locating to the fringe of the city, welfare
implications are likely to be negative—the SCAPs distorted private establishment decisions with little
likely impact on decreasing pollutants in highly populous metropolitan areas. Our identification strategy
would also be at risk.

   To mitigate this potentially confounding factor, we use a broad geographical range when we define
SCAP cities, including the core city and also surrounding areas, where departing establishments would
ostensibly be most likely to settle. While we cannot track establishments as they move across geographies,
we can evaluate whether entry deterrence in the “core” of the city led to greater entry in the “fringe” of
the city. Toward this end, we classify establishments by whether they operate in core or fringe districts,
and reestimate entry and exit effects within these groupings. The details of this procedure are discussed
in Appendix D.4, which shows that exit and entry rates were nearly identical in the core and fringe, with
no offsetting behavior.


5.3    Coal Use and Comparison with Coal Price Effects

Finally, we check whether there is any evidence that the Action Plans affected fuel use. Since coal is the
dirtiest fuel, we pay particular attention to coal inputs. In Table 5, we show effects of the SCAPs on the
extensive and intensive margins of coal respectively. We find no evidence that the Action Plans changed
pattern. The PIA control group results are also similar.



                                                           23
the share of establishments that used coal, but they did significantly reduce the amount of coal consumed
by coal-using establishments. The point estimate in Columns (4) and (7) indicate that the SCAP policies
reduced within-establishment coal use and coal intensity of output by about 14.5% on average—a sizable
magnitude.36 Decomposing effects by HPI-size subgroups reveals that the effects were most concentrated
in large, non-HPI establishments.37 It may be somewhat surprising that the largest percentage changes
are concentrated outside of HPI industries, until we note that some of industries that were not targeted
as HPI are nevertheless quite polluting. Some examples include: textile finishing/dyeing (the largest non-
HPI user of coal inputs), brick making, tyre manufacture, and wood mills. Turning to dynamic effects,
Figure 8 confirms that there are few effects on the extensive margin. The reduction in coal use by large,
non-HPI establishments occurs gradually and persists until the end of our sample period.

   From a pollution point of view, a reduction in coal consumption would not be a great success if it led
to a one-to-one substitution towards grid electricity, which runs primarily on coal, or a massive increase
in other cleaner but still polluting fuels, like natural gas. We test for substitution into electricity or other
fuels, with results reported in Appendix D.8. We find no evidence of such substitution. It appears that
targeting dirty fuels through Action Plans led to overall fuel reductions rather than substitution away
from coal to other fuels.

   Finally, in Table 6, we compare the effects of the Action Plans with coal price variation on coal use.
In columns (2) and (3), we first estimate a coal price elasticity using the leave-one-out measure discussed
above. We find that a 10% increase in coal prices was associated with about a 5% decrease in coal use
on average. In column (4), we further break up effects by subgroups of interest, which shows that coal
price elasticities are relatively equal across different establishment types (additional evidence that market
power is not affecting price negotiation on average). In columns (5) through (7), we use the cost-shifter
Hausman IV described extensively above, to estimate the effects of coal prices. While the IV elasticity
estimates are larger than the leave-one-out measure, they are within the same degree of magnitude—
implying a coal price elasticity of between -0.5 and -1, close to estimates found for the United States.38
Lastly, we report a strong first stage F-statistic on the excluded IV(s) across all specifications (details in
table notes).



  36
     Using the coefficient -0.157 in column (4), we attain 14.5% from 100 × (exp(−0.157) − 1).
  37
     The dependent variable in Table 5 is in logs. When we instead use levels (available upon request), the largest reductions,
which are also strongly statistically-different from zero, come from HPI industries.
  38
     Serletis et al. (2010) find an average own-price elasticity of -0.556 for the US using coal price data from 1960-2007, while
the US Energy Information Administration reports regional own-price elasticities ranging from -0.14 to -0.53 (EIA, 2012).




                                                               24
Interpreting Magnitudes through a Coal Tax Thought Experiment

   The above results suggested that the Action Plans reduced coal use by 12% to 14.5%,39 while a 10%
increase in coal prices is associated with a decline in coal use of between 5% to 10% on average. While coal
taxes did not vary during our sample period, we can compare the magnitude of the Action Plans’ effects
on coal use with what would be required in coal taxes to attain the same reduction, using our average
coal price elasticity. To do this requires two assumptions: (1) First, we assume that the underlying
coal price variation induces the same behavioral response in coal use that would arise increasing the
average coal price through an excise tax (an equal pass-through assumption); (2) Second, we assume that
higher average tax rates affect coal use proportionally across the whole support of baseline prices (an
out-of-sample assumption).

   The coefficient on coal price in column (2) of Table 6 (-0.477), suggests that achieving a 12%-14.5%
reduction in coal use would require a coal tax of about 25-30% on average. If we consider the IV re-
sult for coal price in column (5) of Table 6 (-0.863), a 12%-14.5% reduction in coal use would require
a coal tax of about 14-17%. India has placed a variety of different taxes on coal, including royalties,
GST taxes, and a coal cess, which started at Rs. 50 per tonne in 2010 and was subsequently raised
to Rs. 400 per tonne by 2016 (IISD (2017)). Tongia and Gross (2019) estimate a total tax on coal of
about Rs. 859 per ton (in 2016). Considering only the Rs. 400 cess that was added since our sample
period, the current coal tax is about 15% of current nominal prices (using a spot price of 2,653 Rs/tonne
received by Coal India in 2018-2019, as reported by The Economic Times). Thus, the current coal cess
of 15% is on the low end of the range (15-30%) that would have the same effect as the SCAP on coal use.40



Action Plans vs. Prices in a Context of Weak Enforcement

   The above exercise demonstrated that while coal taxes are likely to have a broad-based impact on
establishments, they need to be large in magnitude to induce average coal reductions commensurate with
Action Plan regulations. Yet we also showed earlier that Action Plans tend to be applied selectively to
certain types of establishments (especially those that are large and high-polluting to begin with). In this
subsection we explore whether CAC and price effectiveness vary by the degree to which enforcement is
complied with—an important source of variation in emerging markets.

   Toward this end, we use baseline state environmental compliance rates prior to SCAP announcements,
reported by State Pollution Control Boards and provided by Greenstone and Hanna (2014), to test for
  39
     Using the coefficient -0.157 in column (1), we obtain 14.5% from 100 × (exp(−0.157) − 1). Using the coefficient of -0.128
in column (5), we obtain 12% from 100 × (exp(−0.128) − 1).
  40
     Considering the full set of levies on coal, the current tax is on the high end of the range.


                                                             25
differential coal price and CAC effects for high and low compliance states separately. The compliance rate
for a given state is calculated as the share of plants flagged as compliers, over a denominator including
compliers, defaulters, and plant closures.41 We then define high and low compliance states relative to the
median compliance rate prior to any SCAP announcement. We report these results in Table 7, using a
variant of Equation 3 that uses compliance-by-year fixed effects in place of HPI-size-year fixed effects to
estimate within high and low com compliance subgroups.

   Consistent across all specifications, we find that previously low-compliance states were those in which
the effects of Action Plans were concentrated no matter the dependent variable. Supreme Court man-
dates thus appear to be most effective in places that were previously non-compliant with environmental
regulations, suggesting a scope for CAC targeting to fill in the gaps when regulatory compliance rates are
low in general. In contrast, coal prices do not have larger impacts on coal use in low compliance states.
In fact, the coal price elasticity is lower in low-compliance states.


5.4    TFP Costs

Our findings so far indicate that the Action Plans induced some large polluters to start investing in
abatement equipment, and reduced coal use. We now turn to the cost side, and examine whether these
regulations affected average TFP.42 TFP is an appealing cost measure because it unambiguously captures
true economic costs (such as innovation) net of factor substitution responses to expensive pollution control
equipment installation (which we treat as a variable rather than fixed input). While establishments
may hire workers to operate the newly mandated equipment, or lay off workers to pay for the new
equipment, productivity is a sufficient statistic that captures total establishment costs from moving away
from (privately optimal) pre-regulation factor choices.

   Table 8 compares the effects of Action Plans and coal prices on TFP. Columns (1) through (6) show
our preferred Ackerberg et al. (2006) measures with and without effects of coal prices, while columns (7)
through (9) provide a Solow Residual measure of TFP as a benchmark. The results reveal that the Action
Plans had very little effect on establishment productivity. While some specifications detect a negative
effect at the 10% level for HPI-Large establishments—those shown earlier to have adopted pollution
control equipment—the results are generally noisy, and reject the presence of major TFP costs. This lack
of significant TFP costs is further supported by dynamic coefficient plots in Figure 9, which show that the
mild negative effects detected in the table cannot be cleanly identified as visually distinct from noise in
  41
    Results are qualitatively similar when removing closures from the denominator.
  42
    Our preferred TFP measures also control for the probability of exit in estimation procedures. However, given evidence
that establishments do not appear to be relocating, we do not focus on aggregate TFP and reallocation issues here.



                                                           26
the baseline, and the results using the PIA control group in Appendix Table C.2 which show no economic
or statistically-significant differences. In Appendix D.1.A, we further show qualitatively similar results
using methods from Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and Olley and Pakes (1996). We also find very mild
negative effects of higher coal prices on TFP, however this is in part expected as TFP is mechanically
calculated using coal among other inputs.

     To further hone in on whether the mild TFP effects for HPI-Large establishments are driven by
extensive margin pollution control equipment installations, in Appendix D.1.B we explore the effects
of Action Plans differentially for establishments which had pollution control equipment prior to SCAP
announcements, and those that did not. Focusing on those with no pollution control stock in the baseline,
we see nearly identical estimates to the overall effects, suggesting that indeed the mild negative effects
among HPI-Large establishments may in fact be concentrated among the small share of establishments
that install equipment in response to the policies.



6         Air Quality

So far, we have shown that both the Action Plans and coal prices affected establishment outcomes, albeit
in different ways. In this section we ask whether either this command-and-control regulation or coal prices
had any impact on air quality.

     Supreme Court Action Plans could have influenced emissions through a variety of measures mandated
by the plans. The different plans had components targeted at vehicles, which could lead to a relationship
between Action Plan passage and different measures of air pollution, regardless of whether industrial
pollution control measures were implemented effectively. However, other components of these plans
focused on industry, including on high-polluting industries in particular; and our findings show that they
encouraged investment in pollution abatement among large establishments and deterred entry across all
HPI establishments. For these plan components, we would expect Action Plan passage to affect air quality
through changes in emissions.

     Table 10 shows the results from district-level regressions in which the outcome variables are ground-
level SPM, SO2 and NO2 concentrations.43 In the footer of each regression model, we list whether the
regression is weighted by baseline district population in the year 2000 (prior to any SCAP announcement),
or the initial number of establishments in the baseline period. The former provides a population-exposed
measure of pollutants conducive to focusing on populous ares, while the latter focuses on industrially-
    43
         See Section 3.4 for a description of district-collapsed pollutant data, and Table 9 for district-level summary statistics.



                                                                   27
concentrated districts. It bears repeating that there is good coverage of Action Plan districts by pollution
monitors, as was shown in Figure 1.

   Starting with SPM in columns (1) through (3) using population-weighted exposure measures, we find
coefficients on the Action Plan variable ranging between -0.089 and -0.171 depending on the specification—
declines of 7.6% to 15.7% in average SPM. While statistical significance is only detected using NN-
matching estimates, Figure 10 shows dynamic plots corresponding to the DID estimates, and indicates
that SPM coefficients are statistically significant at the 5% level in the two event years just after the
SCAPs are implemented—roughly a year after the announcement date—and remain negative throughout
the sample period. Figure 10 also suggests that pre-SCAP trends in SPM are flat, and that the event-study
break in SPM after the SCAP announcement appears distinct from any pre-SCAP noise. We further note
that dynamic DID effects on SPM are very similar when comparing event study plots to our NN strategy
(see Appendix B.3 panel (c)). This is consistent with Greenstone and Hanna (2014), who find similar
coefficients that are not statistically significant.44 In column (4) however, effects are not statistically
significant when weighting by number of initial establishments.

   Moving to SO2, we find no evidence of statistically significant declines in SO2 associated with the
Action Plans in populous areas (again consistent with Greenstone and Hanna (2014)), whether controlling
for thermal power plant coal usage or not. This is one result that differs when using satellite data. The
satellite data regressions that are restricted to districts with air quality monitors or districts that contain
PIAs (Appendix Table D.3.2) show evidence of a close to 4% reduction in SO2 levels. Using land-based
monitors, only column (8) indicates a large negative effect on SO2 when considering effects weighted
by industrial concentration. In contrast, coal prices appear to be strongly linked with reduced SO2
pollution. Since SO2 levels are primarily associated with the burning of fossil fuels, the significant and
negative impact of rising coal prices on SO2 emissions is plausible. The negative coefficient, which varies
between -0.119 and -0.204, indicates that a 10 percent rise in coal prices at the district level would be
associated with a reduction in SO2 emissions of between 1 and 2%. Finally, we do not find evidence of
NO2 declines in response to the Action Plans. If anything, NO2 shows an increase in the post-period
when using population-weighted measures.
  44
    For transparency, we replicate the Greenstone and Hanna (2014) results in Appendix D.2 using the timing definition in
their paper in panel (a) (implementation-year) and the timing in our paper in panel (b) (announcement-year).




                                                           28
7         Falsification Test

Two central findings from our DID estimation are that more large HPI establishments adopted pollution
control equipment in response to the Action Plans, and that HPI establishments were deterred from
entering Action Plan cities. While our results are robust to a nearest neighbor matching strategy, and
both methods show relatively flat pre-trends in dynamic plots, selection on unobservable characteristics
of Action Plan cities may still remain an identification concern. Although multiple events (i.e. the fact
that the Action Plans were implemented at different times across different cities) aid in identification,
since part of the control group contains establishments that will eventually be treated (with presumably
similar pre-trends around the timing of the Action Plan mandates), our sample restrictions limit this
differential timing to only the 2002 and 2003 SCAP waves. To provide additional evidence that selection
concerns are minimal in our context, we thus implement a non-parametric permutation test following
Chetty et al. (2009), that has been applied in a number of subsequent public finance papers with common
trends identification assumptions.45

     The idea in our context, is to run a permutation test that generates placebo estimates from reassigning
treated districts to be treated in every possible year-district combination in our sample, and graphically
inspect where the true estimate falls with respect to the placebo estimate distribution. If we find that the
estimate from our preferred specification is far larger than the majority of placebo estimates, this would
indicate a low p-value on our estimate—i.e. that we are not finding spurious effects due to preexisting
differential trends in years and subsets of districts in which we would not expect to find strong effects.
Were there instead selection on unobservables, then reassigning the timing of treated districts should lead
to a distribution around the “true estimate”, as the econometrician would detect this secular pre-trend
no matter the timing of the policy.

     In Figure 11, we present the empirical CDF of placebo estimates from estimating equation Equation
3, plotting the simulated coefficients on SCAP-HPI-Large. As the combinatorial space for all such per-
mutations would be enormous (8 years including 2001 to 2008 raised to 16 possible cities ≈2.8e+14),
in practice, we take 1000 i.i.d. random draws to assign treatment-years to each of the 16 SCAP cities.
We indicate with a red vertical line the true treatment estimate of the effect of SCAP-HPI-Large on the
probability of pollution control use reported in column (2) of Table 3 (0.035), and entry in column (6) of
Table 4 (-0.0462) . Figure 11 confirms that the effect level we find in both cases, far exceeds the large
majority of all other possible permuted placebo effects.
    45
         See for example Chodorow-Reich et al. (2013) for a prominent and influential example of this.




                                                                29
8    Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we examined the impact of India’s Supreme Court Action Plans—a major set of CAC
policies—on the behavior of manufacturing firms. Using a comprehensive panel of Indian establishments,
we found that the CAC regulations led to an increase in the number of large establishments in targeted,
highly-polluting industries with pollution control stock, and a decrease in coal consumption among large
establishments in both targeted and non-targeted industries. The Action Plans did not substantially
affect establishment-level TFP, but did have a strong deterrent effect on the entry of establishments in
highly-polluting industries. Examining district-level air quality data, we find that the Action Plans are
associated with a decrease in particular matter that is concentrated in highly populated areas, and with a
decrease in SO2 in industrially-concentrated areas. Comparing the effects of these CAC regulations with
the potential impact of a tax on coal - which we estimate by using the large variation in coal prices - we
find that a 15-30% coal tax would be required in order to achieve the same reduction in coal use as was
achieved by the Action Plans.

    One key takeaway from our analyses is that the effects of the CAC regulations were concentrated in
certain industries and areas, whereas the price effects were broadly distributed. The main impacts of the
Action Plans were observed among large establishments, consistent with regulators focusing their enforce-
ment in the most cost-effective way. In addition, the increased investment in pollution control equipment
and the reduction in coal use were largely confined to states where establishments were previously less
compliant - suggesting targeting of non-compliant establishments and areas. In contrast, establishments
of all sizes, and in all areas, responded to coal price increases.

    An important concern with environmental regulations are that they can impose substantial costs on
establishments – a concern that is particularly salient in a developing country. We examined the impact of
the Action Plans on TFP, and found small negative impacts at the establishment level. We did, however,
find large deterrent effects - entry for both small and large establishments in highly-polluting industries
in SCAP districts fell following the implementation of the Action Plans.

    A key contribution of our study is that we examine both the costs and the benefits of CAC regulations.
We document benefits in the form of additional pollution abatement, reduced coal use, and improved air
quality; as well as potential costs in terms of small declines in establishment-level TFP, as well as large
effects on entry into highly-polluting industries. We show that it does not appear that the entry effects
are simply driven by establishments relocating from the core of a city to the fringe. However, it is not
clear whether the entry deterrence has a negative impact on overall output or employment. A complete



                                                      30
accounting of costs and benefits would require a general equilibrium analysis that is beyond the scope
of this paper. However, to provide some suggestive evidence, we examine aggregate coal use, output,
employment, and TFP in manufacturing establishments, by SCAP status in Figure 12. The aggregate
amounts are normalized to equal one in 1998. TFP is weighted by output and thus takes into account
both within-establishment TFP changes and reallocation between establishments. Consistent with our
establishment-level findings, total coal use in non-SCAP districts rises over time, but remains flat in
SCAP districts. In contrast, we see few differences in total output, employment, or output-weighted TFP
between SCAP and non-SCAP districts over time. In other words, we do not see that the deterred entry
of highly-polluting establishments into SCAP districts, or the reduction in coal use, is associated with
major costs at the aggregate level.

   Taken together, our findings suggest that CAC regulations can be effective in a developing country
context, especially if marginal damages are highly concentrated, and regulators would get more “bang for
the buck” from bringing a relatively small set of establishments into compliance. In contrast, if damages
are spread across a large number of establishments, then input taxes may be more effective. These
different targeting mechanisms also have implications for distributional outcomes – especially in a context
like India, where most firms are small and family owned. Further research to examine the implications
of input taxes versus CAC regulations for profits, household income, and the size distribution of firms
would be valuable.




                                                    31
9    Figures and Tables

         Figure 1: Locations of Supreme Court Action Plans (SCAPs) and Air Pollution Monitors




NOTES: This figure shows the number of pollution monitors in each district, along with the location and timing
of each Action Plan. Monitors counts sum the total NO2, SO2, and SPM monitors in every district over the
main analysis sample period (2001 to 2009). Action Plans in large cities in the South of India such as Bangalore,
Hyderabad, and Chennai in fact overlap with a high density of monitors, which is not easily seen on the map
given the small geographic size of these cities’ surrounding districts. Source: CPCB, Greenstone and Hanna
(2014).




                                                       32
                  Figure 2: District Coal Price Variation, Coal Deposits, and State Lines




NOTES: This figure maps mean district coal prices by district across our main analysis sample period (2001
to 2009), and demonstrates geographic price dispersion with respect to distance from coal deposits and state-
specific factors (where state boundaries are outlined in green). For conversion purposes, 1 USD = approximately
50 INR over the sample period. Source: ASI, TERI, IndiaStat.




                                                      33
                                                      Figure 3: Raw Data Underlying Research Design

     Panel A: Raw Data, Establishment-Level Dependent Variables




     Panel B: Raw Data, District-Level Dependent Variables
34




     NOTES: Panel A shows the fraction of HPI-Large establishments with any pollution control equipment by SCAP status, the fraction of HPI-Large
     establishments flagged as new entrants by SCAP status, and the mean TFP value for HPI-Large establishments respectively (see text for details and
     sample restrictions). Panel B shows the total population exposure to air pollution for each pollutant in the header, aggregating district ground-level
     mean pollutant readings within SCAP targeted and non-targeted districts, weighted by district baseline population. ASI sampling weights are applied
     in Panel A such that all estimates are nationally representative. Source: ASI, CPCB, Greenstone and Hanna (2014).
                     Figure 4: Times of India Articles, Source for Keyword Reference Counts




NOTES: This figure demonstrates how a ProQuest Historical Times of India reference to a keyword in a specific Indian
city (district) and year is generated. The left article is counted as a Pollution keyword reference in a given calendar year
for each city in red, if the article contains a keyword in the following set: pollute, polluting, pollution, pollutant, polluted,
emission, so2, sox, sulphur dioxide, sulphur oxide, no2, nox, nitrogen dioxide, nitrogen oxide, SPM, particulate matter),
air quality, water quality, smog. Analogously, the right article is counted as a Supreme Court Action Plan keyword
reference in a given calendar year for each city in red, if the article contains a keyword in the following set: supreme court,
action plan, scap, sc, pollution control, cpcb. Blue highlights “dateline” of the article—the publication city—used for
robustness checks excluding and including dateline cities from reference counts. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1 Source:
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Times of India.




                                                               35
               Figure 5: SCAP Announcement Event Studies, Times of India Reference Counts


Panel A. Mean References by Relative Year (baseline-mean weighted and residualized by calendar year)




Panel B. Mean References by Relative Year and Cohort (baseline-mean weighted)




NOTES: Times of India query counts a reference = 1 if keyword appears anywhere in the article, and SCAP city or
district is mentioned in abstract (first 8 lines), with replacement. Panel A plots are residualized by calendar year, while
all reference counts are mean-weighted by baseline city share of references (from τ = -1 to -6), and added to the average
baseline reference rate from τ = -1 to -6 for interpretation. Event years are restricted to the . τ = 0 refers to the year
of SCAP announcement—for Delhi, this is re-coded from 1998 to 1996 to reflect initial city action plan that preceded
SCAP (see text for institutional details). Note that the 2003 cohort has low Times of India coverage—see Appendix A.3
for version of Panel B normalized to τ = -1 to adjust for this. Pollution keywords: pollute, polluting, pollution, pollutant,
polluted, emission, so2, sox, sulphur dioxide, sulphur oxide, no2, nox, nitrogen dioxide, nitrogen oxide, SPM, particulate
matter), air quality, water quality, smog. SCAP keywords: supreme court, action plan, scap, sc, pollution control, cpcb.
Source: ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Times of India.




                                                             36
        Figure 6: Dynamic Estimates of Action Plans on Pollution Control Measures by Event Time

Left = Effects on Pr(Has Pollution Control Stock)); Right = Effects on Log(Pollution Control)




NOTES: Plots show heterogeneous estimates using a dynamic difference-in-differences specification with respect to omitted
year τ =-1. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during or after
the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Plots correspond to dynamic versions of Table 3 columns (2) and (5)
respectively for the balanced panel. Effects on Log(Pollution Control) are conditional on having positive pollution control
stock in the baseline period. Corresponding nearest neighbor dynamic estimate plots are shown in Appendix B.3. Standard
errors are clustered at the district level, with 90% confidence intervals shown around each estimate. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                            37
               Figure 7: Dynamic Estimates of Action Plans on Exit and Entry by Event Time

Left = Effects on Pr(Exit); Right = Effects on Pr(Entry)




NOTES: Plots show heterogeneous estimates using a dynamic difference-in-differences specification with respect to omitted
year τ =-1. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during or after
the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Plots correspond to dynamic versions of Table 4 columns (3) and (6)
respectively for the balanced panel. See table for definitions of entry and exit. Corresponding nearest neighbor dynamic
estimate plots are shown in Appendix B.3. Standard errors are clustered at the district level, with 90% confidence intervals
shown around each estimate. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                            38
                        Figure 8: Dynamic Estimates of Action Plans on Coal Measures

Left = Effects on Pr(Uses Coal); Right = Effects on Log(Coal Tons)




NOTES: Plots show heterogeneous estimates using a dynamic difference-in-differences specification with respect to omitted
year τ =-1. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during or after
the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Plots correspond to dynamic versions of Table 5 columns (2) and (5)
respectively for the balanced panel. Effects on Log(Coal Tons) are conditional on having positive coal use in the baseline
period. Corresponding nearest neighbor dynamic estimate plots are shown in Appendix B.3. Standard errors are clustered
at the district level, with 90% confidence intervals shown around each estimate. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                           39
                       Figure 9: Dynamic Estimates of Action Plans on TFP Measures
Left = Effects on ACF-TFP; Right = Effects on OLS-TFP




NOTES: Plots show heterogeneous estimates using a dynamic difference-in-differences specification with respect to omitted
year τ =-1. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during or after
the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Plots correspond to dynamic versions of Table 8 Panel A columns (2) and
(8) respectively for the balanced panel. Corresponding nearest neighbor dynamic estimate plots are shown in Appendix
B.3. See Appendix D.5 for in-depth discussion of TFP measures. Standard errors are clustered at the district level, with
90% confidence intervals shown around each estimate. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                           40
                                        Figure 10: Dynamic Estimates of Action Plans on District Pollutants by Event Time
41




     NOTES: Plots show heterogeneous estimates using a dynamic difference-in-differences specification with respect to omitted year τ =-1. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that
     is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during or after the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Plots correspond to dynamic versions of Table 10 Panel A
     columns (1), (5), and (9) respectively for the balanced panel. Corresponding nearest neighbor dynamic estimate plots are shown in Appendix B.3. Standard errors are clustered
     at the district level, with 90% confidence intervals shown around each estimate. Source: ASI, CPCB.
        Figure 11: DID Falsification Test: Random Permutations of Districts to SCAP Treatment

Panel A. Effects on Pr(PollUser)




Panel B. Effects on Pr(Entry)




NOTES: We generate placebo estimates from reassigning treated districts to be treated in every possible year-
district combination in our sample, and graphically inspect where the true estimate falls with respect to the
placebo estimate distribution. We indicate with a red vertical line the true treatment estimate of the effect of
SCAP-HPI-Large on the probability of pollution control use and entry reported in Tables 3 and 4 respectively.
See text for details. Source: ASI, CPCB




                                                      42
                Figure 12: Aggregate Trends in Measures Associated with Regulatory Costs




NOTES: Top two plot reflects district level real 1998 output and output-weighted TFP (calculated using Acker-
berg et al. (2006)) collapsed by calendar year and an indicator variable for whether a district is eventually ever
targeted by a Supreme Court Action. Bottom plots reflect dependent variable in header, sum-collapsed by
calendar year (unweighted). Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                       43
             Table 1: Supreme Court Action Plan (SCAP) Implementation by Year Announced

                                                % Adopting by SCAP Regulation Type
                                               Pollution Control    Plant Closures       Fuel
              Year    Cities Targeted           Stock Measures      and Relocations    Switching

              1998    Delhi                          100%                100%            100%

                      Agra, Ahmedabad,
                      Kolkata, Dhanbad,
              2002    Faridabad, Jodhpur,             82%                 82%             55%
                      Kanpur, Lucknow,
                      Patna, Pune, Varanasi

                      Bangalore, Chennai,
              2003    Hyderabad, Mumbai,             100%                 80%             20%
                      Solapur


NOTES: This table shows three distinct waves of Supreme Court Action Plans according to the cities which they tar-
geted and the year the SCAP was announced. Tabulations reflect the percent of cities in a given SCAP year that
adopted one of three types of regulatory measures, as reported in annual CPCB reports on Action Plan progress
which was hand-collected and codified by the authors. “Pollution Control”’ measures, for example, include the in-
stallation of 150 wet scrubbers in Ahmedabad, the fitting of D.G. set diesel generators with air pollution con-
trol devices in Agra, and the installation of smokestack suspended particulate matter (SPM) monitors in Chen-
nai that feed real-time information to state pollution control boards (local regulatory authorities). “Fuel” mea-
sures include, for example, the banning of the use of coal or coke among 292 Agra establishments, and a plan
in Ahmedabad for 146 establishments using boilers and 500 foundries to convert to natural gas. “Plant Closures
and Relocations” include direct measures, such as the closure or relocation of brick kilns in Delhi. A full list
of these regulations is provided in the associated online appendix. Source: Authors’ calculations from CPCB.




                                                       44
                           Table 2: Baseline Establishment-Level Summary Statistics by SCAP Status

                                                                  SCAP                           Untreated             SCAP - Untreated
                                                      Mean/SD      # Estab-Years      Mean/SD       # Estab-Years             ∆/SE
                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)                   (5)

 A. Economic

 HPI                                                      0.18            23,538           0.20         64,178              -0.021***
                                                         [0.38]                           [0.40]                             (0.0030)
 HPI X Large                                             0.066            23,538          0.088         64,178              -0.022***
                                                         [0.25]                           [0.28]                             (0.0021)
 In Urban Area                                            0.81            23,538           0.50         64,178               0.31***
                                                         [0.39]                           [0.50]                             (0.0036)
 Output (INR millions)                                   249.1            23,519          221.0         64,112                28.1**
                                                       [1517.9]                         [1741.6]                              (12.8)
 Employment                                              238.4            23,528          195.4         64,151               43.0***
                                                        [828.0]                          [930.9]                              (6.89)
 TFP (Olley-Pakes)                                        0.84            23,240           0.90         62,642              -0.056***
                                                         [0.39]                           [0.44]                             (0.0033)
 Entry                                                   0.094            23,538          0.091         64,178                0.0035
                                                         [0.29]                           [0.29]                             (0.0022)
 Exit                                                    0.055            23,538          0.047         64,178              0.0073***
                                                         [0.23]                           [0.21]                             (0.0017)

 B. Environmental

 Has Pollution Control Stock                             0.083            7,854           0.093         20,020              -0.010***
                                                        [0.28]                            [0.29]                             (0.0038)
 Pollution Control Stock (INR millions)                   3.49             648             14.8          1,861                -11.3**
                                                        [8.66]                           [132.6]                               (5.21)
 Log Pollution Control Stock (INR millions)               13.0             648             13.4          1,861               -0.42***
                                                        [2.94]                            [2.91]                               (0.13)
 Uses Coal                                               0.11             23,538           0.14         64,178              -0.026***
                                                        [0.32]                            [0.35]                             (0.0026)
 Coal (000 tons)                                          2.95            2,645            14.8          8,863               -11.8***
                                                        [17.5]                           [109.0]                               (2.13)
 Log Coal (000 tons)                                      5.45            2,645            5.57          8,863                -0.12**
                                                        [2.57]                            [2.79]                              (0.061)
 Establishment Coal Price                               2258.7            2,585          2275.1          8,758                  -16.4
                                                       [1250.8]                         [1280.7]                               (28.5)
 Log Establishment Coal Price (Own)                      7.61             2,585            7.60          8,758                0.0053
                                                        [0.46]                            [0.49]                              (0.011)
 Log Mean District Coal Price (Less Own)                 7.81             23,538           7.79         64,107               0.018***
                                                        [0.27]                            [0.28]                             (0.0021)
 Log State-Industry Coal Price (Less Own) IV              7.64            2,535            7.65          8,545                -0.0065
                                                        [0.28]                            [0.35]                             (0.0075)
 Unique No. Baseline Establishments                     13,606                          35,159
NOTES: This table reports means and standard deviations for SCAP-treated and untreated establishments across baseline years prior to
any SCAP announcement (1998 to 2001), dropping Delhi from the analysis due to lack of pre-treatment data. Mean values are shown by
whether or not the district in which establishments are located was ever targeted by a Supreme Court Action Plan (cols (1) and (3)). An
establishment is classified as “Large” if it had greater than 100 employees in the initial year observed, and as a “High-Polluting Industry”
if belonging to one of 17 industries targeted by the Ministry of Forestry and Environment (MoEF) in the initial year observed (see text for
details). Values for capital stock, coal prices, and output are expressed in 1998 INR. Coal prices reflect various covariates used throughout
the analysis. See text for further covariate definitions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB, TERI/TEDDY, MERRA.




                                                                     45
      Table 3: Effect of Action Plans on Pollution Control Equipment, Extensive and Intensive Margins

                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                             Pr(Has Poll.     Pr(Has Poll.    Pr(Has Poll.      Log          Log          Log
                                               Control          Control         Control       Pollution    Pollution    Pollution
                                             Equipment)       Equipment)      Equipment)       Control      Control      Control
 VARIABLES                                      DID              DID              NN            DID          DID          NN

 SCAP                                          0.000768                                         -0.0775
                                               (0.00428)                                       (0.0660)
 SCAP X HPI X Large                                             0.0350*           0.0425*                   -0.173**      0.0553
                                                                (0.0184)         (0.0243)                   (0.0712)     (0.0808)
 SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                         -0.00188          -0.0415                    -0.0242       -0.203
                                                               (0.00877)         (0.0379)                    (0.159)      (0.281)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                          0.00203         -0.00118                    -0.0991      0.0834
                                                               (0.00921)         (0.0155)                    (0.114)     (0.0737)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                     -0.00206         -0.00211                  -0.000592        0.123
                                                               (0.00279)        (0.00568)                    (0.105)      (0.164)

 Observations                                   284,770         284,770          64,905         30,808       30,808       7,669
 Number of Establishments                       87,847          87,847           17,985         7,728        7,728        1,631
 R2                                              0.029           0.041           0.056          0.060        0.065        0.186
 Establishment FE                                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes
 Year FE                                          Yes             No               No             Yes          No          No
 HPI-Size-Year FE                                  No             Yes             Yes             No          Yes          Yes
 Baseline Mean                                    0.08                                           13.14
 Basline Mean - HPI X Large                                       0.33            0.33                       14.42        14.42
 Basline Mean - HPI X Not Large                                   0.11            0.12                       12.03        12.04
 Basline Mean - Not HPI x Large                                   0.10            0.11                       13.56        13.55
 Basline Mean - Not HPI X Not Large                               0.03            0.03                       11.19        11.13
NOTES: Dependent variable is equal to 1 if an establishment reports any pollution control stock in columns (1) to (4) (extensive
margin estimates), and the logarithm of pollution control stock conditional on having pollution control equipment in the baseline
period in columns (5) and (6) (intensive margin estimates). SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan,
in any calendar year during and after the Action Plan announcement, and 0 otherwise. HPI-Large-Year fixed effects are estimated
for each of the four HPI-Size subgroups. Unique establishment counts by subgroup for DID column (2) (NN column (3)) are as fol-
lows: HPI X Large: 3,677 (860); Not HPI X Large: 14,331 (3,650); HPI X Not Large: 12,103 (2,174); Not HPI X Not Large: 57,737
(9,174). Data on pollution control stock spans 2001-2009. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. ***
p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                                46
                                Table 4: Effect of Action Plans on Exit and Entry

                                                (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                                              Pr(Exit)    Pr(Exit)     Pr(Exit)     Pr(Exit)     Pr(Entry)     Pr(Entry)
 VARIABLES                                      DID         NN           DID          NN           DID           DID

 SCAP                                        0.0135**      0.00192                                -0.0111
                                             (0.00602)     (0.0121)                              (0.00903)
 SCAP X HPI X Large                                                     0.00498      -0.00815                 -0.0462***
                                                                       (0.00710)     (0.0104)                   (0.0112)
 SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                                 0.0105        0.00839                 -0.0456***
                                                                       (0.00801)     (0.0192)                  (0.00967)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                                0.0158**       0.00326                   0.00803
                                                                       (0.00798)     (0.0118)                   (0.0110)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                            0.0141**     -0.000737                   -0.00669
                                                                       (0.00666)     (0.0153)                  (0.00981)

 Observations                                 344,584       88,830      344,584      88,830       344,584       344,584
 R2                                            0.017        0.021        0.020       0.029         0.010         0.012
 Establishment FE                                No           No          No           No            No           No
 Year FE                                        Yes          Yes          No           No           Yes           No
 HPI-Size-Year FE                                No           No          Yes         Yes            No           Yes
 Baseline Mean                                  0.06         0.06                                   0.10
 Basline Mean - HPI X Large                                              0.04         0.04                        0.05
 Basline Mean - HPI X Not Large                                          0.06         0.07                        0.11
 Basline Mean - Not HPI x Large                                          0.05         0.06                        0.07
 Basline Mean - Not HPI X Not Large                                      0.07         0.07                        0.12
NOTES: Entry equals 1 in the first year an establishment appears in the data within three years of the observed ASI “ini-
tial production year”. Exit equals 1 if an establishment is officially declared “closed” in the ASI, so long as it remains
closed thereafter. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any year during or after the
Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. An establishment is classified as “Large” if it had greater than 100 employees
in the initial year observed, and as a “High-Polluting Industry” if belonging to one of 17 industries targeted by the Min-
istry of Forestry and Environment (MoEF) in its initial year (see text for details). HPI-Size-Year FEs are for each of the
four HPI-Size sub-groups. Unique establishment counts by subgroup for DID column (2) (NN column (4)) (associated with
DID specifications) are as follows: HPI X Large: 3,809 (903); Not HPI X Large: 14,875 (3,900); HPI X Not Large: 12,441
(2,305); Not HPI X Not Large: 59,642 (9,800). Nearest neighbor dynamic estimate plots for exit are shown in Appendix
B.3, whereas matching to evaluate entry has no sensible interpretation (see text). Standard errors clustered at the district
level, shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                            47
                      Table 5: Effect of Action Plans on Coal Use, Extensive and Intensive Margins
                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)
                                               Pr(Uses      Pr(Uses      Pr(Uses       Log          Log         Log         Log           Log          Log
                                                Coal)        Coal)        Coal)        Coal         Coal        Coal        Coal          Coal         Coal
                                                                                       Tons         Tons        Tons        Tons          Tons         Tons
                                                                                                                          / Output      / Output     / Output
 VARIABLES                                       DID          DID          NN          DID          DID          NN         DID           DID           NN

 SCAP                                          -0.00436                               -0.157*                              -0.153**
                                              (0.00573)                              (0.0831)                              (0.0689)
 SCAP X HPI X Large                                          -0.0126      -0.0161                 -0.0896       0.197                    0.0567        0.328
                                                            (0.0219)     (0.0346)                 (0.159)      (0.263)                   (0.120)      (0.218)
 SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                      -0.0162      -0.0201                  0.0805       0.247                    -0.0131      0.0620
                                                            (0.0170)     (0.0187)                 (0.144)      (0.227)                   (0.148)      (0.198)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                      -0.0116      -0.0119                -0.590***    -0.509**                 -0.527***     -0.422**
                                                           (0.00708)    (0.00952)                 (0.201)      (0.250)                   (0.173)      (0.204)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                0.000449      0.00163                  -0.0789      0.0613                    -0.0720      0.0191
                                                           (0.00440)    (0.00651)                 (0.107)      (0.139)                  (0.0771)      (0.150)

 Observations                                  344,584      344,584       88,830      41,596       41,596       8,908       41,574       41,574        8,904
 Number of Establishments                      90,766        90,766       19,172      13,347       13,347       2,502       13,342       13,342        2,502
 R2                                             0.001         0.002        0.005       0.011       0.018        0.054        0.007       0.012         0.037
 Establishment FE                                Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
 Year FE                                         Yes           No           No          Yes          No          No           Yes          No           No
 HPI-Size-Year FE                                 No           Yes          Yes          No         Yes          Yes          No          Yes           Yes
 Baseline Mean                                   0.10                                   5.47                                -11.75
 Basline Mean - HPI X Large                                   0.20         0.33                     6.72         6.74                    -12.36        -12.34
 Basline Mean - HPI X Not Large                               0.15         0.12                     4.85         4.84                    -11.26        -11.27
 Basline Mean - Not HPI x Large                               0.12         0.11                     6.51         6.52                    -12.39        -12.40
 Basline Mean - Not HPI X Not Large                           0.07         0.03                     4.17         4.18                    -11.06        -11.04
NOTES: Dependent variable is equal to 1 if an establishment reports any coal use in columns (1) to (3) (extensive margin estimates), the logarithm of coal
tons used conditional on using coal in the baseline period in columns (4) to (6) (intensive margin estimates), and the log of the ratio of coal consumption to
total output in columns (7) to (9). SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during and after the Action Plan
announcement, and 0 otherwise. HPI-Size-Year fixed effects are estimated for each of the four HPI-Size subgroups. Unique establishment counts by subgroup
for DID column (2) (NN column (3)) are as follows: 3,809 (903); Not HPI X Large: 14,875 (3,900); HPI X Not Large: 12,441 (2,305); Not HPI X Not Large:
59,642 (9,800). Data on coal use spans 1998-2009. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1.
Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                                              48
                       Table 6: Effect of Action Plans vs. Coal Prices on Intensive Margin Coal Use
                                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                                            Log         Log          Log          Log         Log           Log           Log
                                                                            Coal        Coal         Coal         Coal        Coal          Coal          Coal
                                                                            Tons        Tons         Tons         Tons        Tons          Tons          Tons
 VARIABLES                                                                  DID         DID          DID          DID       DID/2SLS      DID/2SLS      DID/2SLS

 SCAP                                                                       -0.157*     -0.134*                  -0.121       -0.128*                     -0.120
                                                                           (0.0831)    (0.0773)                 (0.0747)     (0.0778)                    (0.0770)
 Log Mean District Coal Price (Less Own)                                              -0.478***    -0.490***
                                                                                       (0.0928)     (0.0952)
 District Coal Price X HPI X Large                                                                              -0.437**
                                                                                                                 (0.181)
 District Coal Price X HPI X Not Large                                                                         -0.607***
                                                                                                                 (0.128)
 District Coal Price X Not HPI X Large                                                                         -0.469***
                                                                                                                 (0.181)
 District Coal Price X Not HPI X Not Large                                                                     -0.379***
                                                                                                                 (0.120)
 Log Coal Price (Own) - Hausman IV 2nd Stage                                                                                 -0.863***     -0.899***
                                                                                                                              (0.208)       (0.206)
 Own Coal Price X HPI X Large - Hausman IV 2nd Stage                                                                                                        -0.377
                                                                                                                                                           (0.858)
 Own Coal Price X HPI X Not Large - Hausman IV 2nd Stage                                                                                                  -0.949**
                                                                                                                                                           (0.456)
 Own Coal Price X Not HPI X Large - Hausman IV 2nd Stage                                                                                                  -1.149**
                                                                                                                                                           (0.525)
 Own Coal Price X Not HPI X Not Large - Hausman IV 2nd Stage                                                                                             -0.788***
                                                                                                                                                           (0.247)

 Observations                                                               41,596      41,596      41,596       41,596       35,778        35,778        35,778
 Number of Establishments                                                   13,347      13,347      13,347       13,347       9,237         9,237          9,237
 R2                                                                         0.011       0.016        0.015        0.020       0.127         0.126         0.123
 Establishment FE                                                            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
 Year FE                                                                     Yes         Yes          Yes           No         Yes           Yes            No
 HPI-Size-Year FE                                                             No          No           No          Yes          No            No            Yes
 Baseline Mean                                                               5.47        5.47         5.47         5.47        5.65          5.65          5.65
 First Stage F-Stat. on Excluded IV                                                                                           69.69         70.86         42.35
NOTES: Dependent variable names are given in column headings. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during
or after the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Data on pollution control stock spans 2001-2009, while data on coal use spans 1998-2009. Reported F-statistic
on excluded instrument is cluster-robsut Kleibergen-Paap (equivalent to Angrist-Pischke test for one endogenous regressor), except column 7, which reports the Cragg-
Donaldson joint F-statistic. Unique establishment counts by subgroup are as follows: 3,809; Not HPI X Large: 14,875; HPI X Not Large: 12,441; Not HPI X Not Large:
59,642.. Standard errors clustered at the district level, are shown parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                                                49
                             Table 7: Effect of Action Plans vs. Prices by Initial Compliance Rate
                                                                           (1)               (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                                       Pr(Has Poll.      Pr(Has Poll.      Log          Log           Log          Log          Log
                                                                         Control           Control         Coal         Coal          Coal         Coal         Coal
                                                                       Equipment)        Equipment)        Tons         Tons          Tons         Tons         Tons
 VARIABLES                                                                DID               DID            DID          DID           DID          DID          DID

 SCAP X HighCompRate                                                      -0.00400                       -0.00631                    0.00696                   -0.0447
                                                                         (0.00469)                        (0.123)                    (0.125)                   (0.146)
 SCAP X LowCompRate                                                        0.00418                      -0.200***                   -0.172**                  -0.169**
                                                                         (0.00607)                       (0.0765)                   (0.0706)                  (0.0758)
 SCAP X HPI X Large X HighCompRate                                                          0.00996
                                                                                           (0.0256)
 SCAP X HPI X Large X LowCompRate                                                         0.0521**
                                                                                           (0.0225)
 SCAP X HPI X Not Large X HighCompRate                                                     -0.00528
                                                                                           (0.0125)
 SCAP X HPI X Not Large X LowCompRate                                                      0.00134
                                                                                           (0.0117)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Large X HighCompRate                                                      -0.0121
                                                                                           (0.0102)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Large X LowCompRate                                                       0.0128
                                                                                           (0.0130)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large X HighCompRate                                                 -0.00463
                                                                                          (0.00584)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large X LowCompRate                                                 0.000501
                                                                                          (0.00316)
 District Coal Price X HighCompRate                                                                                   -0.517***    -0.518***
                                                                                                                       (0.138)      (0.136)
 District Coal Price X LowCompRate                                                                                    -0.458***    -0.428***
                                                                                                                       (0.106)      (0.108)
 Own Coal Price X HighCompRate - Hausman IV 2nd Stage                                                                                           -1.130***     -1.127***
                                                                                                                                                  (0.289)      (0.288)
 Own Coal Price X LowCompRate - Hausman IV 2nd Stage                                                                                             -0.557**      -0.465*
                                                                                                                                                  (0.257)      (0.268)

 Observations                                                             284,770          284,770        41,596       41,596        41,596       35,778       35,778
 Number of Establishments                                                 87,847           87,847         13,347       13,347        13,347       9,237        9,237
 R2                                                                        0.029            0.041         0.015        0.019          0.020       0.120        0.117
 Establishment FE                                                           Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
 Year FE                                                                     No               No            No           No             No          No           No
 Subgroup-Year FE                                                           Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
 Basline Mean - HPI X Large                                                 0.33             0.33          0.33         0.33           0.33        0.33         0.33
 Basline Mean - HPI X Not Large                                             0.11             0.11          0.19         0.19           0.19        0.19         0.19
 Basline Mean - Not HPI x Large                                             0.10             0.10          0.21         0.21           0.21        0.21         0.21
 Basline Mean - Not HPI X Not Large                                         0.03             0.03          0.09         0.09           0.09        0.09         0.09
NOTES: Dependent variable is equal to 1 if an establishment reports any pollution control stock in columns (1) and (2) (extensive margin estimates), and the logarithm
of coal tons used conditional on using coal in the baseline period in columns (3) to (7) (intensive margin estimates). SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted
for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during and after the Action Plan announcement, and 0 otherwise. Subgroup fixed effects are estimated for each of the eight
HPI-Size-Compliance subgroups. Unique establishment counts by subgroup for DID column (2) (NN column (3)) are as follows: HPI X Large: 3,677 (860); Not HPI
X Large: 14,331 (3,650); HPI X Not Large: 12,103 (2,174); Not HPI X Not Large: 57,737 (9,174). Data on pollution control stock spans 2001-2009, while data on coal
use spans 1998-2009. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                                                    50
                                                            Table 8: Effect of Action Plans on TFP by HPI and Size

                                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)          (9)
                                                                ACF-P          ACF-P           ACF-P          ACF-I          ACF-I         ACF-I           OLS           OLS          OLS
      VARIABLES                                                  DID            DID             NN             DID            DID           NN             DID           DID          NN

      SCAP X HPI X Large                                        0.00520         0.00543       -0.0505*        0.0152         0.0157        -0.0437        0.00659       0.00703     -0.0480*
                                                               (0.0169)        (0.0169)       (0.0271)       (0.0176)       (0.0176)      (0.0291)       (0.0162)      (0.0162)     (0.0269)
      SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                   -0.00662        -0.00657       -0.00635       -0.00522       -0.00490      0.00168        -0.00782      -0.00762     -0.00283
                                                               (0.0123)        (0.0123)       (0.0237)       (0.0132)       (0.0131)      (0.0203)       (0.0125)      (0.0124)     (0.0190)
      SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                    0.00366         0.00418        -0.0196        0.0101         0.0111       -0.00783        0.00707       0.00826     -0.00141
                                                               (0.0126)        (0.0126)       (0.0186)       (0.0135)       (0.0136)      (0.0171)       (0.0134)      (0.0134)     (0.0170)
      SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                0.0127*         0.0129*        0.0201        0.0113*        0.0118**        0.0220        0.00717       0.00756      0.0171
                                                              (0.00712)       (0.00715)       (0.0210)      (0.00585)      (0.00590)      (0.0188)      (0.00629)     (0.00632)     (0.0184)
      Log mean district coal price (excluding own)                             -0.00494       -0.00181                     -0.0112**      -0.00677                    -0.0122**     0.000146
                                                                              (0.00526)       (0.0137)                     (0.00547)      (0.0138)                    (0.00579)     (0.0149)

      Observations                                             307,924         307,151         82,545         307,924       307,151        82,545        336,174       335,298       87,619
      Number of Establishments                                 86,257           86,230         18,702          86,257        86,230        18,702         89,765       89,740        19,055
      R2                                                        0.010           0.010          0.016           0.012         0.013         0.017          0.007         0.007        0.011
51




      Establishment FE                                           Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
      HPI-Size-Year FE                                           Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
      Baseline Mean                                              1.22            1.22           1.22            1.22          1.22          1.22           -0.12        -0.12         -0.12
     NOTES: TFP is calculated using methods from Ackerberg et al. (2006) in columns (1) through (6) (with petrol (-P) and investment (-I) as proxies), and OLS (Solow Residual) in columns
     (7) through (9). In Appendix D.1, we report a full results which additionally estimate TFP using methods from Olley and Pakes (1996) (where the proxy is investment), and Levinsohn and
     Petrin (2003) (where the proxy is petrol ). Variations in observation counts arise from different missing variables in proxies required for each estimation procedure. See Appendix D.5 for
     detailed discussion of TFP estimation methods. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB.
                               Table 9: Baseline District-Level Summary Statistics by SCAP Status

                                                                SCAP                              Untreated             SCAP - Untreated
                                                   Mean/SD       # District-Years     Mean/SD       # District-Years           ∆/SE
                                                     (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)                   (5)

 A. Air Quality Measures

 Log SPM (ground, ppm)                                 5.58               71             5.09             170                 0.49***
                                                      [0.46]                            [0.57]                                (0.077)
 Log SO2 (ground, ppm)                                 2.98               71             2.42             178                 0.57***
                                                      [0.59]                            [1.06]                                 (0.13)
 Log NO2 (ground, ppm)                                 3.31               71             3.07             179                  0.23**
                                                      [0.55]                            [0.68]                                (0.090)
 Log PM10 (Satellite, ppm), MERRA                      3.62             172              3.52            1,655                 0.10**
                                                      [0.54]                            [0.59]                                (0.047)
 Log SO2 (Satellite, ppm), MERRA                       2.10             172              1.62            1,655                0.48***
                                                      [0.61]                            [0.58]                                (0.047)
 Log PM2.5 (Satellite, ppm), ACAG                      3.82             172              3.57            1,655                0.25***
                                                      [0.44]                            [0.45]                                (0.036)

 B. Coal Variables

 Log Coal Tons, Power Plants                           14.5               24             14.8              93                   -0.32
                                                      [0.62]                            [1.13]                                 (0.24)
 Log Mean District Coal Price                          7.59             163              7.56            1,341                 0.034
                                                      [0.32]                            [0.40]                                (0.033)
 Log Industry-Weighted District Coal Price             7.98             162              7.77            1,303                0.21**
                                                      [1.15]                            [1.05]                                (0.088)
 Log State-Industry Weighted Coal Price IV             10.8             172              10.3            1,650                0.48***
                                                      [0.57]                            [0.95]                                (0.074)

 C. Matching Variables

 No. Hotel Rooms                                       820.2            172              110.3           1,655               709.9***
                                                     [1863.5]                           [310.4]                                (51.5)
 No. Hotels                                             12.0            172               2.67           1,655                9.30***
                                                       [23.8]                            [6.24]                                (0.75)
 Population (millions)                                  3.61            172               1.94           1,651                1.67***
                                                       [2.21]                            [1.21]                                (0.11)
 Distance to Nearest Port (km)                         476.6            172              533.9           1,655                -57.3**
                                                      [341.4]                           [341.1]                                (27.3)
 Distance to Nearest Coal Mine (km)                    216.5            172              174.7           1,655                41.8***
                                                      [115.4]                           [138.1]                                (10.9)
 District Area (km2)                                  4625.3            172             6134.8           1,651              -1509.5***
                                                     [4460.7]                          [5250.0]                               (415.1)
 Corruption Keyword References                          65.7            172               37.2           1,655                28.5***
                                                      [127.0]                            [95.5]                                (7.92)
 Compliance Rate with State Enviro. Regs.               0.96            172               0.95           1,600               0.015***
                                                      [0.040]                           [0.067]                              (0.0052)
 No. Ground-Level Pollution Monitors                    1.24            172               0.32           1,655                0.92***
                                                       [1.47]                            [0.91]                               (0.078)
 Previously Declared Problem Area                       0.16            172              0.041           1,655                0.12***
                                                       [0.37]                            [0.20]                               (0.018)
 Unique No. Baseline Districts                         43                                433
NOTES: This table reports means and standard deviations for SCAP-treated and untreated districts across the baseline period (1998 to 2001).
Mean values are shown by whether or not the district in which establishments are located was ever targeted by a Supreme Court Action Plan
(cols (1) and (3)). Pollutants reflect the mean of all district-year pollutant reading in parts per million (ppm). Coal prices reflect various
covariates used throughout the analysis. See text for further covariate definitions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB,
TERI/TEDDY, MERRA.


                                                                     52
                                             Table 10: Comparing Effect of Action Plans vs. Coal Prices on District-Level Pollutants
     Panel A. DID Estimates
                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)           (9)          (10)         (11)           (12)
                                                        log(SPM)     log(SPM)     log(SPM)       log(SPM)      log(SO2)     log(SO2)    log(SO2)       log(SO2)      log(NO2)     log(NO2)     log(NO2)       log(NO2)
      VARIABLES                                            DID          DID       DID/2SLS       DID/2SLS        DID          DID       DID/2SLS       DID/2SLS         DID          DID       DID/2SLS       DID/2SLS

      SCAP                                                -0.101       -0.0903       -0.0894       -0.0458       -0.116      -0.0889      -0.0895         -0.173       0.160*       0.166*        0.167*         0.101
                                                         (0.0668)     (0.0681)      (0.0661)       (0.101)      (0.110)      (0.111)      (0.108)        (0.116)      (0.0882)     (0.0920)      (0.0866)       (0.107)
      Log Mean District Coal Price                                     -0.0386                                               -0.0629                                               0.00599
                                                                      (0.0512)                                              (0.0737)                                               (0.0471)
      Log Industry-Weighted District Coal Price                                       0.113        -0.0287                                  -0.120       -0.172*                                  -0.0516       -0.160*
                                                                                    (0.0857)      (0.0847)                                 (0.142)      (0.0921)                                  (0.102)      (0.0935)
      Log Coal Tons, Power Plants                                     0.00733        -0.0226      -0.00479                  0.142**       0.183**       0.230***                    0.115         0.130*         0.105
                                                                      (0.0272)      (0.0359)      (0.0401)                  (0.0678)      (0.0806)      (0.0731)                   (0.0785)      (0.0777)      (0.0848)

      Observations                                        836           800           796            794          794         768           762            760          843          809           805            803
      Number of District                                  111           110           107            106          105         104            98             97          110          109           105            104
      R2                                                 0.390         0.391         0.380          0.366        0.231       0.248         0.248          0.249        0.037        0.044         0.049          0.022
      District FE                                         Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
      Year FE                                             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
      Weighted By                                       Pop2000       Pop2000       Pop2000      InitEstabs     Pop2000     Pop2000       Pop2000      InitEstabs     Pop2000      Pop2000       Pop2000      InitEstabs
      Baseline Mean                                       5.55          5.57          5.57           5.57         2.95        2.96          2.96           2.96         3.30         3.31          3.31           3.31
      First Stage F-Stat. on Excluded IV                                             29.82          25.05                                  33.30          26.65                                   40.78          29.28
53




     Panel B. NN-Matching Estimates
                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)            (8)          (9)          (10)          (11)          (12)
                                                        log(SPM)     log(SPM)      log(SPM)      log(SPM)      log(SO2)     log(SO2)     log(SO2)       log(SO2)     log(NO2)     log(NO2)      log(NO2)      log(NO2)
      VARIABLES                                             NN           NN         NN/2SLS       NN/2SLS         NN           NN        NN/2SLS        NN/2SLS         NN            NN        NN/2SLS       NN/2SLS

      SCAP                                              -0.171**      -0.170**       -0.153*        -0.210      -0.0817      -0.0741      -0.0979       -0.302**      0.0863        0.0890       0.0535         -0.117
                                                        (0.0840)      (0.0839)      (0.0816)       (0.152)      (0.179)      (0.176)      (0.152)        (0.123)      (0.127)       (0.132)      (0.115)       (0.126)
      Log Mean District Coal Price                                     -0.0123                                                -0.114                                               0.00233
                                                                      (0.0694)                                              (0.0998)                                               (0.0773)
      Log Industry-Weighted District Coal Price                                       0.0892       -0.0308                                -0.180*      -0.204***                                 -0.255*      -0.279***
                                                                                     (0.115)      (0.0991)                               (0.0981)       (0.0660)                                 (0.138)       (0.101)
      Log Coal Tons, Power Plants                                     -0.00659       -0.0388       0.0108                    0.158*      0.229***      0.282***                     0.0422        0.137         0.176
                                                                      (0.0303)      (0.0504)      (0.0535)                  (0.0861)     (0.0889)       (0.0802)                   (0.0865)      (0.103)       (0.133)

      Observations                                        420           413           413            413         412          406          404             404          419          412           411            411
      Number of District                                   46            46            46             46          46           46           44              44           45           45            44             44
      R2                                                 0.432         0.429         0.439          0.395       0.337        0.360        0.333           0.280        0.028        0.030        -0.047         -0.030
      District FE                                         Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
      Year FE                                             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
      Weighted By                                       Pop2000       Pop2000       Pop2000      InitEstabs    Pop2000      Pop2000      Pop2000       InitEstabs     Pop2000      Pop2000      Pop2000       InitEstabs
      Baseline Mean                                       5.55          5.57          5.57           5.57        2.95         2.96         2.96            2.96         3.30         3.31         3.31           3.31
      First Stage F-Stat. on Excluded IV                                             18.92          20.03                                 18.10           23.74                                   19.62          22.38
     NOTES: Dependent variable reflects log of mean ground-level monitor readings within a given district and year for the pollutant shown in the column heading. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted
     for an Action Plan, in any year during or after the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. All regressions weighted by initial number of firms in district in 1998. See text for further covariate definitions and
     sample restrictions. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB, Greenstone and Hanna (2014).
References
Abadie, A., D. Drukker, J. L. Herr, and G. W. Imbens (2004): “Implementing Matching Estima-
 tors for Average Treatment Effects in Stata,” The Stata Journal, 4, 290–311.
Abadie, A. and G. W. Imbens (2002): “Simple and Bias-Corrected Matching Estimators for Average
 Treatment Effects,” NBER Technical Working Paper, 283.
Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2006): “Structural Identification of Production
 Functions,” Mimeo.
Angrist, J. D., G. W. Imbens, and A. B. Krueger (1999): “Jackknife Instrumental Variables
 Estimation,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 14, 57–67.
Angrist, J. D., G. W. Imbens, and D. B. Rubin (1996): “Identification of causal effects using
 instrumental variables,” Journal of the American statistical Association, 91, 444–455.
Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2008): Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s companion,
 Princeton university press.
Becker, R. and V. Henderson (2000): “Effects of Air Quality Regulations on Polluting Industries,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 108, 379–421.
Bertrand, M., S. Djankov, R. Hanna, and S. Mullainathan (2007): “Obtaining a Driver’s License
 in India: an Experimental Approach to Studying Corruption,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 122, 1639–1676.
Blackman, A. and W. Harrington (2000): “The Use of Economic Incentives in Developing Countries:
 Lessons from International Experience with Industrial Air Pollution,” The Journal of Environment &
 Development, 9, 5–44.
Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009): “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
 American Economic Review, 99, 1145–1177.
Chikkatur, A. P. (2008): “A resource and technology assessment of coal utilization in India,” Tech.
 rep., Pew Center on Global Climate Change, Arlington, VA (United States).
Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2013): “Does State Fiscal
 Relief during Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvest-
 ment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4, 118–145.
CPCB (2009): “Comprehensive Environmental Assessment of Industrial Clusters,” Ecological Impact
 Assessment Series EIAS/5/2009–2010, Ministry of Environment and Forests.
Duflo, E., M. Greenstone, R. Pande, and N. Ryan (2013): “Truth-Telling by Third-Party Auditors
 and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 128, 1499–1545.
——— (2014): “The Value of Regulatory Discretion: Estimates from Environmental Inspections in India,”
 NBER Working Paper, 20590.
EIA, U. (2012): “Fuel competition in power generation and elasticities of substitution,” US
  Energy Information Administration. https://www. eia. gov/analysis/studies/fuelelasticities/pdf/eia-
  fuelelasticities.pdf.
Estache, A. and L. Wren-Lewis (2009): “Toward a Theory of Regulation for Developing Countries:
  Following Jean-Jacques Laffont’s Lead,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47, 729–770.



                                                 54
Greenstone, M. and R. Hanna (2014): “Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pollution, and
 Infant Mortality in India,” American Economic Review, 104, 3038–3072.
Greenstone, M., J. A. List, and C. Syverson (2012): “The Effects of Environmental Regulation
 on the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing,” NBER Working Paper, 18392.
Hausman, J. A. (1996): “Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,” in The
 Economics of New Goods, ed. by T. F. Bresnahan and R. J. Gordon, Chicago, IL: NBER University of
 Chicago Press, 207–248.
Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, and P. E. Todd (1997): “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
 Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme,” The Review of Economic Studies,
 64, 605–654.
Henderson, J. V. (1996): “Effects of air quality regulation,” The American Economic Review, 86, 789.
Hyman, B. G. (2018): “Can Displaced Labor Be Retrained? Evidence from Quasi-Random Assignment
 to Trade Adjustment Assistance,” .
IISD (2017): “India’s Energy Transition - Mapping Subsidies to Fossil Fuels and Clean Energy in India,”
  .
Imbens, G. W. (2004): “Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects under Exogeneity: A
  Review,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 4–29.
International Energy Agency (2018): World Energy Outlook 2018, Paris: OECD/IEA.
Jaffe, A. B. and K. Palmer (1997): “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A Panel Data
  Study,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, 610–619.
King, G. and R. Nielsen (2016): “Why Propensity Scores Should Not be Used for Matching,” Political
  Analysis, 1–20.
Laffont, J.-J. (2005): Regulation and Development, Cambridge University Press.
Lanjouw, J. and A. Mody (1996): “Innovation and the international diffusion of environmentally
  responsive technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549–571.
Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin (2003): “Estimating Production Functions using Inputs to Control for
  Unobservables,” The Review of Economic Studies, 70, 317–341.
Levinson, A. (1996): “Environmental regulations and manufacturers’ location choices: Evidence from
  the Census of Manufactures,” Journal of public Economics, 62, 5–29.
Linn, J. (2008): “Energy Prices and the Adoption of Energy-Saving Technology,” The Economic Journal,
  118, 1986–2012.
List, J. A., D. L. Millimet, P. G. Fredriksson, and W. W. McHone (2003): “Effects of Envi-
  ronmental Regulations on Manufacturing Plant Births: Evidence from a Propensity Score Matching
  Estimator,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, 944–952.
Liu, M. and L. Martin (2014): “When Giants Take Steps: The Impact of Conservation Targets on
  China’s Largest Energy-Consuming Firms,” University of Melbourne Working Paper.
Martin, L. A., S. Nataraj, and A. Harrison (2014): “In With the Big, Out With the Small:
 Removing Small-Scale Reservations in India,” NBER Working Paper, 19942.
Millimet, D. L. and J. Roy (2016): “Empirical tests of the pollution haven hypothesis when environ-
 mental regulation is endogenous,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 31, 652–677.


                                                  55
Newell, R. G., A. B. Jaffe, and R. N. Stavins (1999): “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and
 Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 941–975.
Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equip-
 ment Industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263–1297.
Popp, D. (2002): “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American Economic Review, 92, 160–180.
Serletis, A., G. R. Timilsina, and O. Vasetsky (2010): “Interfuel substitution in the United States,”
  Energy Economics, 32, 737–745.
Tanaka, S., W. Yin, and G. H. Jefferson (2014): “Environmental Regulation and Industrial Per-
 formance: Evidence from China,” Mimeo.
Tongia, R. and S. Gross (2019): “Coal in India: Adjusting to transition,” .
Van Donkelaar, A., R. V. Martin, M. Brauer, N. C. Hsu, R. A. Kahn, R. C. Levy, A. Lya-
 pustin, A. M. Sayer, and D. M. Winker (2016): “Global estimates of fine particulate matter using
 a combined geophysical-statistical method with information from satellites, models, and monitors,” En-
 vironmental science & technology, 50, 3762–3772.
Walker, W. R. (2013): “The Transitional Costs of Sectoral Reallocation: Evidence from the Clean Air
 Act and the Workforce,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1787–1835.




                                                  56
Appendices

Appendix A. Detailed Policy Variation

A.1 Supreme Court Action Plan, Selected Policy Detail
This appendix provides selected details on each city action plan according to the primary source “Air Quality
Trends and Action Plan for Control of Air Pollution from Seventeen Cities” (CPCB & MoEF, September 2006)


Delhi (1997-1998):
      • Relocation of 46 Hot Mix Plants and relocation of 243 Brick Kilns
      • Establishment of 15 Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) in industrial areas
      • 3 coal-based power plants to switch to beneficiated coal

Agra (2002):
      • Five zone implementation plan of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) devised, including CNG/LPG (liquefied
        Petroleum Gas) stations and natural gas pipelines via GAIL network
      • Restrictions on the supply and usage of coal, coke, wood, rice husk, bagasse to all industries
      • Diesel generator sets in no-gas zones to be fitted with wet scrubbers or replaced by gas generators
      • Enforced Supreme Court directorate of 292 industries (plants) 46 not to use coal or coke
      • Supreme court directed closure of Brick Kilns in Trapezium Zone
      • Conversion of all 3 wheelers, temp, rickshaws, taxis, buses to CNG/LPG in phases in accordance with
        Supreme Court directive. In the interim, fit these vehicles with wet scrubbers / filters


Ahmedabad (2002):
      • 1595 industrial units are now monitored per the Air Act, including 150 wet scrubbers and 2 ESP (elec-
        trostatic precipitators). Resulted in 27 closures and 501 warnings
      • Plan devised for Highly Polluting Industries (HPIs) to switch over to natural gas, affecting 146 industries
        with major boilers, and 500 foundries. 190 units signed up
      • No new four wheelers registered without being compliant with Bharat Stage II norms
      • Formalization of all rickshaws, and addition of fueling stations planned. All diesel-run rickshaws within
        city limits are banned


Calcutta (2002):
      •   Stricter location policy for new industrial units in red category
      •   Restrictions on coal supply to certain industries and mandatory use of clean fuels
      •   Financial assistance for pollution control devices for SSIs
      •   ESPs in all 6 boilers in new Cossipore Generation Station
      •   Stricter inspection schedule and standards, by West Bengal Pollution Control Board.
      •   Stricter standards for coal fired boilers, ceramic kilns, hot rolling mills, and small cast iron foundries


Dhanbad (Jharia) (2002):
      • Compliance with diesel generator set standards
      • All petrol and diesel to conform to Bharat Stage III norms
      • Construction of flyovers (pedestrian overpasses) and Bus Rapid Transit Systems (BRTSs)
 46
      Indian convention uses the word “industries” to refer to plants or establishments


                                                                  57
Faridabad (2002):
  • Closure of clandestine units and promotion of natural gas inputs (i.e. CNG, Light Diesel Oil, and High
    Speed Diesel)
  • Ultra low sulfur diesel to be used in generating sets
  • Thermal Power Plants should keep ESPs


Jodhpur (2002):
  • Master plan to shift various commercial activities in dense areas outside of the city
  • Development of a Green Belt around the city
  • Reduction in sulfur diesel content


Kanpur (2002):
  • Shifting of polluting industries and installation of pollution control devices
  • GAIL (largest preferentially-contracted natural gas company in India) to supply .3837 MMSCMD of
    natural gas by 2006, and continues to expand pipeline into Kanpur
  • Development of Green Belt around the city
  • No new industries allowed to locate in residential centers
  • Only allow three-wheelers with catalytic converters to operate within municipal limits
  • Phase out of old vehicles, and import of 250 CNG buses to take their place is planned


Lucknow (2002):
  • ESPs (electrostatic precipitators) to be installed in all boilers in power generation stations
  • Stricter regulation of medium/large industries in technical hearings and stricter emissions standards for
    SSIs operating coal fired boilers, ceramic kilns, hot rolling mills, and small cast iron foundries
  • New emissions norms for diesel engines phased in Jan-July 2004


Patna (2002):
  •   Intensification of Air Act norms including through surprise inspections and new punitive action
  •   Establishment of a green belt around all industrial units in the city
  •   Elimination of Kerosene in vehicles (including 3-wheelers and commercial vehicles) by March 2004
  •   Mandated compliance with Bharat Stage II norms


Pune (2002):
  • Closure of clandestine industrial operations or shifting
  • Compliance to standards in diesel generator sets
  • Implementation of industrial location policy for shifting of industries from non-conforming zones
  • The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) allocated 0.4 MMSCMD of Administered Price
    Mechanism (APM) gas which would be cheaper than the gas bought from the private players
  • GAIL’s proposed Dahej-Uran Pipeline (DUPL) will be extended up to Pune


Varanasi (2002):
  • Monitoring and closure of clandestine operations
  • Retrofitting of catalytic converters
  • Mandate of new emissions norms for low Benzene and low sulfur diesel



                                                     58
Bangalore (2003):
  • Established Karnataka State Pollution Control Board online ambient air quality monitoring station
  • 108 roads converted to one-way, 5 flyovers, 3 railway passes


Chennai (2003):
  •   All smoke stacks require an online monitor and are subject to increased inspection
  •   Common facilities set up outside of the city for incineration of bio-medical waste
  •   Coal handling shifted entirely from Chennai port to Ennore Port by December 2004
  •   Provided scrubbers to reduce emissions to power plants
  •   117 buses to be replaced with Bharat Stage II adherence


Hyderabad (2003):
  •   Closure of clandestine units and stricter regulation and inspection
  •   Promotion of alternative fuels, including only use of ultra-low sulfur in generating sets
  •   Thermal power plants to keep using ESPs
  •   Increasing bus fleet with grant to allocate 2,476 new bus permits


Mumbai (2003):
  • All DG sets must have a phase-in plan to meet emission norms by July 2004.
  • Supreme Court mandated stone crushing and hot mix plants to move out of Kandivili in 2003
  • Corporate Responsibility for Environmental Protection (PCREP) for highly polluting industries will be
    required and monitored in a time bound manner
  • Increase CNG dispensing stations from 67 to 80 by March, 2004


Solapur (2003):
  • No stone crushes within 500 meters of highways or rivers or residential habitations.
  • Compliance with diesel generator set standards.
  • Corporate Responsibility for Environmental Protection (CREP) for highly polluting industries adopted
    and monitored.
  • 6-seater rickshaws banned. No new rickshaws can have diesel.
  • Ban on 2-T oil, and vehicles checked regularly for PUC certificate.




                                                       59
     A.2 Factors that Correlate with Establishment Coal Price

                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)               (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                    Log           Log           Log            Log               Log               Log             Log            Log            Log
                                                    Firm          Firm          Firm           Firm              Firm              Firm            Firm           Firm           Firm
                                                    Coal          Coal          Coal           Coal              Coal              Coal            Coal           Coal           Coal
          VARIABLES                                 Price         Price         Price          Price             Price             Price           Price          Price          Price

          SCAP                                     0.0336        0.0490        0.0336        0.00780           0.00658            -0.0179         0.0323         0.0270         0.0463
                                                  (0.0582)      (0.0572)      (0.0582)       (0.0570)          (0.0565)          (0.0506)        (0.0353)       (0.0359)       (0.0399)
          Deregulation                                         -0.0706***
                                                                (0.0204)
          Large (≥ 100 employees)                                                           -0.0951***        -0.0894***         -0.0718**       -0.0423*        -0.0416*
                                                                                             (0.0308)          (0.0296)           (0.0283)       (0.0236)        (0.0237)
          HPI                                                                                 0.0626            0.0520             0.0500        0.0825**       0.0822**
                                                                                             (0.0439)          (0.0423)           (0.0411)       (0.0326)        (0.0326)
          Is Primarily Urban District                                                        0.157***          0.145***           0.147***       0.127***        0.126***
                                                                                             (0.0365)          (0.0368)           (0.0347)       (0.0228)        (0.0227)
          Distance to Coal Mine (km)                                                                                           0.000738***       0.000298       -0.000389
                                                                                                                                (0.000172)      (0.000235)     (0.000533)
          Annual State Rainfall (mm)                                                       -0.000101***      -0.000104***        -5.33e-05       2.56e-05       -1.95e-06      9.66e-06
60




                                                                                             (3.40e-05)        (3.37e-05)       (3.61e-05)      (1.95e-05)     (3.89e-05)     (3.98e-05)
          Distance X Rainfall                                                                                                                                    2.53e-07      -1.89e-07
                                                                                                                                                               (2.70e-07)     (2.62e-07)
          Distance X Annual Petrol Price                                                                                                                        0.000545       0.000681
                                                                                                                                                               (0.000488)     (0.000541)
          Distance X Annual Diesel Price                                                                                                                        -7.70e-07      -7.33e-07
                                                                                                                                                               (8.84e-07)     (1.11e-06)
          HHI (3-digit)                                                                                        1.243***          1.151***        1.178***       1.174***         -0.529
                                                                                                                (0.320)           (0.292)         (0.253)         (0.255)       (0.587)

          Observations                             40,647        40,647        40,647         36,165            36,165            36,165          36,165         36,165         36,165
          R2                                       0.037         0.003         0.037          0.090             0.094             0.117           0.227          0.227          0.762
          Establishment FE                           No            No            No             No                No                No              No             No            Yes
          State FE                                   No            No            No             No               Yes                No             Yes            Yes             No
          Year FE                                    No            No           Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
         NOTES: Table shows regressions of dependent variable on various covariates. Dependent variable is log nominal coal price faced by an establishment. Deregulation is an indica-
         tor variable that takes 1 in years 2001 and beyond, capturing coal dergulation after which coal companies were allowed to set their own prices, albeit ‘guided by the government
         (Chikkatur, 2008). HHI is a standard Herfindahl-Hirschman index based on total output (revenue), which varies from 1 to 10,000 and is calculated by 3-digit industry. Further
         covariates are described in text. Standard errors are clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB, IndiaStat
A.3 Times of India Event Studies Indexed to Year Prior to Announcement




NOTES: Times of India query counts a reference = 1 if keyword appears anywhere in the article, and SCAP city or
district is mentioned in abstract (first 8 lines), with replacement. Panel A plots are residualized by calendar year, while
all reference counts are mean-weighted by baseline city share of references (from τ = -1 to -6), and added to the average
baseline reference rate from τ = -1 to -6 for interpretation. Event years are restricted to the balanced panel. τ = 0 refers
to the year of SCAP announcement—for Delhi, this is re-coded from 1998 to 1996 to reflect initial city action plan that
preceded SCAP (see text for institutional details). Pollution keywords: pollute, polluting, pollution, pollutant, polluted,
emission, so2, sox, sulphur dioxide, sulphur oxide, no2, nox, nitrogen dioxide, nitrogen oxide, SPM, particulate matter),
air quality, water quality, smog. SCAP keywords: supreme court, action plan, scap, sc, pollution control, cpcb. Source:
ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Times of India.




                                                            61
A.4 2SLS Estimand Decomposition, First Stage and “Reduced Form”

Panel A. Variation in Coal Price IV with Visual “Reduced Form”




Panel B. Variation in Coal Price IV with Visual First Stage




NOTES: Panel A overlays a local linear regression of establishment log coal tons on the coal price instrument
(the “reduced form” of the regression) on a histogram of the number of establishment-years assigned to different
values of the coal price instrument, using 50 bins for the histogram and a kernal bandwidth of 1 for the local
regression. Panel B overlays a local linear regression of log establishment coal prices on the IV (a simpler
version of the first stage of the regression) against the same histogram, using the same number of bins and
bandwidth. Source: ASI, CPCB




                                                      62
Appendix B. Nearest Neighbor Matching Appendices

B.1 Nearest Neighbor Matching Estimation Procedure

While the main difference-in-differences (DID) strategy discussed above provides suggestive evidence that the
DID common trends absent treatment assumption is valid, flat pre-trends are but a necessary and not sufficient
condition for identification. Though Times of India references indicated the timing of Supreme Court Action
Plan (SCAP) announcements was unanticipated, one remaining concern is that regulators may target the cities
themselves based on cross-sectional factors unobserved to the econometrician. Noisy covariates and unobserved
heterogeneity may generate seemingly-flat pre-trends in the dependent variable, but confound estimates in the
post-treatment period when not accounted for properly. Imbens (2004) refers to these problems as covariate
overlap and unconfoundedness respectively.
   To gauge the robustness of our results to this limitation, we present an alternative matched-sample strategy
throughout the draft in which we use a nearest-neighbor (NN) matching procedure to pair each SCAP-treated
unit in our sample with an untreated unit, and run our standard difference-in-differences estimator using
this newly matched control group in place of the default control group (untreated establishments at time
of treatment)47 . Intuitively, in establishment-level analyses, our matching estimator finds establishments in
untreated districts with similar district characteristics to SCAP districts, however imposes that establishments
be matched exactly within each of the four HPI x Size subgroups (which vary by establishment). In district-level
analysis, we match only on district-level variables (the full set of matching covariates for both strategies is listed
below).
     We use the semiparametic estimator described in Abadie and Imbens (2002). Starting with establishment-
level results, we desire an establishment-level treatment effect for each treated observation i, θi = Yi (1)Yi (0),
but only one potential outcome is observable for each unit. We consider a distance metric ||Xi Xj || that creates
a score between a treated units covariates Xi and all potential j control candidates with covariate vectors Xj in
the years prior to SCAP announcement (1998 to 2001), and keep the closest Mi matches for each treated unit
i48 . To equalize scales among the different components of each vector in their contribution to the distance score,
we use a Mahalanobis distance statistic—weighting vector distances by the inverse of the variance-covariance
matrix (Σ) for covariates:

                                                                   q
                                        ||Xi Xj ||M ahalanobis =       (Xi Xj )(Σ−1
                                                                                 x )(Xi Xj )                                     (5)

    We use the algorithm discussed in Abadie et al. (2004) to implement this procedure for both establishment-
and district-level regressions. This procedure has the useful property that violators of the covariate overlap
assumption are dropped, resulting in treated units only being used if the covariates share a sufficiently common
covariate support. While our algorithm results in no such dropped units, we also show in Appendix B.2,
predicted SCAP status balance in each of the four subgroups, suggesting that indeed there is ample mass across
the support for treated units to find close nearest neighbors, circumventing problems arising from high-distance
nearest neighbors in which covariates are not evenly distributed (a critique recently popularized by King and
Nielsen (2016), which partly guided our decision to use a nearest-neighbor matching algorithm which does not
collapse information into a single coarse metric, such as a propensity score).49 Finally, in Appendix B.3 below,
the NN necessary condition of flat pretends appears to be met visually.
  47
     In regression tables, we use the header NN to distinguish this strategy from DID, though a more apt name is matched difference-
in-difference estimator” (Heckman et al., 1997).
  48
     In practice, we choose to use only one nearest neighbor, making the potential outcome problem symmetric. We allow treated
units to match to different control units in each of the baseline years (1998 to 2001), and probability weight all regressions by the
number of times a control unit is matched. To ensure that there are no ties in a given year, we include Log(Output) as a matching
variable. Results are nearly equivalent when omitting Log(Output) as a matching variableits function is mainly as a high-variation,
highly-populated variable by establishment and year.
  49
     In these overlap pictures, the main interest is to ensure that there are no notable gaps in any point in the distribution.



                                                                 63
To guide our choice of matching covariates, we first estimated the logit selection model shown in Appendix B.4,
and used four criteria contemporaneously to select among this set:
  1. A flat pre-trend in dynamic estimate plots.
  2. Balance in pre-treatment summary statistics.
  3. Visual inspection of predicted treatment status does not violate overlap assumption.
  4. A relatively consistent set of covariates between establishment- and district-level covariates.

This led to the following sets of variables for each estimation type:

Matching Covariates for Establishment-Level Regressions:
   • Exactly Matched Variables:
        – HPI X Large
   • District-Level Matching Covariates:
        – No. Hotel Rooms; No. Hotels; Population (millions); Distance to Nearest Port; Distance to Nearest
          Coal Mine; District Area (km2); No. Ground-Level Pollution Monitors; Corruption Keyword Refer-
          ences; 3-digit NIC fixed effects; Compliance Rate with State Environmental Regulations; 1(District
          Previously Declared Problem Area)
   • Establishment-Level Variables:
        – Log(Output)


Matching Covariates for District-Level Regressions:
   • Exactly Matched Variables:
        – HPI X Large

           where HPI X Large = 1(District # HPI Firms ≥ Median) X 1(District # Large Firms ≥ Median)
   • District-Level Matching Covariates:
        – No. Hotel Rooms; No. Hotels; Population (millions); Population Density; Distance to Nearest
          Port; Distance to Nearest Coal Mine; District Area (km2); No. Ground-Level Pollution Monitors;
          Corruption Keyword References; 3-digit NIC fixed effects; Compliance Rate with State Environmental
          Regulations; 1(District Previously Declared Problem Area); Log(District Output); Log Thermal Coal
          Tons Used; Log District Coal Price
   • Establishment-Level Variables:
        – None




                                                       64
B.2 Visual Overlap Check for Potential Nearest Neighbor Matches

Panel A. Overall




Panel B. By HPI X Large (TL); HPI X Not Large (TR) ; Not HPI X Large (BL); Not HPI X Not Large (BR)




NOTES: Top figure shows predicted SCAP treatment variable separately for treated and NN-matched controlled units on
full set of establishment-level matching variables, cutting 0.05 tails for exposition (see Appendix B.1 for details regarding
overlap assumptions). Bottom figures are analogous to top figure, broken out by HPI-Size subgroups. Standard errors are
clustered at the district level, with 90% confidence intervals shown around each estimate. Source: ASI, CPCB.




                                                             65
     B.3 Dynamic Estimates of Action Plans Using Nearest-Neighbor Matched Sample

     Panel A. Left to Right: Pr(Has Pollution Control Stock); Log(Pollution Control); Pr(Exit)




     Panel B. Left to Right: ACF-P TFP; OLS TFP Pr(Uses Coal); Log(Coal Tons)
66




     NOTES: Figure shows heterogeneous estimates using a dynamic nearest-neighbor matched specification with respect to omitted year τ =-1. SCAP is equal to 1 in
     any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during or after the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Plots correspond to dynamic
     versions of main specifications in Tables 3 to 9, dependent variables in header. As noted in text, NN estimates are not possible for entry. Source: ASI, CPCB
     Panel C. Log(SPM), Log(SO2), Log(NO2)
67




     NOTES: Plots show district-level estimates using a dynamic nearest-neighbor matching specification with respect to omitted year τ =-1. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district
     that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during or after the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Regressions correspond to dynamic versions of Table
     10 Panel B columns (1), (5), and (9) respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the district level, with 90% confidence intervals shown around each estimate. Source: ASI,
     CPCB, Greenstone and Hanna (2014).
B.4 Covariates that Predict SCAP Status in 2001

                                              (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
                                             SCAP         SCAP            SCAP           SCAP           SCAP           SCAP           SCAP           SCAP
 VARIABLES                                   Logit        Logit           Logit          Logit          Logit          Logit          Logit          Logit

 Previously Declared Problem Area           0.352***     0.256***       0.385***       0.376***       0.389***       0.380***       0.372***       0.309***
                                            (0.00859)     (0.0134)       (0.0139)       (0.0141)       (0.0141)       (0.0142)       (0.0144)       (0.0163)
 No. Hotel Rooms                                        0.000339***    0.000355***    0.000355***    0.000430***    0.000417***    0.000413***    0.000371***
                                                         (1.78e-05)     (1.81e-05)     (1.79e-05)     (2.03e-05)     (2.06e-05)     (2.05e-05)     (2.05e-05)
 No. Hotels                                             -0.0161***      -0.0169***     -0.0180***     -0.0231***     -0.0228***     -0.0226***     -0.0213***
                                                         (0.000927)     (0.000947)     (0.000957)     (0.00111)      (0.00113)      (0.00112)      (0.00115)
 District Area (km2)                                    -4.71e-05***   -4.16e-05***   -4.00e-05***   -4.96e-05***   -5.30e-05***   -5.31e-05***   -4.74e-05***
                                                         (1.30e-06)     (1.29e-06)     (1.27e-06)     (1.58e-06)     (1.65e-06)     (1.65e-06)     (1.60e-06)
 Population (millions)                                   0.193***       0.190***       0.181***       0.187***       0.193***       0.192***       0.185***
                                                         (0.00345)      (0.00357)      (0.00364)      (0.00383)      (0.00396)      (0.00396)      (0.00407)
 Distance to Nearest Port (km)                                         -0.000133***   -0.000152***   -0.000118***   -0.000173***   -0.000174***   -0.000213***
                                                                        (1.69e-05)     (1.69e-05)     (1.74e-05)     (1.85e-05)     (1.85e-05)     (1.90e-05)
 Distance to Nearest Coal Mine (km)                                    0.00123***     0.00122***     0.00114***     0.00126***     0.00125***     0.00129***
                                                                        (4.43e-05)     (4.41e-05)     (4.42e-05)     (4.88e-05)     (4.87e-05)     (5.03e-05)
 No. Ground-Level Pollution Monitors                                                   0.0268***      0.0308***      0.0304***      0.0310***      0.0252***
                                                                                       (0.00318)      (0.00327)      (0.00333)      (0.00333)      (0.00333)
 Corruption Keyword References                                                                       0.000568***    0.000568***    0.000546***    0.000445***
                                                                                                      (3.66e-05)     (3.76e-05)     (3.76e-05)     (3.76e-05)
 Compliance Rate with State Enviro. Regs.                                                                            0.674***       0.611***       0.645***
                                                                                                                      (0.117)        (0.117)        (0.119)
 Log Total Output                                                                                                                   0.0115***      0.0121***
                                                                                                                                    (0.00190)      (0.00197)


 Observations                                27,874       27,865          27,865         27,865         27,865         26,886         26,816         26,816
 3-Digit NIC FEs                               No           No              No             No             No             No             No            Yes
 Pseudo R2                                   0.0529       0.424           0.458          0.460          0.467          0.461          0.462          0.504
 Predicted Pr(SCAP)                           0.274       0.290           0.280          0.275          0.286          0.298          0.296          0.265

NOTES: Figure shows logit selection model of covariates that predict SCAP status, where SCAP here takes a value of 1
if a district is ever targeted for a Supreme Court Action Plan. See Table 9 summary statistics for covariate descriptions.
Source: ASI, CPCB, IndiaStat.




                                                                           68
Appendix C. Alternative Control Group

In 2009-10 the CPCB along with SPCBs and IIT Delhi identified 88 industrial clusters as Polluted Industrial
Areas (PIAs). Almost all SCAP cities were included in this list. These industrial clusters received Comprehen-
sive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) scores based on pollutants (presence of toxins and scale of industrial
activities), pathways (ambient pollutant concentration, impact on people, impact on eco-geological features),
and receptors (potentially affected population, level of exposure, and risk to sensitive receptors). The scores
were designed to reflect air and water quality data, ecological damage, and visual environmental conditions.
The CEPI scores were intended to act as an early warning tool and help prioritize potential interventions. Based
on the CEPI scores, PIAs were classified as Critically Polluted Areas (CEPI greater than 70), Severely Polluted
Areas (CEPI between 60 and 70) and Other Polluted Areas (CEPI less than 60).
    The set of PIA can be thought of as a the set of regions that, in 2009, the CPCB believed were potential
targets for environmental actions. We consider robustness of our main results to restricting our regressions to
firms in districts that contain PIAs. The intuition is that districts with PIAs most resemble the districts that
were chosen for SCAP regulation. That said, they were not actually selected by the Supreme Court and were
identified after our sample period, so they are not a perfect control. We do, however, find it comforting to
see how robust our results are to restricting our regressions to SCAP districts (which include districts hosting
SCAP cities and neighboring districts) and districts that were subsequently flagged as PIAs.

                                    Table C.1 Polluted Industrial Areas

   State                Industrial areas

   Andhra Pradesh       Kathedan, Kukatpalli, Patancheru-Bollaram, Vijaywada, Vishakhapatnam
   Assam                Burnihat, Digboi
   Bihar                Hajipur
   Chhattisgarh         Bhillai-Durg, Korba, Raipur
   Delhi                Nazafgarh drain basin (including Anand Parvat, Naraina, Okhla, Wazirpur)
   Gujarat              Ahmedabad, Ankleshwar, Bhavnagar, Junagarh, Rajkot, Surat, Vadodara, Vapi,
                        Vatva
   Haryana              Faridabad, Panipat
   Himachal Pradesh     Baddi, Kala Amb, Parwanoo
   Jharkhand            Bada Jamtara, Dhanbad, Jamshedpur, Ramgarh, Saraikela, West Singhbhum
   Karnataka            Bhadravati, Bidar, Mangalore, Pinia, Raichur
   Kerala               Greater Cochin
   Madhya Pradesh       Dewas, Gwalior, Indore, Nagda-Ratlam, Pitampur
   Maharashtra          Aurangabad, Chandrapur, Chembur, Dombivalli, Nashik, Navi Mumbai, Pimpari-
                        Chinchwad, Tarapur
   Orissa               Angul Talcher, Ib Valley, Jharsuguda, Paradeep
   Punjab               Batala, Jalandhar, Ludhiana, Mandi Gobind Garh
   Rajasthan            Bhiwadi, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Pali
   Tamil Nadu           Coimbatore, Cuddalore, Erode, Manali, Mettur, Tirupur, Vellore-North Arcot
   Uttar Pradesh        Agra, Aligarh, Bulandsahar-Khurza, Ferozabad, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Mathura,
                        Meerut, Moradabad, Noida, Singrauli, Varanasi-Mirzapur
   Uttarakhand          Haridwar, Udhamsingh Nagar
   West Bengal          Asansole, Durgapur, Haldia, Howrah
NOTES: 88 named industrial areas listed by state. About half are situated in a district with the same name.
Note that all SCAP areas with the exception of Lucknow and Solapur contained a PIA. Source: CPCB (2009)




                                                      69
                                         Table C.2 Key Results for Establishments Located in SCAP Areas and Districts Containing PIAs
                                                               (1)              (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)         (11)           (12)          (13)
                                                                                                                                                                                       Log          Log
                                                          Pr(Has Poll.    Pr(Has Poll.       Log                                                               Log         Log         Coal         Coal
                                                            Control         Control        Pollution                                                           Coal        Coal        Tons         Tons          TFP           TFP
      VARIABLES                                           Equipment)      Equipment)        Control     Pr(Exit)     Pr(Exit)     Pr(Entry)     Pr(Entry)      Tons        Tons      / Output     / Output       ACF-P          OLS

      SCAP                                                  -0.000965                                    0.00620                    -0.0135                    -0.162                  -0.133
                                                            (0.00466)                                   (0.00920)                  (0.0114)                   (0.108)                 (0.0902)
      SCAP X HPI X Large                                                       0.0348       -0.0746                   0.00483                   -0.0361**                -0.0926                    -0.0174       -0.0284       -0.0240
                                                                             (0.0221)      (0.0721)                  (0.00744)                   (0.0156)                (0.212)                    (0.169)      (0.0228)      (0.0221)
      SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                                  0.00379       -0.0231                    0.0138                  -0.0490***                 0.0213                    -0.0245      -0.00713      -0.00361
                                                                            (0.00863)       (0.159)                  (0.00932)                   (0.0133)                (0.157)                    (0.163)      (0.0146)      (0.0149)
      SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                                  0.00268        -0.223                   0.00663                   -0.000304               -0.712***                 -0.585***      -0.00978      -0.00191
                                                                            (0.00994)       (0.161)                   (0.0119)                   (0.0139)                (0.246)                    (0.216)      (0.0128)      (0.0128)
      SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                             -0.00487       -0.0339                   0.00365                    -0.00728                -0.0396                    -0.0197     0.000384       -0.00385
                                                                            (0.00327)       (0.146)                   (0.0103)                   (0.0120)                (0.122)                   (0.0935)     (0.00923)     (0.00891)
      Log mean district coal price (excluding own)                                                                                                                                                               -0.00456      -0.00559
                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.00719)     (0.00667)

      Observations                                           155,636         155,636        18,145       186,801      186,801      186,801       186,801      20,277      20,277       20,267       20,267       172,194       183,911
      Number of Establishments                               48,844          48,844         4,552                                                             6,877        6,877        6,875        6,875        48,762        50,029
      R2                                                      0.030           0.043          0.055        0.019        0.022        0.010         0.012       0.009       0.019         0.012       0.020         0.013         0.009
      Establishment FE                                         Yes             Yes            Yes           No          No            No           No          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
      Year FE                                                  Yes             No             No           Yes          No           Yes           No          Yes          No           Yes          No
70




      HPI-Large-Year FE                                         No             Yes            Yes           No          Yes           No           Yes          No          Yes          No           Yes          Yes           Yes
      Baseline Mean                                            0.08                                        0.06                      0.10                      5.47                    -11.75                      1.22         -0.12
      Basline Mean - HPI X Large                                               0.33          14.42                     0.04                        0.05                    6.72                     -12.36
      Basline Mean - HPI X Not Large                                           0.11          12.03                     0.06                        0.11                    4.85                     -11.26
      Basline Mean - Not HPI x Large                                           0.10          13.56                     0.05                        0.07                    6.51                     -12.39
      Basline Mean - Not HPI X Not Large                                       0.03          11.19                     0.07                        0.12                    4.17                     -11.06
     NOTES: Columns (1) and (2) dependent variable equal to 1 if an establishment reports any pollution control stock; Column (3): logarithm of pollution control stock conditional on having pollution control equipment in the
     baseline period; Column (3): equal to 1 if an establishment reports any coal use; Columns (4) and (5): Exit equals 1 if an establishment is officially declared “closed” in the ASI, so long as it remains closed thereafter; Columns
     (6) and (7): Entry equals 1 in the first year an establishment appears in the data within three years of the observed ASI “initial production year”; Columns (8) and (9): the logarithm of coal tons used conditional on using coal
     in the baseline period; Columns (10) and (11): log of the ratio of coal consumption to total output; Column (12): TFP calculated using methods from Ackerberg et al. (2006) with petrol as proxy; Column (13): TFP calculated
     using OLS (Solow Residual). SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during and after the Action Plan announcement, and 0 otherwise. Data on coal use spans 1998-2009.
     Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB.
Appendix D. Additional Results

D.1.A Effects of Action Plans and Coal Prices on TFP, Additional TFP Measures

                                                             (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                             OP           OP            OP          LP          LP           LP
   VARIABLES                                                 DID          DID           NN          DID         DID          NN

   SCAP X HPI X Large                                       0.0124        0.0129      -0.0450      -0.0224     -0.0254      -0.0848
                                                           (0.0168)      (0.0167)    (0.0274)     (0.0383)    (0.0389)     (0.0518)
   SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                  -0.00798      -0.00767    -0.00309     -0.0269*    -0.0292*     0.00247
                                                           (0.0130)      (0.0129)    (0.0193)     (0.0138)    (0.0152)     (0.0315)
   SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                   0.0186        0.0198     -0.00205       0.0471      0.0412      0.0120
                                                           (0.0144)      (0.0145)    (0.0166)     (0.0303)    (0.0315)     (0.0318)
   SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                             0.0119**       0.0124**      0.0181       0.0528     0.0492        0.0313
                                                          (0.00553)     (0.00560)    (0.0168)     (0.0428)    (0.0387)     (0.0615)
   Log mean district coal price (excluding own)                         -0.0130**    -0.00420                   0.101       -0.0595
                                                                        (0.00574)    (0.0136)                  (0.125)     (0.0418)

   Observations                                            336,063       335,187      87,609      307,924      307,151      82,545
   Number of Establishments                                89,704         89,679      19,050      86,257       86,230       18,702
   R2                                                       0.004         0.004       0.007        0.000        0.000       0.006
   Establishment FE                                          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
   HPI-Size-Year FE                                          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
   Baseline Mean                                             0.84          0.84        0.84         1.00         1.00        1.00
  NOTES: TFP is calculated using Olley and Pakes (1996) (where the proxy is investment) in columns (1) through (3), and Levinsohn
  and Petrin (2003) (where the proxy is petrol ) in columns (4) through (6). See Appendix D.5 for discussion of TFP estimation, and
  further details. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI,
  CPCB.




                                                                   71
     D.1.B Effects of Action Plans and Coal Prices on TFP, No Pollution Control Stock in Baseline

                                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)          (9)
                                                                ACF-P           ACF-P          ACF-P           ACF-I          ACF-I         ACF-I           OLS           OLS          OLS
      VARIABLES                                                  DID             DID            NN              DID            DID           NN             DID           DID          NN

      SCAP X HPI X Large                                        -0.00522       -0.00510       -0.0658*        0.00602         0.00628      -0.0616*       -0.00718      -0.00691     -0.0605*
                                                                (0.0213)       (0.0213)       (0.0356)        (0.0225)       (0.0224)      (0.0366)       (0.0209)      (0.0208)     (0.0308)
      SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                    -0.00812       -0.00830       -0.00425        -0.00575       -0.00575      -0.00278        -0.0107       -0.0108      -0.0104
                                                                (0.0128)       (0.0128)       (0.0242)        (0.0135)       (0.0134)      (0.0212)       (0.0129)      (0.0128)     (0.0206)
      SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                     0.00653        0.00722        -0.0193         0.0142         0.0153       -0.00735       0.00783       0.00922      -0.00107
                                                                (0.0140)       (0.0140)       (0.0220)        (0.0158)       (0.0158)      (0.0200)       (0.0156)      (0.0156)     (0.0200)
      SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                 0.0123*        0.0126*        0.0220         0.0111*         0.0116*       0.0215         0.00632      0.00678       0.0183
                                                               (0.00715)      (0.00718)       (0.0232)       (0.00597)      (0.00602)      (0.0197)      (0.00632)     (0.00635)     (0.0198)
      Log mean district coal price (excluding own)                             -0.00638       0.000888                      -0.0124**      -0.00471                    -0.0133**     0.00312
                                                                              (0.00539)       (0.0159)                      (0.00573)      (0.0165)                    (0.00598)     (0.0181)

      Observations                                              269,399         268,693         72,795        269,399        268,693         72,795       296,587       295,781       77,706
      Number of Establishments                                  79,515           79,488         17,343         79,515         79,488         17,343        82,979       82,954        17,695
      R2                                                         0.010           0.010          0.016          0.012          0.012          0.018         0.007         0.007        0.011
72




      Establishment FE                                            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
      HPI-Size-Year FE                                            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
      Baseline Mean                                               1.22            1.22           1.22           1.22           1.22           1.22          -0.11        -0.11         -0.11
     NOTES: Table shows TFP results conditional on establishments not possesing pollution control stock prior to the SCAP announcements. TFP is calculated using methods from Ackerberg
     et al. (2006) in columns (1) through (6) (with petrol (-P) and investment (-I) as proxies), and OLS (Solow Residual) in columns (7) through (9). In Appendix D.1.A, we report a full results
     which additionally estimate TFP using methods from Olley and Pakes (1996) (where the proxy is investment), and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) (where the proxy is petrol ). See Appendix
     D.5 for detailed discussion of TFP estimation methods. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, CPCB.
D.2 Greenstone and Hanna (2014) Replication of Main Results (Including Delhi)

      Panel A. Population-Weighted, Implementation Year Timing (Greenstone/Hanna)
                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)     (6)
                            log(SPM) log(SPM) log(SO2) log(SO2) log(NO2) log(NO2)
       VARIABLES               DID        DID        DID       DID        DID     DID

       SCAP                        -0.154**        -0.166        -0.0849     -0.0337        0.109        0.0448
                                   (0.0731)       (0.113)        (0.102)    (0.0961)      (0.0884)      (0.0940)
       Stacked Time Trend                          0.0489                    -0.0364                    -0.00427
                                                 (0.0327)                   (0.0496)                    (0.0416)
       SCAP X Trend                               -0.0628                    0.0349                      0.0224
                                                 (0.0390)                   (0.0648)                    (0.0635)

       Observations                  836            836           794          794           843          843
       Number of District            111            111           105          105           110          110
       R2                           0.395          0.398         0.229        0.231         0.029        0.030
       District FE                   Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
       Year FE                       Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes

      Panel B. Population-Weighted, Announcement Year Timing
                               (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)                            (5)           (6)
                            log(SPM) log(SPM) log(SO2) log(SO2)                          log(NO2)      log(NO2)
       VARIABLES               DID       DID       DID       DID                            DID           DID

       SCAP                         -0.101        -0.0510         -0.116     -0.0917       0.160*       0.216**
                                   (0.0668)       (0.124)        (0.110)     (0.110)      (0.0882)      (0.0915)
       Stacked Time Trend                          0.0445                    -0.0236                     -0.0369
                                                 (0.0338)                   (0.0470)                    (0.0354)
       SCAP X Trend                              -0.0785*                    0.0272                      0.0375
                                                 (0.0434)                   (0.0620)                    (0.0574)

       Observations                  836            836           794          794           843          843
       Number of District            111            111           105          105           110          110
       R2                           0.390          0.396         0.231        0.232         0.037        0.039
       District FE                   Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
       Year FE                       Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
      NOTES: Panel A replicates the main findings of Greenstone and Hanna (2014), who use SCAP implementa-
      tion date as the market of event time. We include Delhi to be consistent with their estimation strategy, where
      “Stacked Time Trend” is a linear event time trend normalized to zero for any district which is never mandated
      to adopt an Action Plan over the sample period, and SCAP X Trend interacts that trend with the main SCAP
      variable of interest. Source: ASI, CPCB, Greenstone and Hanna (2014).




                                                            73
D.3 Satellite Measures of Air Quality

Our ability to evaluate the impact of SCAP and coal prices on air quality is limited by the coverage of ground-
level air quality monitors—data initially assembled and analyzed in Greenstone and Hanna (2014). Of the 478
districts that we consistently observe in our sample, only 75 have ground-level air quality monitors. Coverage
of SCAP regions is focused on inner city areas, not neighboring districts. Only 2 of the 25 districts neighboring
those containing an SCAP city report ground-level measurements. In addition, only one third of the districts
that host thermal power plants report ground-level air quality during our sample period.
   We therefore turn to satellite readings. We focus on two sources of remote sensing observations: for SO2 we
use the output of the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Modern-Era Retrospective
Analysis for Research and Applications (MERRA) model, and for PM 2.5 we use Van Donkelaar et al. (2016)’s
re-analysis of raw data from more recent satellite instruments.
   MERRA is a consistent, long-term reanalysis of satellite era observations produced using the Goddard Earth
Observing System (GEOS) data assimilation version 5 framework. The MERRA model reconciles data obtained
from a large number of satellite and conventional data sources. It has full coverage of SO2 at the monthly level for
the entire period of our study at a spatial resolution of 0.5◦ by 0.625◦ . We use MERRA version 2 time-averaged,
single-level, assimilation, aerosol diagnostics (M2TMNXAER) SO2 Surface Mass Concentration, expressed in
units of µg/m3 .
   The Van Donkelaar et al. (2016) estimates of PM 2.5 are based on retrievals from the MODIS, MISR,
and SeaWIFS instruments on board more recent satellites. These instruments measure, among other things,
Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) which is a linear function of PM2.5. The Van Donkelaar et al. (2016) authors
combine AOD data with the GEOS-Chem chemical transport model, which they calibrate to global ground-
based observations of PM2.5. We use Van Donkelaar et al. (2016)’s annual global Estimates (V4.GL.02 /
V4.GL.02.NoGWR) at a spatial resolution of 0.1◦ by 0.1◦ with regression adjustment. We do not make use of
adjustments for dust and sea-salt.
    To convert the gridded dataset to district-level values, we overlap each grid with a map of the 710 district
capital cities and other large cities. There is at least one city in every district. We attribute air quality to each
city by taking the inverse-distance weighted mean of the four North-East-South-West grid-points closest to the
centroid of that city. We then produce a district-level value of air quality that is the city-population-weighted
average of the largest cities in each district. For MERRA, we create an annual value by taking a simple average
of monthly data. Figure D.3.1 shows the precision of the coarser MERRA grid when applied to at the national
and state level. In the latter, major district population centers are shown in light blue.
    We re-run the air quality regressions from Table 10 Panel A using the MERRA data and three specifications:
the full set of all districts in India, districts that also have air quality monitors, and districts that contained
PIAs, as discussed in Appendix C. The two restricted samples have substantial overlap, because PIA areas are
6 times more likely to have an air quality monitor than non-PIA areas. Table D.3.1 shows the result for the full
set of districts, while Table D.3.2 shows the PIA restriction; the restriction to districts with air quality monitors
(available upon request) yields nearly identical results. The satellite data reveal significant reductions in SO2
associated with Action Plans, however do not detect effects of coal prices on SO2. This result is apparent
in both restricted regressions, but is washed out in the full sample. In all specifications, the satellite data in
fact suggest that higher coal prices reduce PM 2.5. There are several reasons why satellite and ground-level
monitors may measure fundamentally different things. For one, satellites infer air quality from readings taken
throughout a vertical column, whereas ground monitors measure very local conditions. Satellite readings may
also be affected by factors like cloud cover, whereas ground-level readings could be more susceptible to human
tampering or the relocation of polluting sources just out of reach of monitor detection. Finally, the satellite
measure of PM used here is 2.5, representing particles of a diameter of 2.5 micrometres or less, whereas SPM
includes larger particles.




                                                         74
   Table D.3.1 Effect of Action Plans vs. Coal Prices on District-Level Pollutants using Satellite Measures
                                                     (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                  log(SO2)    log(SO2)      log(SO2)      log(SO2)      log(PM)      log(PM)       log(PM)       log(PM)
 VARIABLES                                          DID         DID         DID/2SLS      DID/2SLS        DID          DID        DID/2SLS      DID/2SLS

 SCAP                                              -0.00772    -0.0104       -0.00895       -0.0112      0.00574      0.00512      0.00978      -0.000643
                                                  (0.00641)   (0.00688)     (0.00746)      (0.0110)     (0.00743)    (0.00775)    (0.00991)      (0.0134)
 Log Mean District Coal Price                                 0.000752                                               0.00658*
                                                              (0.00453)                                              (0.00336)
 Log Industry-Weighted District Coal Price                                    -0.0190      -0.00757                               -0.0562***     -0.0165*
                                                                             (0.0157)     (0.00996)                                 (0.0144)    (0.00947)
 Log Coal Tons, Power Plants                                   0.00356       0.00351       0.00101                    -0.00128      -0.00137     0.00497
                                                              (0.00222)     (0.00235)     (0.00293)                  (0.00350)     (0.00294)    (0.00692)

 Observations                                      5,529        4,495        4,485           4,365       5,529        4,495        4,485           4,365
 Number of District                                 467          449          440             426         467          449          440             426
 R2                                                0.817        0.822        0.815           0.839       0.794        0.797        0.716           0.791
 District FE                                        Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
 Year FE                                            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
 Weighted By                                      Pop2000      Pop2000      Pop2000       InitEstabs    Pop2000      Pop2000      Pop2000       InitEstabs
 Baseline Mean                                      9.20         9.35         9.35            9.35       48.08        48.59        48.59           48.59
 First Stage F-Stat. on Excluded IV                                          44.27           83.88                                 44.27           83.88
NOTES: In columns (1)-(4), dependent variable is SO2 from MERRA. In columns (5)-(8) dependent variable is PM 2.5 from Van Donkelaar et al. (2016).
SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any year during or after the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Standard
errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: ASI, MERRA-2, Van Donkellaar 2016.




      Table D.3.2 Satellite Results Restricting to Sample to SCAP Areas and Districts Containing PIAs

                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                  log(SO2)      log(SO2)     log(SO2)      log(SO2)      log(PM)      log(PM)       log(PM)       log(PM)
 VARIABLES                                          DID           DID        DID/2SLS      DID/2SLS        DID          DID        DID/2SLS      DID/2SLS

 SCAP                                            -0.0394***    -0.0367***    -0.0363***      -0.0171      -0.00109    0.000214      0.00197       0.00254
                                                  (0.0125)       (0.0126)     (0.0133)      (0.0211)     (0.00899)    (0.00948)     (0.0110)      (0.0148)
 Log Mean District Coal Price                                    -0.00613                                              0.00305
                                                                (0.00859)                                             (0.00593)
 Log Industry-Weighted District Coal Price                                     -0.0258        -0.0177                              -0.0485***      -0.0230
                                                                              (0.0170)       (0.0208)                               (0.0176)      (0.0224)
 Log Coal Tons, Power Plants                                     0.0146        0.0174        0.00411                   0.0157        0.0204        0.0211
                                                                (0.0146)      (0.0155)      (0.00715)                 (0.0109)      (0.0141)      (0.0157)

 Observations                                      1,258         1,204         1,204          1,194       1,258        1,204         1,204          1,194
 Number of District                                 105           105           105            104         105          105           105            104
 R2                                                0.875         0.876         0.867          0.858       0.818        0.822         0.788          0.792
 District FE                                        Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
 Year FE                                            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
 Weighted By                                      Pop2000       Pop2000       Pop2000      InitEstabs    Pop2000      Pop2000       Pop2000      InitEstabs
 Baseline Mean                                      9.20          9.35          9.35           9.35       48.08        48.59         48.59          48.59
 First Stage F-Stat. on Excluded IV                                            46.62          33.39                                  46.62          33.39
NOTES: In columns (1)-(4), dependent variable is SO2 from MERRA. In columns (5)-(8) dependent variable is PM 2.5 from Van Donkelaar et al. (2016). SCAP
is equal to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any year during or after the Action Plan is announced, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors
clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1.




                                                                             75
Figure D.3.1 MERRA 0.5◦ × 0.625◦ grid applied to India (annual SO2 average values for 1998)
                 (a) National                                      (b) Tamil Nadu




             Figure D.3.2 Dynamic plots for regression with CEPI restriction




                                            76
D.4 Exit and Entry Effects in Core vs. Fringe of SCAP Cities

In our main specifications we took a broad definition of SCAP regions that includes neighboring districts to
capture an effect net of any potential re-sorting of firms outside the city boundaries into surrounding areas. By
including neighboring districts in our definition of treated firms, we also guarantee that all nearest neighbor
matches come from regions outside of the SCAP periphery. This section shows that our results, in particular
our entry and exit results, are not driven by our choice of boundaries. We also show that there is no evidence
of re-sorting from the core SCAP areas to neighboring districts.
   Table Table D.4.1 details how we translate SCAP cities to districts that contain the cities themselves and
neighboring districts.

                     Table D.4.1 Districts Containing SCAP Cities and Neighboring Districts

           SCAP City                               Core District(s)         Neighboring districts

           Agra (Uttar Pradesh)                    Agra                     Firozabad, Hathras, Mathura,
                                                                            Bharatpur (Rajasthan)
           Ahmedabad (Gujarat)                     Ahmedabad                Ghandhinagar
           Bangalore (Karnataka)                   Bangalore urban          Bangalore rural, Ramanagara,
                                                                            Krishnagiri (Tamil Nadu)
           Calcutta (West Bengal)                  Calcutta,                24-Parganas North,
                                                   Howrah, Hooghly          24-Parganas South, Nadia
           Chennai (Tamil Nadu)                    Chennai                  Tiruvallur
           Delhi (Delhi)                           Delhi                    G. Buddha Nagar (Uttar Pradesh),
                                                                            Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh),
                                                                            Gurgaon (Haryana)
           Dhanbad (Jharkhand)                     Dhanbad                  Bokaro
           Faridabad (Haryana)                     Faridabad                Gurgaon, Palwal, South Delhi (Delhi),
                                                                            G. Buddha Nagar (Uttar Pradesh)
           Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh)              Hyderabad                Ranga Reddy
           Jodhpur (Rajasthan)                     Jodhpur                  None
           Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh)                  Kanpur Nagar             Kanpur Dehat, Unnao
           Lucknow (Uttar Pradesh)                 Lucknow                  Barabanki, Unnao
           Mumbai (Maharashtra)                    Mumbai                   Thane
           Patna (Bihar)                           Patna                    Saran, Vaishali
           Pune (Maharashtra)                      Pune                     None
           Solapur (Maharashtra)                   Solapur                  Osmanabad
           Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh)                Varanashi                Chandauli, Jaunpur, Mirzapur
NOTES: This table shows the host district(s) for each affected city, along with neighboring districts that are included in our primary
definition of SCAP. All districts are in the same state as the affected SCAP city unless otherwise noted. We use a district definition
that includes any aggregation in order to maintain consistent boundaries over the 1998-2009 period. Source: Authors’ calculations.

    We re-run our main regression specifications first dropping all fringe districts. We call these “Core”. We
then re-run them focusing only districts neighboring the treated cities, dropping the core. We refer to this
second set of regression results as “Fringe”. Table D.4.2 shows that both core and fringe experience an increase
in exit and reduction in entry. Exit in the core is concentrated among large non-HPI firms, whereas exit in the
fringe is concentrated among small firms in both types of industry. The entry deterrence effect is strong among
HPI firms of all sizes, both in core and fringe. Importantly, there is no evidence of increased entry in fringe
districts.50

  50
     We also check for effects on the extensive margin of pollution control equipment and intensive margin of coal use, and find little
differences between core an fringe regions (reported in the online appendix).


                                                                  77
                          Table D.4.2 Effect of Action Plans on Exit and Entry, by Core/Fringe

                                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)
                                              Pr(Exit)     Pr(Exit)     Pr(Exit)     Pr(Exit)    Pr(Entry)     Pr(Entry)     Pr(Entry)      Pr(Entry)
 VARIABLES                                     Core         Fringe       Core         Fringe       Core         Fringe         Core          Fringe

 SCAP                                         0.0119      0.0166**                               -0.0243***     0.00894
                                             (0.00801)    (0.00683)                               (0.00757)     (0.0164)
 SCAP X HPI X Large                                                      0.0113      -0.00140                                -0.0480***     -0.0447***
                                                                       (0.00820)    (0.00973)                                  (0.0140)      (0.0120)
 SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                                -0.000894    0.0274**                                 -0.0573***      -0.0287*
                                                                       (0.00730)     (0.0109)                                 (0.00891)      (0.0162)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                                 0.0233**      0.00792                                  0.00261        0.0148
                                                                        (0.0111)    (0.00664)                                  (0.0101)      (0.0186)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                              0.0118     0.0186**                                 -0.0223***       0.0192
                                                                       (0.00847)    (0.00834)                                 (0.00767)      (0.0183)

 Observations                                 306,823      288,428      306,823      288,428       306,823       288,428       306,823       288,428
 R2                                            0.017        0.017        0.019        0.020         0.010         0.010         0.013         0.013
 Establishment FE                                No          No           No           No             No            No           No            No
 Year FE                                        Yes          Yes                                     Yes           Yes
 HPI-Size-Year FE                                No          No           Yes          Yes            No            No           Yes           Yes
 Baseline Mean                                  0.06        0.05                                     0.06          0.05
 Basline Mean - HPI X Large                                               0.04         0.04                                      0.05          0.06
 Basline Mean - HPI X Not Large                                           0.07         0.06                                      0.09          0.13
 Basline Mean - Not HPI x Large                                           0.06         0.04                                      0.07          0.08
 Basline Mean - Not HPI X Not Large                                       0.07         0.06                                      0.10          0.14
NOTES: Exit equals 1 if an establishment is officially declared “closed” in the ASI, so long as it remains closed thereafter. Entry equals 1 in the first
year an establishment appears in the data within three years of the observed ASI “initial production year”. SCAP is equal to 1 in any district that is
targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during and after the Action Plan announcement, and 0 otherwise. HPI-Size-Year fixed effects are esti-
mated for each of the four HPI-Size subgroups. Data on pollution control stock spans 2001-2009. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown
in parentheses. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1.




                                                                          78
D.5 Measuring Total Factor Productivity

Consider the production function:


                                       yit = βl lit + βm mit + βk kit + ωit + εit                             (6)

where yit is the output of establishment i at time t (logged); and lit , mit , and kit are its labor, material and
capital inputs respectively, in logs. Following the convention of Olley and Pakes (1996) (OP), Levinsohn and
Petrin (2003) (LP), and Ackerberg et al. (2006) (ACF), let ωit represent the component of productivity that
may be anticipated and observable to the establishment, εit the component of the productivity shock that
is unanticipated by the establishment. As OP, LP, and ACF point out, if the establishment can observe ωit
when it makes its input decisions, but the econometrician cannot, then OLS (and fixed effects) estimates of
productivity will be biased.
   Each of these three methods makes somewhat different assumptions about the timing and nature of the
establishment’s input decisions. Nonetheless, each method assumes that there is some observable proxy variable
that is strictly monotonic in the unobserved productivity shock ω, so that the production function can be re-
written as a function of observable inputs. In our baseline TFP measures, we follow ACF, who assume that
the establishment chooses capital inputs first, labor inputs next, and material inputs last (at time t). Thus,
material inputs depend on the productivity shock ωit as well as on previously-chosen capital and labor inputs:


                                                  mit = ft (wit , kit , lit )                                 (7)

   Assuming that this expression is invertible, and substituting back into the production function yields:


                              yit = βl lit + βk kit + βm mit + βk ft−1 (mit , kit , lit ) + εit               (8)

   ACF show that the coefficients on labor, capital and materials can be recovered through a two-stage esti-
mation process. They also demonstrate that either material inputs, or investment can be used as the proxy for
the productivity shock. In Table 7, we show results that are based on two variants of the ACF method. In both
cases, we estimate a revenue productivity function. The first variant uses petrol as the proxy for the unobserved
productivity shock; we also include the remaining material inputs separately in the production function. The
second variant uses investment as the proxy, and includes both petrol and materials net of petrol as inputs.
    We also test the robustness of our results to the OP and LP estimation methods. In the OP case, we use
investment as the proxy, and include total material inputs in the production function. A drawback of the OP
method is that we only observe positive investment for approximately 55 percent of establishments (and 75
percent of observations in our dataset). Thus, the coefficients on the inputs are estimated based on a subsample
of establishments. Nonetheless, we estimate TFP for all establishments, using the input coefficients that are
estimated on the subset of establishments. In the LP case, we use petrol as the proxy, and include materials
net of petrol in the production function.
   Finally, we estimate TFP using OLS. We note that despite the bias inherent in the OLS procedure, and the
various challenges associated with each of the other procedures, the results for the impact of SCAP on TFP
(shown in Table 8) are fairly robust across each of these different TFP measures.




                                                             79
D.6 Expanded Heterogeneity in Coal Use and Pollution Equipment Investment

                 Table D.6.A: Average Coal Price (Rs./ton) by Industry Ownership Type in 2001
                                                                       Average Coal Price
                                 By 2-Digit Industry:
                                 Iron and Steel                                   3,145
                                 Cement                                           1,811
                                 Other                                            2,238
                                 By Ownership Type:
                                 Central Government                               2,007
                                 State or Local Government                        2,260
                                 Central and Local Government                     2,089
                                 Joint Public                                     1,932
                                 Joint Private                                    1,799
                                 Private                                          1,935
NOTES: This table shows average coal prices (deflated to 1998 Rs) faced by establishments according to different
ownership types in the ASI in 2001, as well as 2-digit industries of interest. Source: ASI

                                 Table D.6.B: Pollution Control Stock by HPI and Size
                                              Establishments        Establishments with     Value Pollution
                                                  in 2001            Pollution Control      Control in 2001
                                                                          in 2001            (Million Rs)

                  Non-SCAP districts
                  HPI x Large                     1,730             627        34%              26,104
                  Not HPI x Large                 5,230             592        32%              3,387
                  HPI x Not large                 2,328             275        15%               802
                  Not HPI x Not large             10,732            367        19%               756
                                                  20,020            1,861                       30,574

                  SCAP districts
                  HPI x Large                      506              159        25%                  1,248
                  Not HPI x Large                 2,414             262        40%                  1,037
                  HPI x Not large                  860              100        15%                   150
                  Not HPI x Not large             4,075             127        20%                   127
                                                  7,754             648                             2,509

NOTES: This table shows the number of establishments used in the main analysis, and pollution control stock
for each subgroup of interest in 2001. Percentages represent the fraction of establishments in each SCAP group
that have pollution control stock. Source: ASI

           Table D.6.C: Shares of Factories, Output and Pollution Control Stock by HPI and Size
                                                      HPI, Large     HPI, Small    Non-HPI, Large     Non-HPI, Small
     %   Share   of   Factories, 2001                   4.33           13.75           16.23              65.70
     %   Share   of   Factories, 2008                   4.63           13.36           19.39              62.61
     %   Share   of   Output, 2001                      35.69           5.96           41.42              16.92
     %   Share   of   Output, 2008                      41.30           5.78           38.92              14.00
     %   Share   of   Pollution Control Stock, 2001     73.62           9.15           14.65               2.58
     %   Share   of   Pollution Control Stock, 2008     76.29           4.60           15.65               3.46

NOTES: This table shows the share of establishments (factories), output, and pollution control stock in each
of the 4 groups listed in the column headings, in 2001 and 2008. Each row sums to 100%. Source: ASI


                                                               80
                 Table D.6.D: Average Change in Pollution Control Stock, 2001 to 2008

                                       Overall    HPI, Large     HPI, Small    Non-HPI, Large      Non-HPI, Small
   Initial Investment                 3,975,047   26,454,616      1,055,515      3,762,510            473,784
   Subsequent Change in Investment      1,309      123,329          -5,721        -23,695               669

NOTES: This table shows establishments’ mean initial investment in pollution control stock, and mean subse-
quent changes, for each of the subgroups listed in the column headings, in 2001 and 2008. Source: ASI



D.7 Effects of Action Plans on HPI Status

                                               (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)
                                              Sorts      No Longer      Large - No       Status
                    VARIABLES                 Out          HPI          Longer HPI       Differs

                    SCAP                   -0.000761       0.00141       -0.000295       -0.0170
                                           (0.00119)      (0.00160)      (0.00247)      (0.0116)

                    Observations            344,584        344,584        115,854       344,584
                    R2                       0.002          0.002          0.001         0.001
                    Establishment FE          No              No            No             No
                    Year FE                   Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
                    HPI-Size-Year FE          No              No            No             No
                    Baseline Mean            0.01            0.01          0.01           0.06
                   NOTES: Dependent variable in column (1) takes a value of 1 if a firm listed
                   a HPI industry as its primary industry in the last period but currently lists
                   a non-HPI industry as its primary industry. The dependent variable in col-
                   umn (2) takes a value of 1 if a firm listed a HPI industry the first year it was
                   observed but currently lists a non-HPI industry as its primary industry. The
                   dependent variable in column (3) is the same as in (2), with the sample re-
                   stricted to large firms. The dependent variable in column (4) takes a value of
                   1 in every period that a firm’s HPI status differs from its status in the first
                   year observed. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in paren-
                   theses. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1.




                                                         81
D.8 Effects of Action Plans on Electricity Use and Fuel Switching

                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)        (11)        (12)
                                                                                                                                                             Log         Log         Log
                                                                                    Log            Log       Log          Fuel        Fuel        Fuel       Fuel        Fuel        Fuel
                                               MWh         MWh          MWh         MWh            MWh       MWh          Bill        Bill        Bill       Bill        Bill        Bill
 VARIABLES                                     DID         DID           NN         DID            DID        NN          DID         DID         NN         DID         DID         NN

 SCAP                                          -724.9                              0.00941                              -0.868*                             0.0204
                                              (673.9)                              (0.0341)                             (0.475)                            (0.0298)
 SCAP X HPI X Large                                       -21,679*      -16,493                  -0.0216     -0.0546                 -13.39      -0.896                 -0.0310     -0.0382
                                                          (11,917)     (12,376)                 (0.0518)     (0.114)                (8.289)     (14.21)                (0.0524)     (0.112)
 SCAP X HPI X Not Large                                  -343.4***       -77.54                -0.0793**      -0.139               -1.076***     -0.268                 -0.0302     -0.0738
                                                           (86.82)      (84.73)                 (0.0390)    (0.0854)                (0.344)     (0.541)                (0.0341)     (0.113)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Large                                     1,560        915.4                    0.0415      -0.139                 -0.305      -0.839                  0.0383      -0.144
                                                           (2,406)      (2,974)                 (0.0402)     (0.116)                (0.739)     (1.481)                (0.0332)     (0.101)
 SCAP X Not HPI X Not Large                                 -10.03        1.168                   0.0229     -0.0107                 0.0338     0.0288                   0.0310      0.0192
                                                           (32.49)      (33.72)                 (0.0438)    (0.0570)                (0.103)     (0.144)                (0.0384)    (0.0502)

 Observations                                 343,325     343,325       88,544     332,336      332,336      87,022     344,584     344,584      88,830    342,386     342,386      88,386
 Number of Establishments                     90,726       90,726       19,152      89,259      89,259       18,986     90,766      90,766       19,172    90,596       90,596      19,139
 R2                                            0.000        0.002        0.001       0.029       0.030        0.043      0.001       0.008        0.008     0.013        0.014       0.017
 Establishment FE                               Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes
 Year FE                                        Yes          No           No          Yes         No           No         Yes         No           No        Yes          No          No
 HPI-Size-Year FE                               No           Yes          Yes         No          Yes          Yes        No          Yes          Yes       No           Yes         Yes
 Baseline Mean                                 4130                                  4183                                10.64                              10.69
 Basline Mean - HPI X Large                                36265        36737                      36265     36737                   62.32       62.83                   62.39       62.90
 Basline Mean - HPI X Not Large                             453          456                        456       459                     2.41       2.44                    2.41        2.44
 Basline Mean - Not HPI x Large                             4966        5051                       4996       5081                   18.10       18.38                   18.17       18.45
 Basline Mean - Not HPI X Not Large                         201          203                        205       207                     1.03       1.05                    1.04        1.05
NOTES: In columns (1)-(3) the dependent variable is electricity consumed, in MWh per year. In columns (4)-(6) the dependent variable is log(MWh consumed). In columns (7)-(9) the
dependent variable is total annual fuel bill, in millions of INR. In columns (10)-(12) the dependent variable is log(total fuel bill). All baseline mean values shown in levels. SCAP is equal
to 1 in any district that is targeted for an Action Plan, in any calendar year during and after the Action Plan announcement, and 0 otherwise. HPI-Size-Year fixed effects are estimated
for each of the four HPI-Size subgroups. Standard errors clustered at the district level, shown in parentheses. *** p≤0.01, ** p≤0.05, * p≤0.1.




                                                                                              82
