                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                DIVORCE: WHAT DOES LEARNING HAVE TO DO WITH IT?

                                           Ioana Marinescu

                                        Working Paper 21761
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21761


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2015




I want to thank Jeff Campbell, Kerwin Charles, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Analia Schlosser and Rob
Shimer for helpful comments on previous versions of this draft. I also want to thank seminar participants
at the University of Chicago, CEPR Ammersee 2008, SOLE 2009, NBER Summer Institute 2009,
ASSA meetings 2014 for useful comments. I gratefully acknowledge support from the Center for Human
Potential and Public Policy, Faculty Development Award. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ioana Marinescu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Divorce: What Does Learning Have to Do with It?
Ioana Marinescu
NBER Working Paper No. 21761
November 2015
JEL No. J12,J63,J64

                                            ABSTRACT

Learning about marriage quality has been proposed as a key mechanism for explaining how the
probability of divorce evolves with marriage duration, and why people often cohabit before getting
married. I develop four theoretical models of divorce, three of which include learning. I use data from
the Survey of Income and Program Participation to test reduced form implications of these models.
The data is inconsistent with models including a substantial amount of learning. On the other hand,
the data is consistent with a model without any learning, but where marriage quality changes over
time.


Ioana Marinescu
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ioanamarinescu@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction

Traditionally, the bride and groom leave the parents’ nest to be married until death tears
them apart. Modern marriages fundamentally differ from this model in that the rate of
divorce is substantial. This raises the key question of why people marry only to divorce
a few years later. The answer must be that something changes over time that makes
divorce preferable to the continuation of the relationship. A number of theories exist
that posit different sources of change as being the drivers of divorce. One theory is that
the outside option of one of the partners can change, and the marriage dissolves when
one of the partners meets a better match (Weiss and Willis, 1997). A second theory is
that one of the aims of marriage is consumption insurance and marriages end when such
insurance fails (Hess, 2004). Finally, a third theory invokes learning: when spouses marry
they are not perfectly informed about their match quality. Instead, they learn about it
over time, and divorce occurs when spouses find out that they are in a bad match. This
theory also offers a reason for why people cohabit before marriage, another key feature
of modern relationships (e.g. Brien, Lee, Lillard and Stern, 2006). In this framework,
cohabitation allows partners to learn about match quality before making a commitment
that is costly to break.
    I argue that the theories explaining why people marry only to divorce a few years
later can be broadly classified into two categories. One theory is that the value of the
relationship relative to the outside option changes over time. The other is that the value of
the relationship does not change over time, but partners’ beliefs about this value change
as they gradually learn about match quality. This paper will show that, empirically,
learning plays little to no role in divorce and that divorce can be fully explained by
changes in the value of the relationship itself. I start with constructing a model that
nests both theories by assuming that match quality follows a random walk and partners
learn about match quality through signals a la Jovanovic (1979). I then derive empirically
testable predictions that can, under some parameter restrictions, distinguish between a
pure learning model (no changes in match quality over time), a pure changes model (no
learning) and a mixed model that includes both learning and changes in match quality.
In order for models to yield starkly different predictions, it is necessary to assume that
there is substantial learning in any of the models that includes learning, i.e. that the
signal of marriage quality observed by couples is noisy enough. Under this assumption
and a number of additional parameter restrictions, we can make the following empirically
testable predictions. First, the divorce hazard increases and then decreases with marriage
duration in the pure learning model or the mixed model, but it monotonically decreases
with duration in the pure changes model. In order to get further predictions, I derive the
impact of observing a signal of low match quality on the divorce hazard. I find that, in
the pure learning model, marriages for which a signal of low match quality is observed
are more likely to terminate even many periods after the signal of low match quality was
observed. In the other models, the impact of observing a signal of low match quality
declines to zero as time goes by: after enough time has elapsed, marriages for which a
signal of low match quality was observed at some time in the past are no more likely to
terminate than marriages for which no such signal was observed. A second prediction
using a signal of low match quality is that in the pure learning model, the impact of a
signal of low match quality on the divorce hazard monotonically decreases with marriage
duration. In contrast, in the pure changes model, the impact of a signal of low match
quality on the divorce hazard monotonically increases with marriage duration. Finally,
in the mixed model, the impact of a signal of low match quality on the divorce hazard
decreases and then increases with marriage duration.
   My empirical analysis uses monthly longitudinal data on married and cohabiting
couples from the 1990-2004 waves of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP). I use job loss (either being laid off or getting fired) as a signal of low match quality.
Indeed, spouses care about economic success (e.g. Hitsch et al., 2010). Additionally,
job loss has a negative impact on subsequent earnings, unemployment (Gibbons and
Katz, 1991) and survival (Sullivan and von Wachter, 2009). Importantly, job loss is in
fact associated with an increased probability of divorce (Charles and Stephens, 2004).
Using the tests outlined above, I find that the data is most consistent with the pure
changes model. Substantively, I find that the divorce hazard monotonically decreases
with marriage duration and that the impact of a discharge for cause on the divorce
hazard is monotonically increasing with duration1 . Additionally, I find that a job loss
that occurred more than a year ago has no significant impact on current divorce. One
may question the assumption that job loss is simply a signal of low match quality: what
if job loss has a causal effect and actually decreases match quality just as much for good
as for bad marriages? I use an alternative learning model that embodies this assumption.
I cannot reject that this model is incorrect. Overall, in two of the three tests I use, the
predictions of the pure learning model are not supported against the null of no effect,
while in the third case the coefficient is significant and wrongly signed. Thus, the pure
learning model is a poor fit for the data. By contrast, the predictions of the pure changes
model are never rejected. I conclude that the pure changes model is the best candidate
to explain the divorce hazard.
    This paper makes three key contributions. First, while the learning model has been
widely used to explain divorce and cohabitation, I show that learning plays at best a
modest role in accounting for how divorce probabilities change with marriage duration.
On the other hand, a model that assumes that match quality is perfectly observed and
follows a random walk can fully explain the data. This finding can also make sense of
the fact that many papers fail to find that cohabitation unambiguously and significantly
decreases the divorce hazard (see e.g. Lillard et al., 1995, and Reinhold, 2010), a key
implication of the learning model. Beyond the fact that there is selection into cohabitation
(Axinn et al., 1992, Lillard et al., 1995, and Reinhold, 2010), learning may simply not play
an important role in marriage. The second contribution of this paper is to the literature
on the impact of job loss on divorce. While it is known that job loss is associated with a

   1
    As will be discussed below, it is likely that other studies have underestimated the divorce hazard at
low durations because no high frequency panel data was available. Underestimating the hazard at low
durations will tend to yield an overall hazard that increases initially with relationship duration.
higher divorce hazard, it has not yet been clear to what extent this relationship could be
interpreted causally. The results of this paper are consistent with job loss having a causal
impact on divorce. For a given belief about match quality prior to job loss, marriages
in which a job loss occurs are more likely to end in divorce. At the same time, job loss
does not occur randomly: instead, the evidence is consistent with lower quality marriages
being also more likely to experience job loss, and in particular a discharge for cause. The
third contribution of this paper is to provide a model of relationship separation that
can be applied to other relationships such as employment relationships or commercial
contracts. The model yields empirically testable predictions that can allow us to learn
about the role of learning and shocks in other domains.
   There is a limited literature in economics that investigates the impact of labor market
shocks on the probability of divorce or separation. Weiss and Willis (1997) look at the
impact of unexpected wage gains on divorce and find a negative impact for men’s wage
gains and a positive one for women’s wage gains. This supports the idea that women
prefer men with higher earning potential. Charles and Stephens (2004) find that the
probability of divorce increases when either spouse is laid off (with a stronger effect for
men). Moreover, a layoff has a stronger effect than a plant closing. Charles and Stephens
(2004) speculate that what matters is the information conveyed by job loss about the
fitness of the partner as a mate rather than purely economic factors. Plant closure also
significantly increases the probability of divorce (Rege, Telle and Votruba, 2007), which
suggests that job loss has a causal impact on divorce.
   There is a much larger literature in psychology that addresses marital functioning and
its relationship to economic factors, even though this literature does not focus specifically
on the impact of job loss. Economic stress decreases marital satisfaction, and this is in
part due to worse marital functioning, i.e. worse communication and the like (Conger et
al. 1999). Kinnunen and Feldt (2004) show that even in a country like Finland, where
unemployment benefits are very generous, the longer the husband stays unemployed the
more likely his wife is to report increased conflict and decreased common interests.
   This paper also relates to a theoretical literature that explains the evolution of the
hazard of relationship separation in various contexts. With respect to job separation,
Jovanovic (1979) develops the classical learning model and Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994) explain job separation through the occurrence of random productivity shocks. A
series of subsequent papers have further developed theory and tested it in the context of
job separation (Farber, 1994, Nagypal, 2007, Marinescu, 2009, Kahn and Lange, 2010).
In the case of marital separation, Brien, Lee, Lillard and Stern (2006) develop a marriage
model inspired by Jovanovic (1979) and structurally estimate the model, finding that
cohabitation is explained by both the need to learn about potential partners and by the
desire to hedge against future bad shocks. Finally, an extension of the Jovanovic (1979)
learning model has also been developed and tested for firm learning in the first year
of a firm’s life (Abbring and Campbell, 2005): there is no evidence for Jovanovic-style
learning in this context. With the exception of Farber (1994), all of the papers that test
theory empirically use structural estimation. This paper shows how one can use intuitive
and easy to implement reduced-form tests to test for the presence of substantial learning.
Additionally, to perform these tests, one only needs a crude signal of low match quality:
a dummy variable is sufficient. More detailed data is of course in principle desirable but
it will tend to be missing for some applications, and in particular in the case of marriage.
Indeed, there is to my knowledge no high-frequency data that tracks beliefs about match
quality in marriage.
   Finally, this paper relates to a literature in econometrics that addresses the issue of
causality in duration models. The question is whether some treatment is causally related
to duration, or whether the impact of the treatment is due to unobserved heterogeneity.
Abbring and van den Berg (2003) develop empirical tests that are similar in spirit to
what I propose here. A contribution of my paper is to show how these econometric tests
can be grounded in microeconomic theory based on agents’ optimizing behavior.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a theory of
marriage duration. Section 3 discusses the main empirical results. Section 4 discusses
some further empirical results and robustness tests, and section 5 concludes.



2       Theory

2.1     Model specification

The model analyzes the decision of one of the partners in a relationship to continue that
relationship or end it. To make the discussion more intuitive, I will assume that the
woman is the partner who decides whether to separate. The problem is of course sym-
metric for the man2 . I assume that individuals are matched randomly3 , which implicitly
assumes that there are search frictions.
    The woman entering a new marriage does not know the exact value of such a marriage.
The quality of the marriage, or match quality, is the flow utility that the woman gets
from the marriage: monetary benefits, companionship, love, children, etc. Thus, the
quality of a marriage is multi-dimensional. To simplify the modeling, I assume that this
multi-dimensional marriage quality is reducible to a single index. The woman holds a
prior belief about the distribution of quality in the population of potential relationships
(partners). This prior P (q0 ) is normally distributed with mean q̄ and variance σ02 . Denote
by qk the (true) match quality at length k. As long as the marriage continues, match
quality is assumed to evolve over time according to the following AR(1) process:


                                      qk = ρqk−1 + c + qk−1                                      (1)


where qk ∼ N (0, σp ). c is a deterministic drift. For simplicity, I further assume that ρ = 1
and c = 0, so that the process is a random walk4 . At each period, the woman observes a
noisy signal of the quality of the partner. The signal of match quality is an observation

    2
     If utility is transferable, then the woman and the man will always agree on the separation, so it
does not matter which point of view we consider.
   3
     On p. 21 below, I discuss an extension of the model where marriage is preceded by a period of
cohabitation, and thus only better matches go from cohabitation to marriage.
   4
     Assuming some slightly smaller ρ and higher c does not affect the qualitative results.
zk defined as:
                                                   zk = qk + zk                                              (2)

where zk ∼ N (0, σobs ). The best estimate q̂k of qk given all observations z1 ...zk is fully
determined by the Kalman filter solutions (see Arulampalam et al. (2001)).
   Figure 1 shows the timing of the woman’s decision process. At every time step5 , the
woman has two possible actions a: she can continue the current marriage (a = C) or
separate from the current partner, pay a separation cost f , and begin a new marriage
with another partner6 (a = S). The woman chooses one of these actions depending on
her current belief and the length of the marriage k. Define a policy π, which gives for
each belief and marriage length the action to be taken. Define the Q function Qπ (q̂k , a)
as the expected return of taking action a today and then following the policy π in the
future. The value function V π (q̂k ) gives the current and future rewards of the woman
as a function of current belief, assuming that the woman follows policy π from now on.
The optimal policy maximizes V π (q̂k ), and gives rise to the optimal value function V ∗ (q̂k ).
The optimal action value function Q∗ is defined as a function of the optimal value V ∗ (q̂k ):

                                          X
                 Q∗ (q̂k , C) = q̂k + δ           P (q̂k+1 |q̂k )V ∗ (q̂k+1 )                                 (3)
                                          q̂k+1
                                              X
                 Q∗ (q̂k , S) = q̄ − f + δ              P (q̂1 |q̄)V ∗ (q̂1 )                                 (4)
                                                  q̂1
                                                                                X
                             = Vnew − f, where Vnew = q̄ + δ                          P (q̂1 |q̄)V ∗ (q̂1 )
                                                                                q̂1


The optimal value is given by the Bellman equation:


                                      V ∗ (q̂k ) = max Q∗ (q̂k , a)                                           (5)
                                                          a∈[C,S]



Thus, if the woman decides to continue with the current relationship, she gets the ex-

   5
     I assume that the length of the marriage is limited to some length kmax .
   6
     The new marriage begins instantly and no one remains unmatched. The costs of switching partners
are captured by f in this model.
pected value of the marriage quality in the current period plus any future rewards. If she
instead decides to end the marriage, she gets the average value of a new match randomly
                                                                         7
drawn from the prior distribution plus any future rewards                    from that new match8 , and
has to pay f . The cost f could depend on marriage duration k but, to keep the model
parsimonious, I abstract from such a dependency here 9 . The separation cost f covers
the direct cost of ending the current relationship, such as a paying for a divorce lawyer.
It also covers the costs of beginning a new marriage, such as fees to enroll in online dating
sites.
    In this framework, the optimal policy followed by the woman is uniquely defined by
τ (k), the belief such that the woman is indifferent between continuing and separating
from her partner at marriage length k. In other words, the threshold for separation τ (k)
is defined by the equalization of Q functions for the actions “continue” (equation (3)) and
“separate” (equation (4)). To compute the optimal values and policy, one fixes parameter
values and uses a version of the “value iteration” algorithm10 , which has been shown to
converge to the solution of a Partially Observed Markov Decision Problem such as the
one we have here (see Hauskrecht(2002)).
    Note that the planning horizon of the woman is assumed to be infinite. This means
that the woman lives indefinitely; or alternatively, the woman’s retirement from the

    7
      The definition of the reward function is compatible with a Nash bargaining solution where the two
partners split the surplus, so that, while the marriage continues, each partner gets a fixed share. Suppose
that 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 is the share of the rewards from the marriage received by the woman. The reward of the
woman would then be αq̂k if continuing and αq̄ if separating; but this change is not substantial since it
simply amounts to rescaling the distribution of match quality.
    8
      Because the woman needs to divorce in order to sample another partner, this model does not allow for
on-the-marriage search (as in e.g. Burdett et al., 2004). The woman divorces if Q∗ (q̂k , C)−Q∗ (q̂k , S) < 0,
so what matters is the comparison between the current relationship and Vnew . With on-the-marriage
search, Vnew would change over time as new outside offers would arrive. Empirically, without information
on outside offers, it would be hard to determine whether divorce occurred because of changes in q̂k or
Vnew , and therefore hard to test for on-the-marriage search as a cause of divorce distinct from changes
in beliefs about match quality.
    9
      In fact, one can assume any deterministic relationship between f and k without further technical
complications in solving the model.
   10                                                         0
      Briefly, one starts with an arbitrary value for Vnew , Vnew . At the last period of the marriage, the
                                                      0
marriage ends, and so the value of the marriage is Vnew −f . One then computes the value of the marriage
at the period prior to the last period, and so on recursively until the first period. One gets a value for
                                   1                                                   1
the marriage at the first period Vnew . One starts the recursion again with Vnew = Vnew    at the last period
                                             n       n−1
of the marriage, and one does this until Vnew ≈ Vnew .
marriage market is at some date so far away in the future that given the discount factor,
it does not play any role in the woman’s current decisions. The model may thus not be
adequate for explaining the behavior of older women.
   The model developed here embeds two polar cases. If σp = 0, match quality is
constant over the duration of the marriage. In that case, and assuming further that
σobs > 0, the model is essentially identical to Jovanovic (1979): it is a model of learning
about match quality, or “pure learning model”. If σobs = 0 and σp > 0, match quality
is perfectly observed but evolves over time. One example of such a model is Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994), where job destruction is generated by idiosyncratic shocks to job
productivity. In the context of a couple’s separation, if σobs = 0 and σp > 0, then
separation is only due to changes in marriage quality. This is a “pure changes model”.
When σobs > 0 and σp > 0, this is a “mixed model” with both learning and changes
to marriage quality, i.e. the woman learns from noisy observations about a marriage
quality that is constantly evolving. Because the small literature on marriage duration
(e.g. Svarer, 2004) proposes the pure learning model as an explanation of the probability
of marriage dissolution as a function of marriage length, this paper takes that model as
a starting point. The question is then whether one can do better in explaining empirical
data about marriage duration by using changes in marriage quality.


2.2     Empirically observable outcomes

I discuss three empirically observable outcomes that can be derived from the model. I
will then discuss how these outcomes differ depending on model parameters.


2.2.1   Divorce hazard

The theoretical hazard of separation is the result of infinitely many women confronted
with the same separation decision problem; it summarizes the average separation behavior
of women over marriage lengths. One can compute the theoretical separation hazard
once the threshold for separation is known. Note that at marriage length zero, when no
observation has been made yet, q̂0 = q̄ for all matches. For all women, the belief is the
same as the prior. Let pk (q̂k ) be the density of women who hold a belief with mean q̂k
at length k, given that they follow the optimal policy embodied in τ (k). The hazard of
separation at length k, h(k), can be computed recursively, starting at k = 1 and using the
distributional assumptions. The initial values for the distribution of women’s expected
beliefs about match quality are:
                                      
                                       1 if q̂0 = q̄
                                      
                          p0 (q̂0 ) =                                                   (6)
                                       0 otherwise
                                      
                                      X
                          p1 (q̂1 ) =    p0 (q̂0 )P (q̂1 |q̂0 ) = P (q̂1 |q̄)           (7)
                                       q̂0



The hazard of separation at length k, h(k), can then be computed recursively, starting
at k = 1:

                                               q̂k =τ (k)
                                                 X
                                    h(k) =                  pk (q̂k )                   (8)
                                              q̂k =q̂min

                                  pk (q̂k ) = 0 if q̂k ≤ τ (k)                          (9)
                                              pk (q̂k )
                                 pk (q̂k ) = P                                         (10)
                                               pk (q̂k )
                                             X
                            pk+1 (q̂k+1 ) =      pk (q̂k )P (q̂k+1 |q̂k )              (11)
                                                q̂k



Equation (10) insures that the mass of women is always normalized to 1. P (q̂k+1 |q̂k ), the
distribution of possible beliefs at marriage duration k given the belief at k − 1, can be
computed given distributional assumptions. Once the divorce hazard is computed, one
can analyze how it changes with marriage duration. It is to be expected that different
model parameters will yield different shapes for the divorce hazard.
2.2.2    Impact of job loss on divorce hazard as a function of marriage duration

Empirically, the divorce hazard is the key observable outcome. But there is only so much
information one can extract from a single divorce hazard. Further information can be
provided by examining the divorce hazards of population subgroups that differ in ways
that are interpretable within the model. Specifically, we can analyze the divorce hazard
for couples that received a negative signal about marriage quality versus couples that did
not receive such a negative signal. We can further analyze how the impact of a negative
signal about marriage quality changes with marriage duration.
    To use a concrete and empirically observable case, let’s consider a husband’s job
loss as a signal of match quality. Job loss can be interpreted as information about the
quality of the husband, since a job loss suggests that his future earnings will be lower. In
the model, I do not explicitly model husband quality as separate from marriage quality
because there is no good information on the flow utility from marriage in the data I will
be using. Instead, I assume that, if the quality of the husband decreases, then the quality
of the marriage also decreases11 . Thus, the husband’s job loss represents bad news about
the quality of the marriage as evaluated by the wife. However, job loss is just a signal
because the wife cannot perfectly observe how much the husband is to blame for the job
loss. If the husband has little responsibility in the job loss, his future economic prospects
are less likely to be negatively affected.
    Given the assumptions of the model, a negative observation about the current mar-
riage does not affect the value of alternative marriages. Therefore, job loss always de-
creases the value of the current marriage relative to the outside option Vnew , making
divorce more likely. The assumption that job loss does not affect the outside option
should hold for the wife. However, the husband’s job loss is likely to affect his quality as
perceived by potential mates and hence his outside option. Therefore, the husband may
be willing to transfer some utility to his wife so as to avoid divorce. In order for a bad

   11
     A job loss could also affect the quality of the interactions between the partners by increasing marital
disputes, but this is not observed in the data. Whether the job loss affects the husband’s earnings or the
quality of the interaction between the partners, it results in a decrease in marriage quality.
observation about the current marriage to have its full effect on the probability of divorce,
it must be the case that utility is not transferable, or that job loss is bad enough that
the husband cannot compensate the wife for the decline in the value of their marriage.
    I model job loss in the following specific way. I assume that if the man experiences
a job loss at marriage length k, then the woman observes zk < z ∗ , where z ∗ is some low
marriage quality threshold (this threshold has to be lower than the mean of the prior,
i.e. the average quality of a new marriage). The idea is that a job loss is a negative
signal about marital quality, but I do not take a stance about exactly how bad it is; I
just assume that it is below some threshold. Since q̂k−1 and zk uniquely determine q̂k
given distributional assumptions, I define a function g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ ) that gives, for each q̂k−1 ,
the value of q̂k corresponding to the observation of z ∗ at period k. Since for a given q̂k−1 ,
q̂k increases in zk , zk < z ∗ can be rewritten as q̂k < g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ ). The probability that a
match of quality q̂k−1 is dissolved at k given zk < z ∗ is then:


                                 P (q̂k < τ (k)|q̂k−1 , q̂k < g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ ))


Using the definition of conditional probabilities and Bayes’ rule:

                                                           P (q̂k < min(g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ ), τ (k))|q̂k−1 )
         P (q̂k < τ (k)|q̂k−1 , q̂k < g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ )) =
                                                                  P (q̂k < g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ )|q̂k−1 )

It is important to realize two things with respect to the equation above. First, I assume
that job loss (zk < z ∗ ) happens at period k and make no specific assumption about
whether job loss occurred earlier than k. The history of observations up to zk−1 is simply
assumed to be consistent with the distributional assumptions and the optimal strategy of
the woman. Second, the denominator of the equation above shows that the probability of
job loss at period k depends on estimated marriage quality at period k − 1. This allows
for job loss to occur more often in low quality marriages: since zk = qk + zk (see equation
2), it is straightforward to see that observing zk < z ∗ is more likely if qk is low, and hence
if q̂k is low.
   The hazard hb given a bad observation zk < z ∗ can then be written as:

                                                         Pq̂k =min(g(q̂k−1 ,z∗ ),τ (k))
                                 X                          q̂k =q̂min                    P (q̂k |q̂k−1 )
                  hb (k) =               pk−1 (q̂k−1 )         Pq̂k =g(q̂k−1 ,z∗ )                                         (12)
                                 q̂k−1                             q̂k =q̂min        P (q̂k |q̂k−1 )

Similarly, the hazard hg given a relatively good observation zk > z ∗ is:

                                                                             Pq̂k =τ (k)
                       X                                                         q̂ =g(q̂       ,z ∗ )   P (q̂k |q̂k−1 )
            hg (k) =           I[g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ ) ≤ τ (k)]pk−1 (q̂k−1 ) Pq̂kk =q̂max
                                                                                 k−1
                                                                                                                           (13)
                       q̂k−1                                                     q̂k =g(q̂k−1   ,z ∗ )   P (q̂k |q̂k−1 )


where I is an indicator function. The indicator function I is necessary because the hazard
is positive only if g(q̂k−1 , z ∗ ) ≤ τ (k); otherwise not observing a job loss guarantees that
no divorce occurs at k.
   Empirically we can estimate log[hb (k)/hg (k)], i.e. the impact of job loss on the divorce
hazard, and we can examine how this impact varies with marriage duration.


2.2.3   Impact of job loss on the divorce hazard as a function of time elapsed
        since job loss

So far, I have examined the effect of observing a job loss at length k on separation at
length k. However, it is also interesting to ask how this effect evolves over time: relative
to those marriages that did not experience a job loss at length k, how much more likely
are marriages that did experience a job loss at length k to dissolve at lengths k + 1, k + 2,
..., k + n? One can answer this question by computing the hazard of separation at lengths
k + 1,..., k + n separately for those marriages that did experience a job loss at k and those
that did not. I can then analyze how the impact of job loss varies with time elapsed since
job loss.


2.2.4   Causality, learning and job loss

When estimating econometric models, one often asks if some variable is “causally” related
to the outcome of interest. In this specific case, one may ask whether job loss is causal
in generating divorce. In the models discussed above, job loss is causal in the sense that
observing job loss at the current period increases the divorce hazard for a given belief at
the previous period. However, it is important to point out that in the models discussed
above, the impact of job loss on divorce is also due to selection in the sense that job loss
is more likely to happen in bad marriages. Indeed, since I formalize job loss as zk < z∗,
and zk = qk + zk , then clearly the probability of observing zk < z ∗ is higher when actual
match quality qk is lower. In that sense, job loss in these models does not have a purely
causal effect. Job loss happens more often to worse quality matches, and it further causes
them to dissolve.
   Since the impact of job loss on divorce in the models discussed above is not purely
causal, it is useful to formulate an alternative model where the impact of job loss is purely
causal, i.e. where job loss is not correlated with match quality. I start with the model
above in the pure learning case (σp = 0) and add some shocks that are independent of
marriage quality. Call this model “learning with shocks”. Assume that there is a two-
states Markov process and the marriage can be either in the “job loss” state, or in the
“no job loss” state. There are two transition probabilities, p1 and p2 , that govern the
transitions to and from the “job loss” state. Importantly, these transition probabilities are
independent of match quality. Assume that the optimal action value function if continue
Q∗ (q̂k , C) is defined as a function of the optimal value V ∗ (q̂k , j), where j identifies whether
the match is in the “no job loss” (j = 1) or “job loss” (j = 2) state:

                              X
  Q∗ (q̂k , 1, C) = q̂k + δ           P (q̂k+1 |q̂k )(1 − p1 )V ∗ (q̂k+1 , 1) + P (q̂k+1 |q̂k )p1 V ∗ (q̂k+1 , 2) (14)
                              q̂k+1
                                      X
  Q∗ (q̂k , 2, C) = q̂k − b + δ               P (q̂k+1 |q̂k )(1 − p2 )V ∗ (q̂k+1 , 2) + P (q̂k+1 |q̂k )p2 V ∗ (q̂k+1 , 1)
                                      q̂k+1

                                                                                                                      (15)


where b > 0 is a constant that embodies the per period cost of job loss.
   Assume further that all marriages start in the “no job loss” state. Thus, the optimal
action value function if separating is the same as in the pure learning model. This model
can be solved numerically just as the models discussed above. Note that it is similar
in spirit to the mixed model since it includes both learning and changes in the value
of the marriage over time. However, it differs from the mixed model in that job loss is
a transitory negative shock to the rewards from marriage that is independent of match
quality.


2.3     Distinguishing between models on the basis of empirically

        observable outcomes

2.3.1      Calibration: reference parameters

I start with a reference case for the parameters. When empirical evidence is available, I
calibrate the parameters, and I otherwise choose reasonable values using considerations
specific to each parameter. Below, I also check how sensitive the results are to the chosen
calibration by exploring a range of alternative values.
    I use up to 50 periods of marriage, and the period is to be understood as a year.
Consequently, I choose a value of 0.8 for the discount factor, consistent with empirical
evidence about the yearly subjective discount factor (Frederick et al., 2002). The cost of
divorce is best understood relative to the per period reward of an average new marriage
(mean of prior). If we greatly simplify and assume that the benefits and costs of marriage
are mostly financial, the empirical literature suggests that women typically experience
a 30% to 40% adjusted income drop in the aftermath of divorce (Smock, Manning, and
Gupta 1999, Gadalla 2008). Gadalla (2008) shows that the income drop persists for at
least 5 years post divorce12 . If we assume a 35% income drop spread over 5 years and
discounted using the 0.8 dicount factor, this amounts to a present value of 94% of pre-

  12
      There is some debate about whether this income drop is causally related to the divorce or is due to
the selection of women into divorce. Bedard and Deschnes (2005) use an instrumental variable strategy
to show that the household income of ever divorced women is in fact higher than the household income
of never divorced married women. However, these results may reflect the fact that the negative impact
of divorce fades over time. In my calibration exercise, I am interested in the overall cost of divorce, not
in its long-term impact on income. Therefore, even if the cost of divorce in the long run is negligeable,
short-run costs can still be quite high.
divorce income, i.e. close to the income of a year of marriage pre-divorce. Using this
calculation, it seems that a value of 30 is reasonable since it assumes that the cost of
divorce is equal to the value of a year of a new marriage. It is likely that a value of 30
for the cost of divorce underestimates the total cost. Indeed, the calculation only takes
into account income, but other costs exist such as health costs (Amato, 2010), and they
are quite difficult to quantify. On the other hand, the financial cost of divorce for men
is lower than for women (Gadalla, 2008). While men are less likely to initiate divorce
(Kalmijn and Poortman, 2006), some do, and therefore a value of 30 for the divorce cost
represents a reasonable compromise between the costs of divorce for women and men.
   The reference values for σobs and σp were chosen with the view that they should
represent substantial learning and substantial changes in match quality. Given that the
standard deviation of the prior is 5, how large these parameters are needs to be gauged
in reference to that value. I chose σobs = 10 for the reference case, which represents
substantial learning in the sense that the signal has a standard deviation that is twice as
high as the standard deviation of the prior. For the models with changes in relationship
quality, I chose σp = 5, which is indeed a high value as the standard deviation of shocks
to match quality is as large as the standard deviation of the prior. Values that are much
larger than this are not empirically plausible. Indeed, if the standard deviation of the
shocks to match quality is much larger than that of the prior, then your average new
husband has a non negligible chance of becoming worse in the second year of marriage
than the very worst husband was in the first year of marriage. Such a rapid change does
not seem plausible.
   For the learning with shocks model, I assume that being in the job loss state takes
10 units off the quality of the marriage, which is a 33% decline at the mean of the prior.
Given the high costs of job loss, such a magnitude seem plausible. Then, in keeping
with the empirical data described below, I choose transition parameters implying that
job loss is fairly uncommon (p1 = 0.05). I further assume that the job loss state is
persistent (p2 = 0.1), consistent with the empirical literature showing the long-term
negative consequences of job loss (Gibbons and Katz, 1991, Sullivan and von Wachter,
2009).
    These reference parameters being fixed (see Table 1 for the full list), we can analyze
how different model parameters impact empirically observable outcomes.


2.3.2    Outcomes in the reference case

As is well known since Jovanovic (1979), the pure learning model generates a divorce
hazard that increases and then decreases with marriage duration (see Figure 2). The
initial increase is due to the fact that initially match quality is not well known and, as
long as separation costs are not zero, it is worth waiting to gain more information. As
sufficient information accumulates, more and more of the relatively bad matches dissolve,
which increases the separation hazard. Eventually, the hazard decreases as continuing
marriages are dominated by higher quality matches.
    By contrast, the pure changes model generates a hazard that decreases monotonically
with marriage duration (Figure 2). The intuition for why the hazard decreases mono-
tonically in the pure changes model is as follows. The starting distribution of marriage
quality is normal. Because there is a divorce cost, the divorce threshold is to the left of
the mean of the prior distribution; the larger the divorce cost, the more the threshold is
to the left as worse marriages are allowed to continue. Over time, the quality distribution
of surviving marriages is continuously being truncated from the left as marriages cross
the divorce threshold. At the same time, the random walk process for the marriage qual-
ity flattens the distribution of quality in surviving marriages: some marriages become
better, some worse, but all are moving away from the mean of the prior distribution.
Because of this flattening of the quality distribution, the share of marriages that are close
to the divorce threshold becomes smaller and smaller over time, so the divorce hazard
decreases13 .
    Like the pure learning model, the mixed model and the learning with shock model
   13
     In the reference case, the divorce cost is low enough for the divorce hazard to monotonically decrease.
If the divorce cost is high enough, then the hazard can also initially increase in the pure changes model.
generate a hazard that increases and then decreases with marriage duration (Figure 2).
   Figure 3 plots the impact of job loss on the divorce hazard (log hazard ratio log[hb (k)/hg (k)])
under the various models under consideration. In the pure learning model, the log hazard
ratio decreases very rapidly and then more slowly as marriage duration increases. Ob-
serving a job loss early on in the marriage is very informative about marital quality, but
becomes less informative as more information is gathered. In the pure changes model,
the log hazard ratio increases with marriage duration. The intuition for the increase in
the hazard ratio is as follows. First note that, in the pure changes model, the impact of
job loss relative to no job loss is largest for “mediocre” marriages. Very bad marriages
are quite likely to end regardless of whether or not a job loss occurs: since marital quality
follows a random walk, a marriage that is in the vicinity of the divorce threshold is likely
to be dissolved soon. Similarly, for marriages that are really far away from the thresh-
old, divorce is unlikely whether or not job loss occurs. The reason why the log hazard
ratio increases over time in the pure changes model is that the proportion of mediocre
marriages increases. At low marriage durations, the distribution of estimated marital
quality is roughly a truncated normal. Truncation is driven by the divorce threshold and
occurs to the left of the mode of the distribution: because there are positive divorce costs,
the threshold for separation is lower than mean marriage quality for new partners. At
low marriage durations, the bulk of marriages are therefore far away from the threshold.
However, as shocks are added to marital quality, the distribution becomes more spread
out, and so the proportion of marriages that are “mediocre” increases. This increase
in the proportion of mediocre marriages increases the risk of divorce in the case where
the marriage is affected by job loss. Therefore, the impact of job loss on divorce in-
creases with marriage duration. In the mixed model, the log hazard ratio first decreases
with marriage duration, then subsequently increases again. The initial decrease is due to
learning (σobs > 0) while the subsequent increase is due to changes in marriage quality
(σp > 0). To check for the roles of learning versus changes in match quality, one can vary
σobs and σp in the mixed model. Thus, one can see that the initial decrease in the hazard
ratio is stronger with a higher σobs , i.e. when there is more scope for the woman to keep
learning new things about the marriage as time goes by. The subsequent increase in the
hazard ratio is stronger as σp increases14 . Finally, Figure 3 shows that the log hazard
ratio decreases and then increases with marriage duration in the learning with shocks
model, a prediction which is similar to the prediction for the mixed model.
    Figure 4 plots the log ratio of the hazard if a bad signal was observed at length 5 (i.e.
if job loss occurred), to the hazard if no bad signal was observed at length 5. This is not
defined in the pure changes model as formulated above. Since the signal is a perfectly
accurate reflection of true marriage quality, those marriages that get a bad signal at
tenure k dissolve immediately if the signal is below the threshold, and so there are no
marriages left to be dissolved at k + 1 or later. To get a more interesting prediction, I
allow the signal to be noisy, i.e. instead of representing job loss by zk < z ∗ , I represent
it by zk < z ∗ + k , where k is independently normally distributed with mean 0 and a
standard deviation of 5. This adds a lot to the computational burden since one must
loop over a discretized list of values for k . On the other hand, there is little gain to this
extension in terms of qualitative results15 . For this reason, I only use this extension of
the pure changes model here. I call this model “pure changes model with noise”.
    In Figure 4, the log hazard ratio is plotted against time elapsed since the job loss
occurred. The figure shows that in all models the hazard ratio is largest in the periods
immediately following period 5. The mixed model and the pure changes model yield
very similar results. They key difference between the pure learning model and the mixed
model or the pure changes model is how the log hazard ratio evolves over time. In the
pure learning model, the hazard for those marriages that got a bad observation at 5
remains larger than the hazard for those marriages that did not get a bad observation at
5. In contrast, in the mixed model or the pure changes with noise model, the difference

  14
      An increase in σp increases both hb and hg . However, while σp increases hb by roughly the same
amount at all marriage durations, σp increases hg much more at low marriage durations. This is what
drives the steeper increase in the hazard ratio hb /hg when σp increases.
   15
      I verified that the qualitative results in cases other than the pure changes model are unchanged for
a range of parameters.
between the two hazards decreases quickly with time. These qualitative conclusions do
not depend on the choice of k = 5. The intuition for these results is as follows. In the pure
learning model, the true quality of the marriage is fixed. As a result, marriages that get
a bad observation at 5 are on average worse than those that do not, and this difference
persists over time. For both those marriages that get a bad observation at 5 and the
others, learning continues until hazards converge to zero. However, until then, there will
be more separations among marriages that get a bad observation at 5 because they are
worse on average. In the mixed model or the pure changes with noise model, marriage
quality changes continuously. As in the pure learning model, those marriages that get a
bad observation at 5 are on average worse than those that do not. However, since true
marriage quality evolves according to a random walk after length 5, their quality at length
5 is less and less informative about their present quality as time goes by, and after some
time the two groups no longer differ in their separation hazards16 . In the learning with
shocks model, the log hazard ratio decreases with time elapsed since job loss as for all
the other models. However, what is interesting here is that the log hazard ratio becomes
smaller than zero when enough time has elapsed since job loss occurred (see Figure 4).
In other terms, when enough time has elapsed since job loss, the hazard of divorce for
those couples that experienced a job loss at k is smaller than the hazard of divorce for
those that did not experience such a job loss at k. This is quite intuitive: since job loss
is transitory and independent of match quality in the pure learning with shocks model,
those couples that survive after experiencing job loss have on average a higher match
quality than those that did not experience a job loss. This prediction differentiates this
model from all the models I examined above.
   Table 2 summarizes empirical predictions that can allow us to distinguish between
alternative models, assuming that parameters are as in the reference case.
   To conclude this examination of the predictions of the different models in the reference
case, I introduce a pure learning model with cohabitation, and examine whether the
  16
     This also holds if the AR(1) process is stationary. Indeed, since all marriages converge to the
long-run mean, past history becomes less and less relevant.
predictions remain the same as in the pure learning model. Indeed, some learning may
take place prior to marriage, during the courtship phase or during cohabitation. Does
this change the predictions of the pure learning model? The pure learning model can be
extended to allow for cohabitation by assuming that the first period of the relationship has
a lower separation cost (“cohabitation”, f = 5) than the subsequent periods (“marriage”,
f = 30). With these assumptions, I can show that the predictions of this model for
the three outcomes in Table 2 are qualitatively identical to the predictions of the pure
learning model. A quantitative difference is that, when allowing for cohabitation, the
divorce hazard is lower than in the pure learning model: this is intuitive since some
of the worst relationships are already terminated at the cohabitation stage. So, even
if we allow for learning during cohabitation and prior to marriage, and hence selection
into marriage, this does not affect the qualitative predictions of the pure learning model
during the marriage.


2.3.3   Sensitivity to changes in reference parameters

To assess how robust differences between models are to changes in parameters, I have
computed model outcomes for a large number of alternative parameter combinations.
Table 3 lists the parameter ranges I have explored. For the standard deviation of the
observation and of the process, I have chosen a fairly small step starting from 0, so that
we can see how predictions change starting from no learning or no changes in match
quality. For the standard deviation of the observation, I chose twice the reference case
as the upper bound. For the standard deviation of the process, I have also chosen twice
the reference case as the upper bound. For the divorce cost, I have explored a slightly
lower value than in the reference case (I did not look at even smaller values because such
a low divorce cost is inconsistent with empirical data), and also several higher values,
up to twice the divorce cost in the reference case. Finally, for the threshold for a bad
observation, I have chosen a broad range of values within the range 0 to 30; indeed, since
a bad observation must imply that the relationship is below average, this threshold has
to be below 30.
   Table 4 shows which parameter ranges (within the range of parameters explored in
Table 3) preserve the same predictions as in the reference case. For each model, out-
come and parameter, the table shows which parameter range preserves the reference case
prediction assuming that all other parameters remain the same as in the reference case.
There are two key lessons to draw from the table. First, when the standard deviation
of the observation is small enough, most predictions no longer hold for models including
learning. The only prediction that is not sensitive to a decrease in the standard deviation
of the observation is the prediction for outcome 2 for the pure learning model. Second,
if divorce costs are high enough, some predictions no longer hold for the pure changes
model and the mixed model.
   Since I am interested in comparing empirically observable outcomes of these mod-
els, the relevant question is whether we can still distinguish between models when the
parameters are outside the range that is compatible with the reference case predictions.
Since small values of the standard deviation of the observation are not compatible with
standard predictions, I pick a such a small value, i.e. 2, and examine how the predictions
differ from the reference case. Parameters other than the standard deviation of the ob-
servation remain as in the reference case. Table 5 shows that, under this alternative set
of parameters, predictions for outcome 1 are the same for all models. The divorce hazard
monotonically decreases with marriage duration even in the pure learning model. This
is because, with a small enough standard deviation of the observation, many couples are
able to gather sufficient information in one single period to divorce immediately rather
than wait to gain more information about marriage quality. The predictions for outcome
3 have also become the same for all models but the mixed model. Only the predictions
for outcome 2 can still allow us to distinguish between the different models. This shows
that it is difficult to distinguish between the models if we assume that there is only little
learning going on.
   While it is difficult to distinguish between the pure learning model and the pure
changes model if there is little learning, it is also difficult to distinguish between these
two models if divorce costs are high enough. Specifically, if divorce costs are as high as 60
and other parameters stay the same as in the reference case, then the predictions for the
pure changes model are the same as for the mixed model. So it is relatively difficult to
distinguish between the pure learning model and the pure changes or mixed model when
the divorce cost is 60 or higher. However, a divorce cost of 60 is very high, and arguably
unrealistic, as it is double the calibrated divorce cost.
     Overall, I conclude that it is possible to distinguish empirically between different
models under some reasonable parameter restrictions. However, there exist parameter
combinations for which the models are difficult to distinguish from each other, and this
is especially an issue if there is little learning (low standard deviation of the observation).
How much we can learn from the data depends in practice on how the outcomes in Table
2 turn out empirically. I now turn to the empirical analysis.



3         Empirical Evidence: main results

3.1         Data used

I use monthly data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) 1990,
1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001 and 200417 . I retain all observations of married persons. The
data is reshaped so that the panel identifier corresponds to marriages, not individuals.
Thus, for individual characteristics, there is one variable for the woman and one for the
man. Marriages for which neither of the partners is ever observed to be the head of the
household are not in the sample: these are special cases such as young couples living with
their parents. Marriages are observed for at most 4 years, and the average window of
observation for a marriage is 29 months or a bit more than 2 years. A marriage is defined
to end the first time I observe a separation or a divorce. A marriage is right-censored
whenever there is any gap in the observations for either partner and that gap is not
    17
         These years are all the years in which a SIPP panel was started.
explained by separation or divorce.
    Job loss is defined as either getting laid off or fired. For each category and each
spouse, I retain only the first such event observed in the sample. This is to insure better
consistency with the model: indeed, the model assumes that marriages have “normal”
histories before the shock and so using second shocks would make this assumption less
plausible18 . Laid off and fired are two possible responses to the question of why the last
job ended; the distinction is therefore based on self-reports.
    Table 6 reports summary statistics for the variables of interest. The monthly prob-
ability that a marriage ends in separation or divorce is 0.13%, which amounts to 1.56%
per year. There are 93,505 marriages in the sample, and of those 3.76% end in divorce
or separation during the observation period. Job loss is fairly uncommon: for example,
the probability that in any given month the husband has been fired during the past year
is 0.27%.19 Thus, one really does need a large sample to investigate the impact of job
loss on divorce, especially since I want to allow for this impact to vary with the duration
of the marriage. This is why it makes sense to use the SIPP over alternative datasets
such as the NLSY 1979. Also, since job loss in any given month is so rare, it is necessary
to define job loss over the past year to get a measure that is not too noisy. Moreover, I
hypothesize that, due to transaction costs and delays, it takes at least a few months for
a marriage to be dissolved once it has been hit by a fatal negative shock. This justifies
looking at job losses that occured not just in the current month but also within the past
year.


3.2     Econometric specification

Basic specifications relating job loss to the divorce hazard use a Cox proportional hazard
model. Such a model assumes that the hazard of separation at marriage duration k is


  18
      In practice, more than 90% of observations from marriages with at least one job loss experience
only one job loss during the window of observation.
   19
      Because both divorce and job loss are such rare events, the graphical check for the causal effect of
job loss on divorce proposed by Abbring and van den Berg (2003) is not feasible.
given by:
                                      λ(k; X) = λ0 (k)exp(β 0 X)                       (16)

where λ0 (k) is the baseline hazard estimated non-parametrically, and X is the set of
relevant covariates. The Cox model assumes that these covariates have a proportional
effect on the baseline hazards.
   Since I am also interested in how the impact of job loss varies with marriage duration,
I relax the proportionality assumption by allowing the coefficient β to be time-varying.
Assume the hazard is given by:


                              λ(k; X) = λ0 (k)exp[β 0 + m(k)0 X]                       (17)


Assuming that m(k) = 0, i.e. that the standard Cox model is correct, then the maximum
likelihood estimate of β, β̂, satisfies:
                                  (                                   )
                                                     Xj exp(Xj0 β̂)
                                           P
                            X                 j∈Ri
                                      Xi − P                              =0           (18)
                            i∈D                j∈Ri   exp(Xj0 β̂)

where D is the set of indices for those marriages that end and Ri is the set of marriages
that are at risk when marriage i ends. Schoenfeld’s (1982) residuals are defined as:

                                                        Xj exp(Xj0 β̂)
                                               P
                                                 j∈Ri
                                  r̂i = Xi − P                                         (19)
                                                               0
                                                     j∈Ri exp(Xj β̂)


Grambsch and Therneau (1994) showed that E(r̂i ) ≈ Vi g(ki ), where Vi is the variance
matrix of β, and ki is the time when marriage i ends. Thus a smoothed plot of V̂i−1 r̂i + β̂
versus marriage duration k will reveal the functional form of β(k). I am specifically inter-
ested in how the impact of job loss varies with marriage duration, so I focus on relaxing
the proportionality assumption for these variables. However, in order to disentangle how
the impact of job loss varies with marriage duration, it is important to also allow other
control variables to have a time-varying impact. Indeed, as pointed out by Abbring
(2012), a threshold crossing model like the one in this paper can lead to hazards that
are not proportional in the threshold. Thus, control variables that affect the threshold
may have a non-proportional impact. In order to determine if other controls besides job
loss satisfy the proportionality assumption, I test whether the scaled Schoenfeld residual
is linearly related to time20 . If some controls violate the proportionality assumption, I
stratify on them, or add an interaction with time.
   The sample of left-censored marriages is a stock sample with follow-up. Therefore, in
my analysis, I take into account the fact that these marriages only enter the sample at
the date of the first interview21 , and are therefore only at risk of dissolution after that
date.
   The econometric model does not include unobserved heterogeneity. While such hetero-
geneity is likely to be important, the predictions of the theoretical model are constructed
by assuming that there is in fact heterogeneity in marital quality: for example, the pre-
diction about the divorce hazard results from integrating over the quality of all marriages
that have survived up to a given point in time. The model’s empirically observable out-
comes have been computed over a population of heterogeneous marriages, and in that
sense it is not necessary to correct for unobserved heterogeneity. On the other hand, it is
conceivable that there exists different marriage markets, and that the parameter values
that I use to derive the predictions of the model vary across these markets: for example,
the divorce cost may be larger for more educated people. This is the reason why it is
important to control for a number of observable characteristics.
   As for observed heterogeneity, I do not control for any variable that may be corre-
lated with marriage quality, so as to be consistent with the fact that the model makes
predictions for the average surviving marriage. What kind of variables may be correlated
with marriage quality? Couples in a good marriage are more likely to make investments
that reduce the probability of divorce, and these investments would show up in observed
characteristics. For example, having kids could theoretically decrease the probability
  20
       I use Stata’s estat phtest command to do so.
  21
       I use the enter option in Stata’s stset command to specify this.
of divorce in three ways: increasing the costs of divorce, making one less attractive to
other mates (as in e.g. Masters’s 2008 model where people endogenously invest in attrac-
tiveness), and reducing time and opportunities available to meet other mates (as in e.g.
Gautier, Svarer and Teulings, 2010, where people not looking for mates prefer to live in
less dense areas). Empirically, it turns out that including endogenous controls such as
home ownership, the number of kids, or pre-marital cohabitation, has no effect on the
qualitative conclusions from this study. While my model does not explicitly account for
investment in the relationship, the empirical analysis is therefore robust to controlling
for such investments.


3.3      Results

Figure 5 plots the non-parametric estimate of the divorce hazard. I applied a Kernel-
weighted local polynomial smoothing using an Epanechnikov kernel22 The divorce hazard
does not significantly increase starting from 0 duration. Looking at the predictions for
outcome 1 in Table 2, the observed pattern is most consistent with the pure changes
model.
    Even though the divorce hazard is monotonically decreasing, the confidence intervals
around the hazard in Figure 5 are large enough to allow for a small increase in the divorce
hazard starting from month 0, so I cannot formally reject models other than the pure
changes model. It is only possible to reject that there is a lot of learning going on, i.e.
that the standard deviation of the observation is larger than some threshold. Indeed,
the sensitivity analysis performed in Table 4 shows that, in the pure learning model, the
higher the standard deviation of the observation, the later the maximum of the divorce
hazard occurs and the higher the proportional difference between the divorce hazard at


  22
     This was implemented with Stata’s lpoly command. A similar result is obtained using the Stata
command sts graph, hazard kernel(epan2), degree 1, bandwidth 8. Both methods are robust to boundary
bias (see Cleves et al., 2002, p. 115), and this is important since boundary bias would tend to underesti-
mate the hazard at low marriage durations, thus potentially giving the false impression that the hazard
increases with duration. Ultimately, I chose local polynomial smoothing because I want to use the same
smoothing for scaled Schoenfeld residuals as for the divorce hazard.
period 0 and the maximum of the divorce hazard. Intuitively the divorce hazard has a
longer and steeper increasing phase if learning is slower. So I can reject the pure learning
model with a large standard deviation of the observation but I cannot reject the pure
learning model with a small standard deviation of the observation. Additionally, I cannot
reject that the pure learning model, the mixed model and the learning with shocks model
make incorrect predictions with respect to the divorce hazard (specifically that the divorce
hazard increases initially), but I can reject that the pure changes model makes incorrect
predictions with respect to the divorce hazard. Overall, I conclude that the pure changes
model is most consistent with the divorce hazard as estimated from the data.
    The finding that the divorce hazard monotonically decreases may surprise the reader
since some previous research reported that the divorce hazard initially increases with
duration. The last available official vital statistics on the duration of completed marriages
at the time of divorce in the US pertains to divorces occurring in 1990 (Clarke, 1995):
divorces in the first year of marriage are less common than in years two to four, which
supports an initial increase in the divorce hazard. In my main analysis, the end of a
relationship is either divorce or separation, so this could be a reason why the divorce and
separation hazard does not initially increase. However, when I restrict the SIPP data to
divorce only, the hazard is still monotonically decreasing.
    Another explanation why I find a monotonically decreasing divorce hazard could be
that most of my data covers a period later than 1990. To test this hypothesis, I compare
the divorce hazard (not including separations) in the earlier half of my data (between
October 1989 and April 1997) vs. the later half of my data (between May 1997 and
December 2007). I find that there is indeed an initial increase in the divorce hazard in
the earlier part of the data, consistent with the vital statistics evidence from 1990. In
the later part of the data, the divorce hazard is monotonically decreasing23 , as it is for

  23
     Even if the divorce hazard is monotonically decreasing, one could estimate an increasing hazard
due to two types of biases. First, there is the boundary bias mentioned above. Second, there is the
possibility of a sampling bias: if a survey interviews people at low frequency (e.g. the NLSY79 only
interviews participants every two years after 1992), short marriages occurring in between interviews are
missed, thus contributing to underestimating the divorce hazard at short durations.
the whole sample.
    Table 7 estimates the impact of job loss on the separation hazard as a function of how
long ago the job loss happened. The first two columns examine the impact of job loss 1
to 12 months ago, while the last two columns estimate the impact of a job loss 13 to 24
months ago. In the first column, without controls, the husband’s job loss is associated
with a significant and large increase in the divorce hazard. The impact of the husband
getting fired is larger than the impact of a lay off but not significantly so. The wife getting
fired has a significant and positive impact on the divorce hazard that is comparable in
size to the impact of the husband getting fired. By contrast, the wife getting laid off does
not significantly affect the divorce hazard. This may be because getting laid off is more
closely related to the earnings potential, which matters more for men in their traditional
role as breadwinners, whereas getting fired is related to a difficult personality for both
men and women.
    Column 2 adds a number of controls reflecting marriage characteristics: age at the
beginning of the marriage, race, education, prior marital history. The role of these
controls is to allow for the fact that marriages may be governed by different parameters
due to heterogeneity in marriage markets. When adding these controls, the coefficients
on job loss stay significant but get a little smaller24 . Note that, in the column with
controls, stratification and interactions with duration25 have been used to get rid of non-
proportional effects for all right-hand side variables other than job loss (see note to Table
7 for details). The last two columns repeat the specifications for the first two columns,
but use job loss 13 to 24 months ago. The impact of job loss 13 to 24 months ago is
not significantly different from 0 . Thus, using predictions for outcome 2 in Table 2,
  24
      I also ran a specification controlling for labor market outcomes other than job loss that may be
short-run consequences of job loss: monthly earnings in the last year, number of months unemployed
during the last year, number of months inactive during the last year. These controls do reduce the
magnitude of the coefficients on job loss but job loss conserves its statistical significance.
   25
      Using the model without stratifying or interacting any control with a function of marriage duration
does not qualitatively affect any of the main results. I stratified on the education variables, and added
a time interaction for the two other variables that failed the proportionality test. One of these other
variables, the wife’s age at the beginning of the marriage, was continuous, therefore not appropriate for
stratification. The other variable, prior marriages for the husband, is a dummy that too rarely takes the
value of 1 (1.8% of observations) to yield reliable stratified estimates.
these results are most consistent with the pure changes model or the mixed model and
suggest that match quality changes fairly rapidly. Indeed, using the sensitivity analysis
from Table 4, I can show that the higher the stardard deviation of the process and the
faster the impact of job loss on the divorce hazard converges to 0 as time since job loss
increases. Since the estimates of the impact of job loss 13 to 24 months ago have a fairly
large standard error, the confidence interval typically includes both positive and negative
values, and therefore I cannot reject the predictions from the pure learning model or the
learning with shocks model. Still, there is no evidence in favor of these two models, or,
more formally, if I assume that the predictions of the models with respect to outcome
2 are false, I cannot reject that they are indeed false. Since the learning with shocks
model does not find much support, this suggests that job loss does not have a purely
causal effect on the divorce hazard. Instead, otherwise worse marriages are more likely
to experience job loss26 . Overall, I conclude that the pure changes model or the mixed
model are most consistent with the evidence from Table 7.
    Figure 6 plots the non-parametric estimate of the job loss on divorce as a function
of marriage duration. For reference, a linear fit is also plotted. The residuals are from
the regression in Table 7, column 2. Using no controls does not affect the shape of
the estimates but increases the mean and shrinks confidence bands. These estimates
correspond to the log of the hazard ratio and thus allow me to test the predictions
for outcome 3 from Table 2. Generally, the impact of job loss increases with marriage
duration. The only exception to this general pattern is the wife getting laid off, but
then this does not significantly affect the divorce hazard in the first place. Additionally,
there is no evidence for a decline in the impact of job loss starting from zero duration.
Therefore, the evidence is most consistent with the pure changes model. However, the
linear trend is only statistically significant and positive for the husband being fired. For

  26
     This implies that divorce should also predict subsequent job loss. I test this using a sample of jobs
from the SIPP and divorce during the previous quarter as a covariate in a Cox proportional hazard
model of job separation, which also includes standard covariates such as education. The results (not
shown here) show a significant and positive impact of divorce on the probability of a layoff; the impact
of divorce on someone getting fired is also positive but insignificant.
the other job loss events, I cannot reject a slightly negative trend. For the husband being
fired, I can therefore reject the prediction of the pure learning model, but not so for other
types of job loss. Even for other types of job loss, I can reject that there is a lot of
learning, i.e. that the standard deviation of the process is higher than some threshold.
Indeed, using the sensitivity analysis from Table 4, I can show that, in the pure learning
model, the higher the standard deviation of the observation, the higher the impact of
job loss at period 0, and the steeper the decline in the impact of job loss as marriage
duration increases from 0. Overall, as for other outcomes, the evidence from Figure 6 is
most consistent with the predictions of the pure changes model.
   More concretely, the reason why the impact of job losses experienced by men tends
to increase with marriage duration (Figure 6) is most likely that over time there are
more and more marriages whose quality is fairly mediocre (as opposed to really bad),
and so this increases the proportion of marriages that are at risk of dissolving if they
are hit by a bad shock relative to those marriages that are at risk of dissolving even
in the absence of a shock. The psychology literature seems to confirm this hypothesis.
Using longitudinal data, Kurdek (2005) shows that marital satisfaction decreases in the
first years of marriage, especially for women. It would be important to confirm these
findings in the present study. However, the SIPP does not provide any direct information
on marital satisfaction. For this reason, I turn to another data set to investigate the
plausibility of this hypothesis. The National Survey of Families and Households contains
such information. The overall sample for the first wave conducted in 1987-1988 includes
a main representative cross-section of 9,637 American households27 . The survey asks
married individuals about the date of their marriage, so I can reconstruct their marriage
duration as of the date of the interview. The survey also asks questions about marital
happiness on a 1-7 scale and the subjective probability of divorce on a 1-5 scale. The
latter would seem to best correspond to the theme of this study. However, the subjective
probability of divorce has fewer possible values and is much more skewed than marital
  27
    The survey also includes an oversampling of blacks, Puerto Ricans, Mexican Americans, single-
parent families, families with step-children, cohabiting couples and recently married persons.
happiness. For these reasons, I choose to focus on marital happiness. Marital happiness
is indeed negatively correlated (-0.48) with the subjective probability of divorce. For
example, among women with level 5 of satisfaction, only 50% rate their probability of
divorce as very low, compared to 72% at level 6 and 91% at level 7.
   In Figure 7, I plot the distribution of women’s responses to the question about marital
happiness as a function of the duration of their relationship. I find that women who have
been married for less than 6 months are most likely to report being “very happy” with
their marriage. The proportion of those who declare themselves very happy decreases
quite strongly with marriage duration, and this decrease is faster earlier in the relation-
ship. A parallel phenomenon is that the proportion of those who declare themselves only
“somewhat happy” (category 5) increases quite dramatically with marriage duration. On
the other hand, the proportion of those who declare themselves unhappy to any degree
does not change over time. This evolution in the distribution of marital bliss can explain
why the impact of a husband’s job loss increases with time: in older relationships, wives
are less likely to be satisfied and therefore a negative labor market outcome affecting their
husband is more likely to dissolve the marriage. Finally, note that the way marital hap-
piness evolves in cross-sections of marriages of different durations is not consistent with
what one would expect based on the pure learning model. In the pure learning model,
one would expect to see more very unhappy wives at short marriage duration than at
long marriage duration. Under the learning model, people wait until they have enough
information and only then separate, which means that in the beginning one should see
more unhappy wives because they are not yet sure whether they should separate. The
pattern in Figure 7 is rather consistent with a model where relationships evolve over
time, and tend to slowly regress to the mean (this could be modeled by assuming ρ < 1
and c > 0 in equation (1)). The evidence in Figure 7 does not preclude that wives are
somewhat uncertain about the quality of their relationship, but it is inconsistent with
the pure learning model.
   Overall, using the predictions from Table 2, I conclude that the pure changes model is
most consistent with the data. If I assume that the predictions of the pure changes model
are false, I can usually reject that they are false. At the same time, if I assume that the
predictions of the pure learning model are false, I can usually not reject that they are
false. This holds for the reference case. However, looking at the predictions from Table
5, it is clear that, based on the data, it is not possible to reject that outcomes 1 and 3 are
driven by a pure learning model with a small amount of learning. Only outcome 2 from
table 5 allows us to distinguish between the pure learning model and the pure changes
model, and the pattern in the data for outcome 2 is more favorable to the pure changes
model. Additionally, data on the distribution of marital satisfaction at different marriage
durations is not supportive of the pure learning model. Overall, I conclude that, while it
is difficult to reject a model with a small amount of learning, the data does not support
a large amount of learning (i.e. high standard deviation of the observation). At the same
time, patterns in the data are consistent with changes in marital quality driving the bulk
of divorces.
   Having confirmed that there is no substantial role for learning in explaining divorce, it
becomes interesting to examine whether learning may explain separations in cohabiting
relationships. Indeed, it could be that little learning happens in marriages because such
learning occurred earlier, during the cohabitation phase. Given the data I use, I only
know the duration of cohabiting relationships for those that started during the sample,
which means that I only observe the early stages of cohabiting relationships (at most
4 years if the relationship started at the very beginning of the observation window).
Hence, tests based on the impact of job loss at various durations cannot be used reliably.
Additionally, job loss is not a significant predictor of separation in these relationships.
Interestingly, the fact that job loss does not predict separation in cohabiting relationships
is consistent with the pure changes model applied to cohabiting relationships. As Figure
3 shows, the impact of job loss increases with relationship duration in the pure changes
model. Since I only observe the early stages of cohabiting relationships, it is possible that
the impact of job loss is too small to be statistically significant.
   While I cannot use any tests based on the impact of job loss, I can still use the
prediction about outcome number 1 in Table 2. Figure 8 plots the separation hazard for
cohabiting relationships. Here, one can see more clearly than in the case of marriages that
the separation hazard initially increases with duration. However, the level of the hazard
at the very beginning of the relationship is not significantly smaller than the maximum of
the hazard; hence I cannot reject that the hazard is initially flat, just like in the marriage
case. Additionally, a separation hazard that is increasing and decreasing with duration
is compatible both with the pure learning model and the pure changes model, provided
separation costs are high enough (see section 2.3.3). Overall, while my ability to reject
the pure learning model for cohabiting relationships is much more limited than in the case
of marriages, it is still the case that, even for cohabiting relationships, the pure changes
model is more consistent with the data.
   To give more evidence on the role of learning, one can also compare marriages that
were preceded by cohabitation with those that were not. Intuitively, marriages that were
not preceded by cohabitation should show more signs of learning. Because I can only
observe whether marriages were preceded by cohabitation if the marriage started during
the observation window, I have to restrict the sample to these marriages. Therefore, due
to a follow up of only two years on average, I can only use the first test, i.e. examining the
shape of the overall divorce hazard. Whether marriages started with cohabitation or not,
we do not see a significant initial increase in the divorce hazard (Figure 9), contrary to
the prediction of the pure learning model. At the same time, those marriages that started
with cohabitation have a lower divorce hazard in the first year, but not beyond (Figure
9). This lower divorce hazard is consistent with selection during cohabitation, so that
only better relationships transition to the marriage phase. Because such selection should
happen in both the pure changes and the pure learning model, a lower divorce hazard
for marriages preceded by cohabitation does not allow us to distinguish between these
models. Overall, these results suggest that the predictions unique to the pure learning
model also fail to hold up for marriages that were not preceded by cohabitation, and
where learning should play a larger role. By contrast, the results are consistent with the
pure changes model, which strengthens the case for this model.
    Considering the analysis of both marriage and cohabitation, I find little conclusive
evidence for learning. On the other hand, separations during both marriage and cohabi-
tation can be explained by a model based on shocks to marital quality. If learning plays
an important role, it is likely to happen much earlier in the course of the relationship,
possibly not even during cohabitation but during the dating stage.



4     Conclusion

This paper examines the fundamental reasons underlying the evolution of the divorce
probability over the course of a marriage. Although learning about marital quality has
been often proposed as an explanation for the divorce hazard, this mechanism finds limited
support in the data. On the other hand, the divorce hazard can be fully explained by the
assumption that the marital quality follows a random walk. In other terms, divorce can be
fully explained by real changes in relationship quality, and without invoking any learning.
The fact that learning plays at best a limited role in explaining divorce patterns may be
part of the reason why it is so difficult to show empirically that pre-marital cohabitation
decreases the probability of divorce. From a policy perspective, the results from this
paper suggest that policies that strengthen marriages are those that help couples cope
with negative shocks, such as marital counseling or income support policies.
    This result is important not only because it sheds light on the substantial mechanisms
behind divorce, but also because it clarifies which class of models is most appropriate for
marriage. Indeed, learning models are cumbersome, and the mixed model, which also
allows for changes in match quality, is even less tractable. If shocks to match quality are
the key cause of divorce, then only these shocks need to be modeled in theories whose
aim is to explore aspects of the marital relationship other than divorce timing, such as
investment in the relationship.
   While the theory developed here is suitable to test for the role of learning in marriages,
it has important limitations. First, the theory only allows us to test for the presence of
substantial learning. The tests used here do not allow us to reject that there is any
learning at all in marriage. Second, I do not explicitly model investments in the rela-
tionship. Third, the model does not specify what the sources of shocks to relationship
quality are. The empirical work concentrates on one of these shocks, job loss, but other
elements must also play an important role. Future research should better quantify the
relative contribution of various types of shocks to marital dissolution. Another promising
research endeavor is to better understand the role of cohabitation. Since learning may not
be an important reason for cohabitation, what explains this behavior? Is it for example
that partners cohabit instead of marrying because they expect shocks to occur in the
near future that could change their valuation of the relationship? Focusing on shocks to
relationship quality instead of learning opens interesting avenues for future research on
marriage and cohabitation.



References

 [1] Abbring, Jaap H. (2012), “Mixed Hitting-Time Models”, Econometrica, Vol. 80,
    Issue 2, http://dx.doi.org/10.3982/ECTA7312.

 [2] Abbring, Jaap H. and Jeffrey R. Campbell (2005), “A Firm’s First Year”,
    Tinbergen Institute Discussion Papers, 05-046/3, Tinbergen Institute.

 [3] Abbring, Jaap H. and Gerard J. van den Berg (2003), “A Simple Procedure
    for the Evaluation of Treatment Effects on Duration Variables”, IZA Discussion
    Papers, 810.

 [4] Amato, Paul R. (2010) “Research on Divorce: Continuing Trends and New
    Developments.” Journal of Marriage and Family 72 (3) (June 1):                  650-666.
    doi:10.1111/j.1741-3737.2010.00723.x.
 [5] Arulampalam S., Maskell S.,Gordon N., Clapp T. (2002), “A Tutorial
    on Particle Filters for Online Nonlinear/Non-Gaussian Bayesian Tracking”, IEEE
    Transactions on signal processing, Vol. 50, No. 2, Feb. 2002.

 [6] Axinn, William, and Arland Thornton (1992), ”The Relationship between
    Cohabitation and Divorce: Selectivity or Causal Influence?” Demography, 29(3):
    357-74. Reprint No. 386.

 [7] Bedard, Kelly, and Olivier Deschnes (2005), ”‘Sex Preferences, Marital Dis-
    solution, and the Economic Status of Women”’, Journal of Human Resources 40(2):
    411-434.

 [8] Brien, Michael J., Lee A. Lillard and Steven Stern (2006), ”Cohabita-
    tion, Marriage, And Divorce In A Model Of Match Quality” International Economic
    Review, vol. 47(2), pages 451-494, 05.

 [9] Burdett, Kenneth, Ryoichi Imai and Randall Wright (2004), ”Unstable
    Relationships,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, De Gruyter, vol. 1(1), pages
    1-44, January.

[10] Cassandra A. R. (1998), “Exact and Approximate Algorithms for Partially Ob-
    servable Markov Decision Processes”, Ph.D. thesis, Brown University, May 1998.

[11] Charles K. and Stephens M. “Job Displacement, Disability, and Divorce”, Jour-
    nal of Labor Economics, April 2004, vol.22, n.2, p.489-522.

[12] Clarke, S. C., “Advanced Report of Final Divorce Statistics, 1989 and 1990”,
    Monthly Vital Statistics Report, Vol. 43, No. 9, Supplement. March 22, 1995.

[13] Cleves Mario , William W. Gould, Roberto G. Gutierrez, and Yulia
    Marchenko, “An Introduction to Survival Analysis Using Stata, 2nd Edition”,
    Stata Press, 2008.
[14] Conger, R.D., Rueter, M.A., Elder, G.H. Jr, ”‘Couple resilience to economic
    pressure”’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1999 Jan, 76(1),54-71.

[15] Farber H. S. (1994), “The Analysis of Interfirm Worker Mobility”, Journal of
    Labor Economics, Vol 12., 554-593.

[16] Frederick S., Loewenstein G. and O’Donoghue T. (2002), “Time Discount-
    ing and Time Preference: A Critical Review”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol
    40., No. 2, 351-401.

[17] Gadalla, Tahany M. (2008) “Impact of Marital Dissolution on Men’s and
    Women’s Incomes: A Longitudinal Study.” Journal of Divorce & Remarriage 50
    (1): 55-65. doi:10.1080/10502550802365714.

[18] Gautier P. A., Svarer M., Teulings C. N. , Marriage and the city: Search fric-
    tions and sorting of singles, Journal of Urban Economics, Volume 67, Issue 2, March
    2010, Pages 206-218, ISSN 0094-1190, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.08.007.

[19] Gibbons R., Katz L., “Layoffs and Lemons”, Journal of Labor Economics, 1991,
    vol. 9, no. 4, 351-380.

[20] Grambsch P., Therneau T., “Proportional Hazards Tests and Diagnostics Based
    on Weighted Residuals”, Biometrika, Vol. 81, No. 3. (Aug., 1994), pp. 515-526.

[21] Hauskrecht M. (2000), “Value-Function Approximations for Partially Observable
    Markov Decision Processes”, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 13 (2000)
    33-94.

[22] Hess G. (2004), “Marriage and Consumption Insurance: What’s Love Got to Do
    with it?”, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol 112., no.2, 290-318.

[23] Hitsch G., Hortacsu A., Ariely D. (2010), “Matching and Sorting in Online
    Dating”, American Economic Review, 100(1), March 2010.
[24] Jovanovic B. (1979), “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover”, The Journal
    of Political Economy, Vol 87., 972-990.

[25] Kahn L. and Lange F. (2010),“Employer Learning, Productivity and the Earn-
    ings Distribution: Evidence from Performance Measures”, working paper.

[26] Kalmijn M., Poortman A., “His or Her Divorce? The Gendered Nature of
    Divorce and its Determinants”, European Sociological Review Vol. 22, No. 2, April
    2006, 201214.

[27] Karney B., Bradbury T., “Attributions in Marriage: State or Trait? A Growth
    Curve Analysis”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2000, Vol, 78, No.
    2, 295-309.

[28] Kinnunen U., Feldt T., “Economic stress and marital adjustment among couples:
    analyses at the dyadic level”, European Journal of Social Psychology, 34, 519532
    (2004).

[29] Kurdek L., “Gender and Marital Satisfaction Early in Marriage: A Growth Curve
    Approach”, Journal of Marriage and Family, 67 (February 2005): 6884.

[30] Lillard, Lee A. and Brien, Michael J. and Waite, Linda J., ”‘Premarital
    Cohabitation and Subsequent Marital Dissolution: A Matter of Self-Selection?”,
    Demography, vol. 32 (3), August 1995, 437-457.

[31] Marinescu I. E.(2009), “Job Security Legislation and Job Duration: Evidence
    from the U.K.”, Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 27, no. 3 (p. 475-486).

[32] Masters A., “Marriage, commitment and divorce in a matching model with differ-
    ential aging”, Review of Economic Dynamics, Volume 11, Issue 3, July 2008, Pages
    614-628, ISSN 1094-2025, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.red.2007.08.005.

[33] Mortensen D., Pissarides C., “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory
    of Unemployment” , Review of Economic Studies 61 (July 1994) 397-415.
[34] Nagypal E. (2007), “Learning by Doing vs. Learning About Match Quality: Can
    We Tell Them Apart?,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 74(2), pages 537-566, 04.

[35] Rege, Mari and Kjetil Telle and Mark Votruba (2007), “Plant Closure
    and Marital Dissolution”, Discussion Papers, 514, Research Department of Statistics
    Norway.

[36] Reinhold, S., ”‘Reassessing the link between premarital cohabitation and marital
    instability”, Demography, vol. 47 (3), 2010, pp.719-733.

[37] Schoenfeld D., “Partial residuals for the proportional hazards regression model”,
    Biometrika, 1982, 69, 1, p.239-241.

[38] Smock, Pamela J., Wendy D. Manning, and Sanjiv Gupta. (1999) “The
    Effect of Marriage and Divorce on Women’s Economic Well-Being.” American Soci-
    ological Review 64 (6) (December 1): 794-812. doi:10.2307/2657403.

[39] Sullivan D., von Wachter T. (2009), “Job Displacement and Mortality: An
    Analysis Using Administrative Data”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124
    (3): 1265-1306.

[40] Svarer M. (2004), “Is Your Love in Vain? Another Look at Premarital Cohabita-
    tion and Divorce”, Journal of Human Resources 39(2), 523-536.

[41] Weiss Y., Willis R. J. (1997), “Match Quality, New Information, and Marital
    Dissolution”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1, Part 2: Essays in Honor
    of Yoram Ben-Porath. (Jan., 1997), pp. S293-S329.
Figure 1: Timing of partner’s decisions


                       Observe quality
                       signal

                                                              Observe quality
                       and update                             signal and
                       belief                                 update belief


       p                            Continue :      p+1
           Shock to                                       Shock to
           match                    OR                    match
           quality                  Separate, pay         quality
           realized:                f(k) and get          realized
                                    another
                                    relationship:
Table 1: Reference parameters


                                       Pure learning Pure changes                  Learning with
                                       model         model        Mixed model      shocks
         Parameters of interest
Standard deviation of observation            10              0            10             10
Standard deviation of process                 0              5             5              0
Probability of job loss occuring             N/A            N/A           N/A           0.05
Probability of job loss state ending         N/A            N/A           N/A           0.1
Standard deviation of noise to the
                                             N/A            5*            N/A           N/A
observer*
       Parameters held constant
Mean of prior                                30             30             30           30
Standard deviation of prior                   5              5              5            5
Drift of process                              0              0              0            0
Auto-correlation of process                   1              1              1            1
Threshold for bad observation                15             15             15           15
Separation cost                              30             30             30           30
Discount factor                              0.8            0.8            0.8          0.8
          Technical parameters
Range of match qualities                    [0,60]         [0,60]         [0,60]       [0,60]
Number of match quality values               801            801            801          801
Maximal duration                              50             50             50           50



Note: the standard deviation of noise to the observer is only used in Figure 4.
Figure 2: Theoretical divorce hazard under alternative models


        0.12
                                                                Pure learning model
                                                                Pure changes model
         0.1                                                    Mixed model
                                                                Learning with shocks

        0.08



        0.06



        0.04



        0.02



           0
               0           5              10             15            20              25


Note: The parameters for the calculation of these hazards can be found in Table 1.
Figure 3: Theoretical log hazard ratios under alternative models


           9
                                                                    Pure learning model
                                                                    Pure changes model
           8
                                                                    Mixed model
                                                                    Learning with shocks
           7


           6


           5


           4


           3


           2
            0               5              10              15              20              25



Note: The parameters for the calculation of these hazards can be found in Table 1. The hazard
ratio is defined as the hazard if job loss occurred at k divided by the hazard if no job loss occurred
at k. Time k is represented on the x axis. The log ratios for the pure learning model and for
learning with shocks have been smoothed with a moving average with a span of 5 for all values of
k greater or equal to 10 in order to attenuate discretization artifacts.
Figure 4: Theoretical log hazard ratios after job loss occurred at period 5



           2
                                                            Pure learning model
                                                            Pure changes model w. noise
         1.5
                                                            Mixed model
                                                            Learning with shocks
           1


         0.5


           0


         -0.5


           -1


         -1.5
             5              10              15              20                25            30



Note: The parameters for the calculation of these hazards can be found in Table 1. The hazard
ratio is defined as the hazard at k if job loss occurred at period 5 divided by the hazard at k if no
job loss occurred at period 5. Time k is represented on the x axis.
Table 2: Empirically testable predictions using reference parameters
                                                       Prediction under alternative models
Outcome Outcome description             Pure     Pure changes           Mixed model                  Learning
Number                                  learning                                                     with shocks

    1     Slope of the divorce hazard + then -   -                          + then -                 + then -
          (see Fig. 2)
    2     Sign of the impact of job loss +       Undefined in simple         + then approaches 0     +, then -
          on the divorce hazard a few            model. In the model        when the number of       when the
          periods after job loss                 with extra noise, + then   periods since job loss   number of
          occurred (see Fig. 4)                  approaches 0 when the      is large enough          periods
                                                 number of periods since                             since job
                                                 job loss is large enough                            loss is large
                                                                                                     enough
    3     Slope of the impact of job    -        +                          - then +                 - then +
          loss as a function of
          marriage duration (see Fig.
          3)

Note: the reference parameters are in Table 1.
Table 3: Range of parameters tested
 Standard     Standard                      Threshold for
 deviation of deviation of  Separation      bad
 observation  process       cost            observation
         0            0            20             10
         1            1            30             15
         2            2            40             20
         3            3            60             25
         4            4
         5            5
        10            7
        20           10
Note: I have computed the outcomes in Table 2 under all possible combinations of the
parameters above. Parameters not listed above remain the same as in the reference case.
Table 4: Sensitivity of predictions to changes in parameters
                                  Range of parameters yielding the same predictions as in the
                                                        reference case
                                                                               Threshold for
                                     S.d. of       S.d. of                          bad
     Model           Outcome        process      observation     Divorce cost   observation
Pure learning           1               0           [4:20]          [20:60]         N/A
                        2               0           [1:20]          [20:60]       [10:25]
                        3               0           [3:20]          [20:60]       [10:20]
Pure changes            1            [1:10]            0            [20:30]         N/A
                        2            [1:10]            0            [20:60]       [10:25]
                        3            [1:10]            0            [20:30]       [10:15]
Mixed                   1            [1:10]         [3:20]          [20:60]         N/A
                        2            [1:10]         [3:20]          [20:60]       [10:25]
                        3            [2:10]         [2:20]          [20:40]       [10:20]
Learning with           1              0            [4:20]          [20:60]         N/A
shocks                  2              0            [3:20]          [20:60]         N/A
                        3              0            [4:20]          [20:60]         N/A

Note: For each parameter, the range given is the range that preserves the reference case
predictions in Table 2, assuming that all other parameters remain the same as in the reference
case. Only parameter values in Table 3 were tested.
Table 5: Predictions under a low level of learning
                                                       Prediction under alternative models
Outcome Outcome description             Pure     Pure changes           Mixed model               Learning
Number                                  learning                                                  with shocks

    1     Slope of the divorce hazard -          -                          -                      -
    2     Sign of the impact of job loss +       Undefined in simple        Undefined in simple    -
          on the divorce hazard a few            model. In the model        model. In the model
          periods after job loss                 with extra noise, + then   with extra noise, +
          occurred                               approaches 0 when the      then approaches 0
                                                 number of periods since    when the number of
                                                 job loss is large enough   periods since job loss
                                                                            is large enough
    3     Slope of the impact of job    +        +                          - then +               +
          loss as a function of
          marriage duration

Note: Parameters as in the reference case (Table 1), except that the standard deviation of the
observation is set to 2.
Table 6: Summary statistics
Variable                                              Obs     Mean     Std. Dev. Min Max
Divorce or separation                                  2797181 0.001256 0.035417    0       1
Husband laid off in the last year                      2797181 0.011647 0.107291    0       1
Husband fired in the last year                         2797181 0.00267 0.051605     0       1
Wife laid off in the last year                         2797181 0.008068 0.08946     0       1
Wife fired in the last year                            2797181 0.001847 0.04294     0       1
Husband has had another marriage                       2797181 0.018288 0.133991    0       1
Wife has had another marriage                          2797181 0.017493 0.131098    0       1
Age of the husband at the beginning of marriage        2796877 28.47455 9.432294 12        87
Age of the wife at the beginning of marriage           2796705 25.95334 8.744819 12        87
Husband is 5 years older than the wife or more         2797181 0.191416 0.393416    0       1
Wife is 5 years older or more                          2797181 0.03128 0.174073     0       1
Husband is white                                       2797181 0.888015 0.315348    0       1
Both same race                                         2797181 0.973222 0.161433    0       1
Both high school educated or less                      2797181 0.374762 0.484062    0       1
One with high school and one with some college or more 2797181 0.239599 0.426839    0       1
Both some college or more                              2797181 0.263985 0.440791    0       1

Note: An observation is a marriage*month.
Source: Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004.
Figure 5: Divorce hazard

    .004
    .003
    .002
    .001
    0




           0               60                120                  180                 240
                                Duration of marriage in months

                                 Divorce hazard
                                 90% confidence interval



Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing using an Epanechnikov kernel, degree 1,
bandwidth 8. The smoothing was achieved using durations up to 300 but the hazard is only
graphed up to duration 240.
Source: Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004.
Table 7: Impact of job loss on divorce as a function of time elapsed since the job loss


                                      Job loss 1-12 months ago         Job loss 13-24 months ago
                                      No controls   Controls           No controls   Controls
Husband
 Laid off                             0.730***        0.572***         0.194              0.0428
                                      (0.126)         (0.126)          (0.232)            (0.232)
   Fired                              0.887***        0.652***         0.421              0.212
                                      (0.206)         (0.206)          (0.380)            (0.380)
Wife
 Laid off                             0.188           0.146            0.404              0.335
                                      (0.194)         (0.194)          (0.252)            (0.252)
   Fired                              1.046***        0.902***         0.445              0.233
                                      (0.225)         (0.225)          (0.449)            (0.449)
Observations                          820,845         820,799          421,453            421,428
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Notes: Cox proportional hazard model for the marriage ending in a separation or divorce.
Columns 2 and 4 use a stratified Cox model. The controls that are stratified on are: a dummy
taking the value 1 if only one of the partners is a high school dropout or if both partners are high
school graduates, a dummy taking the value 1 if one of the partners is a high school graduate and
the other has some college education, and a dummy taking the value 1 if both partners have
some college education. The other controls in columns 2 and 4 are: a dummy for having
contracted a previous marriage (one dummy for each partner), a dummy for the husband having
contracted a previous marriage interacted with marriage duration, age at the beginning of the
marriage (one variable for each partner), wife’s age at the beginning of the marriage interacted
with marriage duration, age difference between the partners (set of 2 dummies: wife older by 5
years or more, husband older by 5 years or more), white husband dummy, partners of the same
race dummy.
Source: Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004.
Figure 6: Linear and non-parametric estimates of the impact of job loss as a function of marriage
duration



      Husband first laid off in the last year      Husband first fired in the last year
     1.5




                                                  3
     1




                                                  2
     .5




                                                  1
     0




                                                  0
     -.5




                                                  -1
     -1




            0    24    48    72     96 120             0    24    48    72     96 120
            Duration of marriage in months             Duration of marriage in months


           Wife first laid off in the last year        Wife first fired in the last year
     2




                                                  2
     1




                                                  1
     0




                                                  0
     -1




                                                  -1
     -2




                                                  -2




            0    24    48    72    96 120              0    24    48    72    96 120
            Duration of marriage in months             Duration of marriage in months


Notes: Cox proportional hazard model for the marriage ending in a separation or divorce. The
graph plots a local polynomial smooth (degree 1, bandwidth 8, Epanechnikov kernel) of scaled
Schoenfeld residuals for various definitions of job loss together with 90% confidence intervals in
gray; the dashed line is a linear fit of the residuals on time. The specification used is the same as
in Table 7, column 2, but includes marriages up to 15 years old.
Source: Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004.
Figure 7: Distribution of marital happiness for women, at varying relationship durations

               70

               60

               50
                                                                                    0-5 months
  Percentage




               40                                                                   6-11 months
                                                                                    12-23 months
               30                                                                   24-71 months
                                                                                    72-119 months
               20

               10

               0
                    1    2        3        4        5         6        7
                        How happy the wife is about the marriage


Notes: 1 corresponds to “very unhappy” and 7 to “very happy”.
Source: National Study of Families and Households 1987-1988, cross-section.
Figure 8: The hazard of separation for cohabiting relationships


    .04
    .03
    .02
    .01
    0




          0                        12                         24                       36
                                 Duration of cohabitation in months

                                   Separation hazard
                                   90% confidence interval

Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing using an Epanechnikov kernel, degree 1,
bandwidth 3.5.
Source: Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004.
Figure 9: The hazard of divorce for marriages preceded by cohabitation or not


   .005
   .004
   .003
   .002
   .001
   0




          0                      12                       24                     36
                                Duration of marriage in months

                                       No premarital cohabitation
                                       Premarital cohabitation
                                       90% confiedence intervals


Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing using an Epanechnikov kernel, degree 1,
bandwidth 3.5.
Source: Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004.
