                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PATENT RIGHTS, INNOVATION AND FIRM EXIT

                                        Alberto Galasso
                                       Mark Schankerman

                                      Working Paper 21769
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21769


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2015, Revised May 2017




Previously circulated as "Patents Rights and Innovation by Small and Large Firms." We are
grateful to two anonymous referees and the Editor for very constructive suggestions that greatly
improved the paper. We also thank Philippe Aghion, Iain Cockburn, Petra Moser, Florian
Schuett, Carlos Serrano, Mariagrazia Squicciarini, Heidi Williams and participants in seminars at
Bocconi University, Cattolica University, CEPR Conference on Applied IO, Duke, Einaudi
Institute in Rome, IESE Barcelona, Tel Aviv University, UC Berkeley, University of Toronto,
ZEW Mannheim, NBER and Paris School of Economics for helpful comments. We thank John
Golden and David Schwartz for their help in clarifying points regarding the legal doctrine and
procedure governing patent invalidation suits. Joanne Evangelista provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alberto Galasso and Mark Schankerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Rights, Innovation and Firm Exit
Alberto Galasso and Mark Schankerman
NBER Working Paper No. 21769
December 2015, Revised May 2017
JEL No. K41,L24,O31,O32,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the causal impact of patent invalidation on subsequent innovation and exit by the patent
holder. The analysis is based on patent litigation at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit, and exploits the random allocation of judges to control for endogeneity of the judicial
decision. Invalidation causes the patent holder to reduce subsequent patenting over a five-year
window by 50 percent on average, but the effect is heterogeneous. The impact is large for small
and medium-sized firms, particularly in technology fields where they face many large
competitors, and for patents central to their technology portfolio. We find no significant effect for
large firms. Invalidation also significantly increases the likelihood that small firms exit from
patenting entirely.


Alberto Galasso
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
alberto.galasso@rotman.utoronto.ca

Mark Schankerman
Department of Economics, R.516
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
M.Schankerman@lse.ac.uk
1    Introduction

Innovation lies at the heart of high-tech entrepreneurship and economic growth. Modern macro-
economic growth models give a central role to innovation and the competition that generates
incentives for it, including the interaction between small entrants and large incumbents in this
process (Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Acemoglu, Akcigit, Bloom and Kerr, 2013). At the same
time, a large body of microeconomic evidence shows that there is underinvestment in R&D,
with social rates of return being more than twice as large as the private rates (Jones and
Williams 1998; Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen, 2013). This is a primary justiﬁcation
for government support of innovation, and patent rights are one of the key policy instruments
for this purpose. It is important to understand whether patents are actually an eﬀective in-
novation incentive and, importantly, whether they work equally well for small and large ﬁrms
and in diﬀerent competitive environments.
      A number of economic and legal scholars have raised serious doubts about whether patent
rights actually promote innovation, and there is a widespread view that current patent policy,
and debates over patent reform, are not based on empirical evidence (Boldrin and Levine,
2013; Burk, 2016). One of the most prominent legal scholars in the area argues that much of
the patent policy discussion is ‘faith-based’, with “participants on both sides of the IP debates
increasingly taking out positions that simply do not depend on evidence at all.” (Lemley, 2015).
In a recent paper, Williams (forthcoming) provides a thoughtful and balanced analysis of the
issues and the evidence on how patent rights aﬀect innovation and welfare, and identifying the
gaps in our empirical knowledge that need to be ﬁlled to reach deﬁnitive conclusions. As she
puts it, “While patent systems have been quite widely used both historically and internationally,
there is nonetheless a tremendous amount of controversy over whether the patent system is —
in practice — improving the alignment between private returns and social contributions.”
      To address this need for more empirical evidence, in this paper we analyze how the loss
of patent rights aﬀects a ﬁrm’s level of subsequent innovation, and the likelihood that a ﬁrm
exits from patenting activity entirely, for small and large ﬁrms across a range of technology
ﬁelds. To do this, we study the impact of judicial invalidation of existing patents on the owner’s
subsequent patenting activity over a ﬁve year window. Our analysis shows that patents have
an impact on future patenting for small and medium-sized ﬁrms, but we ﬁnd no evidence of
signiﬁcant impact on large ﬁrms. We also show how the eﬀectiveness of patent rights depends
on speciﬁc features of competition in the technology markets.


                                                1
       From a theoretical perspective, the impact of patent invalidation on future innovation
is not obvious. The conventional view is that patents enhance the ability of ﬁrms to capture
innovation rent, but at the cost of creating a static eﬃciency loss from higher prices (Arrow,
1962). We show that more complex interactions arise from two sources when innovation is
cumulative. The ﬁrst is complementarity between the current and subsequent generation of
innovation:    the ability of a ﬁrm to innovate in the future and capture the rents from that
innovation will depend on the ﬁrm’s current stock of patents.                 Second, patent invalidation
triggers a potential patent race building on the innovation by opening up the technology to
potential competitors. The model developed in this paper highlights the trade-oﬀs involved
and shows that the qualitative eﬀect of patent rights on future patenting is ambiguous, as it
depends on features of the ﬁrm and the technological competition they face. Thus empirical
analysis is essential to inform patent policy.
       Despite its central importance, there are relatively few studies with causal evidence
on whether patent rights are an eﬀective incentive for innovation, and the existing studies
do not speak with one voice.1 For example, Budish, Roin and Williams (2015) show that
there is more innovation, as measured by clinical trials, on late-stage cancer drugs that have
longer eﬀective patent lives (due to shorter regulatory screening times). Similarly, Farre-Mensa,
Hegde and Ljungqvist (2015) use the quasi-random assignment of patent examiners to study the
impact of patent rights on new start-up ﬁrms. They ﬁnd that a patent grant strongly increases
subsequent patent applications and growth, and also raises the probability of an IPO. On the
other hand, Sampat and Williams (2015) use quasi-random assignment of patent examiners to
study whether human gene patents aﬀect subsequent innovation by the patentee (and others)
and ﬁnd no signiﬁcant eﬀect. Even more surprising, Baten, Bianchi and Moser (2015) show
that the imposition of compulsory licensing on chemical patents by German ﬁrms after WWI
increased subsequent patenting by the (large) chemical ﬁrms that owned them. Our paper
develops a model which reconciles these apparently contradictory ﬁndings in the literature.
       Patent rights can aﬀect innovation, especially for small ﬁrms, through several channels.
First, patents shape the nature of competition in product and technology markets, especially
in settings where small ﬁrms interact with large incumbents (Spulber, 2013; Aghion, Howitt

   1
    In a related strand of the literature, there are studies that use patent renewal data and other approaches
to measure the incremental incentives provided by patent rights (Schankerman and Pakes, 1986; Schankerman,
1998; Arora, Ceccagnoli and Cohen, 2008). They show that patents are associated with greater private value
derived from inventions. However, these studies do not provide causal evidence on the link between patent rights
and the level of innovation.


                                                       2
and Prantl, 2015). While the relationship between patent rights, competition and innovation
is theoretically ambiguous, recent research suggests that patents are particularly eﬀective in
providing incentives when competition is intense (Aghion et. al., 2005). Moreover, patents
are often the key assets that enable small ﬁrms to license their innovations to large ﬁrms for
commercialisation (Gans, Hsu and Stern, 2002). In this way, patents underpin the mark for
innovation which in turn facilitates eﬃcient vertical specialization in innovation, commercial-
ization and enforcement of knowledge assets (Galasso, Schankeman and Serrano, 2013).
      Second, patents facilitate access to debt and venture capital markets for ﬁnancially con-
strained innovators. This is especially relevant to small (and young) ﬁrms for whom information
asymmetry is severe and patents may be their primary collateralizable asset (Hochberg, Serrano
and Ziedonis, 2014). Finally, patents are often used to secure cross-licensing agreements and
as bargaining chips to resolve disputes and gain access to patented inputs needed to conduct
research (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004).
      We develop a model that shows how the loss of patent rights aﬀects incentives to innovate.
The basic mechanism is as follows: We assume that a ﬁrm builds on its stock of existing patents
in subsequent rounds of innovation, and that there are diminishing returns in this process.
When a patent is invalidated, the ﬁrm retains the knowledge embodied in the patent, but the
loss of patent protection allows other ﬁrms now to exploit this knowledge without a license. The
resulting innovation race has an ambiguous eﬀect on the patentee’s incentives. The payoﬀ to
future R&D investment declines because the competitive rents are dissipated by the patent race.
At the same time, the patent race intensiﬁes incentives because of strategic complementarity
in R&D — i.e., the ﬁrm needs to raise its eﬀort to win the race to commercialize the technology.
      The model generates two main predictions. First, the loss of a patent on a core technology
— which serves as the basis for subsequent innovation — aﬀects innovation more for small ﬁrms
than for large ﬁrms. This follows from our assumption of diminishing returns to patent portfolio
size as an input to cumulative innovation by the ﬁrm. Second, for a small ﬁrm the impact of
losing a core patent will depend on the number of potential licensees for the technology (in
the empirical work, we associate this with the number of large ﬁrms in the related technology
area). The reason is that the patentee is more likely to be able to license the technology and
extract greater value when there are more potential licensees.
      The main empirical challenge is the potential endogeneity of court decisions to invalidate
an existing patent. This can arise in a variety of way, but of particular concern in our setting



                                               3
is that ﬁrms which aggressively patent, ﬁling numerous patent applications some of which are
of dubious validity, are more likely to experience invalidation by the courts. To address this
concern, we adopt (and extend) the identiﬁcation strategy in Galasso and Schankerman (2015).
We study decisions by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which has exclusive
jurisdiction in appellate cases involving patents. Each decision is by majority rule of three-
judge panels, which are randomly assigned by a computer algorithm. We exploit this random
allocation of judges, together with variation in their propensity to invalidate, to construct an
instrumental variable for patent invalidation.
      It should be noted that patents litigated in the Federal Circuit are typically high value
patents, as they have gone through the costly litigation process up to the appellate level.
For purposes of studying how patents aﬀect innovation incentives, it is reasonable to start by
analyzing Federal Circuit patents because the distribution of patent values is highly skewed
(Schankerman and Pakes, 1986) and the incentives generated by these patents are likely to be
more important for welfare.
      The main ﬁndings in the paper are as follows. First, the loss of patent rights due to
Federal Circuit invalidation causes, on average, a 50 percent decrease in future patenting (in a
ﬁve-year window) by the focal patentee. This result is robust to a wide variety of speciﬁcations
and controls. Second, the impact of patent rights depends critically on the size of the ﬁrm,
the competitive environment and the nature of the technology. The eﬀect is driven by small
innovative ﬁrms and by ﬁrms losing patents on technologies that are core to their research
focus. Third, we ﬁnd that the loss of a patent has a much larger impact on small ﬁrm inno-
vation in technology ﬁelds where they face many large ﬁrms. This is consistent with the idea
that patents are especially important in shaping the competition in product and technology
markets, and facilitating the licensing of innovations by small ﬁrms to larger incumbents for
commercialisation, as discussed above. Finally, we show that losing a patent right sharply
increases the probability that a small ﬁrm exits the market (as indicated by a complete ces-
sation of patenting). This conﬁrms that patent rights aﬀect not only the level of innovation
by ongoing ﬁrms, but also the extensive margin of ﬁrm survival and thus can be critical for
high-tech entrepreneurship.
      The magnitude and the heterogeneity in the eﬀect of patent rights we ﬁnd are not obvious
a priori. Even in a sample like ours, where patents are valuable as revealed by the substantial
litigation cost, we show that only a subset of invalidation cases have any signiﬁcant impact



                                                 4
on future patenting. The ﬁndings are consistent with the idea that patents are especially
important in shaping the competition in product and technology markets, and facilitating
the licensing of innovations by small ﬁrms to larger incumbents for commercialization. We
think that documenting such heterogeneity is important, and highlights the need of additional
research to inform policy makers.
      Finally, we combine the estimated eﬀect of patent rights on the patent holder from this
paper, together with the impact on innovation by other ﬁrms from Galasso and Schankerman
(2015), to perform illustrative computations assessing the overall impact of patent invalidation
for the patents in our sample. We conclude that the combined eﬀect of patent rights litigated
at the Federal Circuit was to block subsequent innovation by a modest amount, i.e. if all these
patents were invalidated, follow-on innovation would have been somewhat higher. From a more
law and economics perspective, we also analyze what the overall eﬀect of having the Federal
Circuit Court was, relative to not having any appellate court. We conclude that the impact of
its decisions to reverse the lower courts (both invalidity and validity rulings) was to stimulate
subsequent patenting marginally (by less than two percent).
      From a broader innovation perspective, this paper shows that the loss of patent rights
(on core technologies) sharply reduces innovation, and increases the likelihood of exit, by small
ﬁrms, but not for large ﬁrms. This sharp diﬀerence between small and large ﬁrms is consistent
with recent macroeconomic research showing that R&D subsidies are more eﬀective when tar-
geted at small innovative ﬁrms rather than large incumbents (Acemoglu et. al., 2013). Taken
together with our earlier study on cumulative innovation (Galasso and Schankerman, 2015),
this paper documents that patent rights have heterogeneous eﬀects on innovation by both the
patentee and other competing ﬁrms. This research raises serious questions about whether a
‘one size ﬁts all’ patent system is desirable. While the practical challenges of designing a more
nuanced patent system should not be underestimated, more research on these issues seems
warranted.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a model showing how loss of a patent
right can aﬀect innovation incentives for subsequent innovation. Section 3 describes the data
set. Section 4 discusses the econometric speciﬁcation and identiﬁcation strategy. In Section 5
we present the baseline estimates of the eﬀect of patent invalidation on innovation. In Section 6
we show that the impact of patent rights is heterogeneous, diﬀering sharply for small and large
ﬁrms, and core and peripheral patents. Section 7 tests several diﬀerent mechanisms that might



                                               5
explain the impact on small ﬁrms. Section 8 shows that the loss of patent rights powerfully
aﬀects the exit probability for small ﬁrms. Section 9 provides a preliminary assessment of the
net eﬀect of patent rights and the impact of the Federal Circuit Court. We conclude with a
brief summary of ﬁndings and their policy implications.


2       Analytical framework

We model the innovation process in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage a ﬁrm invests in R&D which
generates a new technology stochastically. In the second stage the ﬁrm commercializes the
innovation. The ﬁrm is endowed with c patents on ‘core’ technologies and p on ‘peripheral’ ones.
We deﬁne core technologies as those that facilitate the development of subsequent innovation.
By contrast, peripheral technologies increase the innovation rent that the ﬁrm can capture from
its core technologies, but do not aﬀect the success probability of follow-on innovation.2                    Let
n = p + c denote the total number of patents held by the ﬁrm. We assume that the number of
core patents a ﬁrm owns is a ﬁxed proportion of n, i.e. c = λn.3
        The probability of developing a new innovation when the ﬁrm owns c valid core patents is
given by rV (c) with V (c) = 1−(1−α)c and α < 1. This formulation embodies complementarity
between the existing stock of core technologies, c, and current research investment, r, and
implies diminishing returns of core knowledge on the marginal product of R&D, which is a
property of most standard production functions. V (c) can be interpreted as the likelihood of
getting at least one idea, when ideas are independent draws with probability α from each of the
(symmetric) core patents. In the case in which multiple ideas originate from the core patents,
we assume that the ﬁrm is restricted to develop only one.4 The cost of R&D is C(r) = r2 /2.
        A patent on a core technology allows the patentee (‘focal ﬁrm’) to block other innovators

    2
    The original distinction between core and peripheral technologies goes back to the sociologist Thompson
(1967), who argued that the role of peripheral technologies is to seal-oﬀ core technologies from ‘environmental
inﬂuences’. From an economic perspective, this could take the form of diversifying revenue sources that build on
core technologies (entering diﬀerent product market niches using the same core knowledge) to protect the core
idea from idiosyncratic demand shocks in diﬀerent applications. The economics and management literatures
emphasise the related concept of core competencies in shaping a ﬁrm’s strategies and competitiveness. A recent
empirical study shows that the distinction between core and peripheral patents is important in explaining
knowledge spillovers through job mobility (Song, Almeida and Wu, 2003).
    3
    This assumption simpliﬁes the analysis but is not required. Our results are robust to any strictly increasing
function c = λ(n) with c ≤ n.
    4
    Our results generalize to the case where the expected number of commercialized technologies increases less
than linearly in c. This assumption is consistent with the management literature documenting a tendency for
large ﬁrms to exploit only a limited fraction of the ideas generated by their scientists (Cassiman and Ueda, 2006;
Cohen, 2010).


                                                        6
from building on it. If the patent is invalidated, the focal ﬁrm still retains the knowledge about
the technology which it can use in developing the next innovation. However, the loss of the
patent right means that the ﬁrm can no longer block other ﬁrms from using the knowledge
and thus induces a patent race for the follow-on innovation. The focal ﬁrm innovates if it
successfully builds on the remaining valid patents or it wins the patent race building on the
invalidated patent. The probability that the focal ﬁrm innovates becomes rI(c) with

                           I(c) = 1 − (1 − α)c − α(1 − α)c−1 (1 − χ(r))

where χ(r) captures the probability of winning the patent race for the follow-on technology
which builds on the invalidated patent. The term (1 − α)c is the probability of not getting an
idea from any of the core patents and α(1 − α)c−1 (1 − χ(r)) is the probability of getting an
idea only from the invalidated patent and losing the patent race. We assume that χ(r) = rχ
where the parameter χ < 1 can be interpreted as the level of rivalry in the patent race (Loury,
1979).
         Commercialization of the new technology yields a revenue equal to Θ < 1. If the ﬁrm
has n ≥ κ patents, it can commercialize the technology itself. Firms with n < κ commercialise
their innovation through licensing. This captures the idea that internal commercialisation is less
proﬁtable for small ﬁrms. This can arise in at least two ways. First, small ﬁrms are less likely
to have access to the requisite complementary assets. Second, large patent portfolios increase
the value from commercialization by providing a ‘buﬀer’ to protect products incorporating the
ﬁrm’s (core) technologies and enhancing the ability of the ﬁrm to enforce patent rights more
eﬀectively (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004).
         In the case of external commercialization, the ﬁrm can negotiate a licensing deal with
one of N symmetric ﬁrms, each of whom needs the technology with probability z. The ﬁrm
bargains with potential licensees sequentially. If a license is struck, the ﬁrm earns Θ. The timing
of the licensing game is as follows. The ﬁrm approaches one potential licensee and makes a
take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer for an exclusive license. If the licensee accepts, the licensing subgame
ends. If the oﬀer is rejected, the patentee moves to the next ﬁrm and payoﬀs are discounted by
δ. We let L(N, Θ) < Θ denote the expected payoﬀ of the innovator from this licensing subgame.
         A ﬁrm that retains the litigated patent sets its R&D investment to maximize ΛV (c)r −
r2 /2 where Λ = {L(N, Θ) if n < κ, Θ if n ≥ κ} is the value of commercialising the new
technology. If the patent is invalidated, the ﬁrm sets R&D to maximise ΛI(c)r − r2 /2. The
optimal level of R&D with c valid patents is rV∗ (c) = ΛV (c), and the optimal level in the case

                                                7
of invalidation is
                                               1 − (1 − α)c−1
                                      rI∗ (c) = Λ               .
                                            1 − 2Λχα (1 − α)c−1
Deﬁning ∆r = rV∗ (c) − rI∗ (c), we obtain the impact of patent invalidation on R&D by the ﬁrm:
                                                                1 − (1 − α)c−1
                            ∆r = Λ 1 − (1 − α)c −                                     .
                                                             1 − 2Λχα (1 − α)c−1
         The following proposition summarizes the predictions of the model about how patent
invalidation aﬀects innovation by the patent owner.

Proposition 1 There exists: (i) an χ∗ > 0 such that, for χ < χ∗ , ∆r = rV − rI > 0 and
d∆r
    > 0; (ii) an n̄ > κ such that |∆r| is larger for ﬁrms with n < κ than for ﬁrms with n > n̄.
dN
       Proof. See Appendix A.1.
       The main result of the model is that invalidation has an ambiguous eﬀect on innovation
incentives. Loss of a core patent has two countervailing eﬀects (there is no eﬀect for peripheral
patents, by assumption). The number of ideas which the ﬁrm can develop in the absence
of external competitive pressure declines when it loses a patent, and this reduces incentives.
However, invalidation opens up the technology ﬁeld and induces a patent race. Because the
probability of winning the race increases with the R&D investment, invalidation also has a
positive eﬀect on innovation incentives. Which eﬀect dominates depends on the intensity of
the competition in the patent race, reﬂected in the parameter χ.
       Part (i) of the Proposition says that when the ﬁrm faces intense competition in the
patent race (low χ), the ﬁrst eﬀect dominates, so invalidation reduces follow-on innovation
by the patent holder. When R&D investment by the patent holder substantially aﬀects the
likelihood of winning the patent race (low competition, high χ), invalidation increases follow-
on innovation. This highlights that the impact of patent rights depends on the characteristics
of the competitive environment. In addition, for a small ﬁrm facing an intense patent race,
the impact of losing a core patent is larger when there are more potential licensees for the
technology (in the empirical work, we associate this with the number of large ﬁrms in the
related technology area). The intuition is that more potential licensees make it more likely
that the technology will be licensed (in addition, competition among licensees raises the rent
the innovator can extract, though this element is not in the formal model).5

   5
     While our model takes χ as exogenous, one may expect χ′ (N ) < 0 because large ﬁrms with a diversiﬁed
research portfolio are best positioned to exploit opportunities and ﬂexibility to shift the focus of their research.
This would reinforce our result that the impact of patent invalidation is larger when there are more potential
licensees for the technology.


                                                         8
        Part (ii) says that there is a size threshold, n̄ > κ such that the loss of a core patent
has a greater impact on small ﬁrms (n < κ) than on large ﬁrms (n > n̄) — and the impact
goes to zero as ﬁrm size increases. Because internal commercialization allows large ﬁrms to
extract greater proﬁts from their patents, the eﬀect of invalidation is stronger for large ﬁrms
than small ﬁrms. However, the concavity of V (c) and I(c) means that the marginal beneﬁt of
owning an extra patent declines as the portfolio size increases. For n large enough, the second
eﬀect dominates and the loss of a core patent aﬀects innovation by small ﬁrms more than large
ﬁrms.
        In Appendix A.2 we show that these predictions hold for a large class of bargaining games,
and in particular do not depend on the take-it-or-leave feature of the licensing negotiation. In
Appendix A.3 we also show that, when competition in the patent race is intense (χ(r) is very
small), the comparative statics of the model are robust to a more general speciﬁcation of the
innovation production process V (c, r), I(c, r), Θ(n) and C(r), under some mild conditions on
their curvature.


3    Data

The empirical work is based on an extended version of the data used in Galasso and Schanker-
man (2015), which combines the decisions by the Federal Circuit Court with the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO) patent dataset.
        The Federal Circuit, established by the U.S. Congress in 1982, has exclusive jurisdiction
over appeals in cases involving patents (and claims against the federal government in various
subject matter) and consists of twelve judges appointed by the President. Judges are assigned to
patent cases through a computer program that randomly generates three-judge panels, subject
to their availability and the requirement that each judge deals with a representative cross
section of the ﬁelds of law within the jurisdiction of the court (Fed. Cir. R. 47.2). Decisions
are taken by majority rule.
        We obtain the full text of patent decisions by the Federal Circuit from the LexisNexis
QuickLaw portal. This contains a detailed description of the litigated dispute, the ﬁnal decision
and jurisprudence used to reach the decision. Using keyword searches, we identify each case
involving issues of patent validity from the establishment of the court in 1982 until December
2010. For each case we record the following information: docket number, date of the decision,
patent identiﬁcation number, identities of the three judges involved, the plaintiﬀ and the defen-


                                                 9
dant. The ﬁnal sample covers 1379 patent invalidity decisions. Information about each patent
in the sample is obtained from the USPTO patent database.
       In this paper we focus on how patent invalidation aﬀects innovation at the ﬁrm level.
To do this, for each owner of patents litigated at the Federal Circuit, we use a number of
data sources to construct the patent portfolio in the year of the Federal Circuit decision and
subsequent patenting activity. The USPTO data provide an assignee identiﬁcation number, our
main tool to track patenting activity, only for patents granted after 1976. For patents granted
earlier, we retrieve data through manual searches on ‘Google Patents’. Assignee numbers are
not provided for patents owned by individual inventors. For each of these patents, we identify
the disambiguated name of the ﬁrst inventor, exploiting the data described in Li et. al. (2014).
We then track patenting activity over time by identifying patents with inventors having the
same name, city, country and zip-code of the ﬁrst inventor of the litigated patent. Finally,
assignee identiﬁcation numbers are not available for patents classiﬁed as ‘unassigned’ by the
USPTO. For these patents, we identity the patentee from the text of the Federal court decision.6
       The main variables used in the empirical analysis are described below.
       PostPatents: number of patent applications by the patent owner (assignee) in a ﬁve
year window after the Federal Circuit decision. This is our primary measure of innovation.
Because of granting delays, we date the patents using the year in which they were applied for.
       Invalidity: a dummy variable equal to one if the Federal Circuit invalidates at least one
claim of the litigated patent. This is the main explanatory variable of interest, and represents
the removal of patent rights.
       PrePatents: number of patents applied for by the patent owner in the ten years pre-
ceding the Federal Circuit decision.
       Technology ﬁeld: dummy variables for the six technology classes in Hall, Jaﬀe and
Tratjenberg (2001) — chemicals, computers and communications, pharma, electrical and elec-
tronics, mechanicals, and others. We also employ a narrower deﬁnition based on the 36 two-digit
subcategories.

       Table 1 provides summary statistics. The Federal Circuit invalidates in 40 percent of
cases. On average the cases involve ﬁrms with 336 patents in their portfolio and that apply for

    6
      For each unassigned patent, we identify the names of the parties involved in the suit. If one of the litigants
is also an inventor listed on the patent, we classify the patent as assigned to that individual. If litigants are
ﬁrms, we exploit the USPTO re-assignment data to conﬁrm that the patent was assigned to one of the ﬁrms and
use the USPTO assignee data to retrieve an assignee number of the acquiring ﬁrm. We dropped patents where
we were unable to match the patent to an entity with conﬁdence.


                                                        10
214 patents in the ﬁve years after the decision, but the portfolio distribution is highly skewed
(median is 14, and 21 percent of the ﬁrms have only one patent).
        Federal Circuit cases represent a selected sample of highly valuable patents. For example,
in January 2005 the Federal Circuit invalidated the patent for the once-a-week version of
Merck’s Fosamax, the leading osteoporosis drug in the market at that time. Galasso and
Schankerman (2015) show that commonly-used indicators of patent value — e.g., the number
of claims and citations per claim — are higher for litigated patents than others, and even
higher for those appealed to the Federal Circuit. However, for the purpose of studying whether
patent rights provide important innovation incentives, it is reasonable to start with privately
valuable patents as they are also likely to be of greatest importance for welfare. In addition,
our identiﬁcation strategy only applies to this sub-population, since unfortunately judges are
not always randomized in cases at the lower (district court) level.
        Unlike Galasso and Schankerman (2015), this paper is conducted at the ﬁrm-case level
because we are interested in identifying the impact of invalidation on innovation by the ﬁrm
that loses its patent right. This requires collapsing the dataset from patent-level observations
to ﬁrm-level units of analysis. For about 79 percent of the cases in our sample, ﬁrms litigate
only one patent, but the remaining cases involve multiple patents owned by the same ﬁrm. For
multi-patent cases, we deﬁne the invalidity dummy as equal to one if at least one patent is
invalidated, and allow multiple age and technology ﬁeld dummies in order to characterize all
the patents in the case.7


4       Econometric speciﬁcation and identiﬁcation strategy

The ﬁnal dataset is a cross section where the unit of observation is a Federal Circuit case
involving ﬁrm i.8 Our main empirical speciﬁcation is

                         log(P ostP atentsi + 1) = β Invalidityi + λ′ Xi + εi                              (1)

    7
    In the sample, 158 cases involve two patents held by the same ﬁrm, 47 have three patents, 14 involve four,
and 8 cases have more than ﬁve patents. Results are robust to redeﬁning the age of the litigated patents as the
average (integer) age, and the technology ﬁeld as the modal ﬁeld of the patents in the case.
    8
    Even though we have some cases of the same ﬁrm more than once, we use the subscript i to denote the case
to emphazise that our sample is a cross section.




                                                      11
where X denotes control variables. We include a dummy control variable for observations
where the ﬁrm has zero patenting in the ﬁve-year window after the decision.9 The coeﬃcient β
captures the eﬀect of invalidation on subsequent patenting by the ﬁrm: β < 0 means that ﬁrms
react to patent invalidation by reducing their subsequent patenting, and thus that patent rights
have a positive impact on innovation. To control for ﬁrm heterogeneity that may be correlated
both with the court decision and later patenting, we include the number of patents received
prior to the Federal Circuit decision (PrePatents), and a full set of age, decision year and
technology ﬁeld dummies. We also include dummies which capture the most extreme repeat
litigants (i.e. ﬁrms which appear in 4 or 5 litigation cases in our sample) and an additive
dummy for the largest ﬁrms in our sample (top 2 percent of portfolio size). Controlling for
these outliers is important because the patenting strategies of large ﬁrms and repeat litigants
may diﬀer substantially from those of other ﬁrms in the sample — e.g., the largest ﬁrms are likely
to invest more in defensive patenting to resolve disputes (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004),
and repeat litigants may partly reﬂect patent assertion entities. We report robust standard
errors clustered at the litigant level.
       The main empirical challenge is the potential endogeneity of the Federal Circuit decision
to invalidate a patent. The greatest concern in our context is that ﬁrms diﬀer in their propensity
to patent their innovations. Firms that aggressively patent, ﬁling numerous patent applications
some of which are of dubious validity, may be more likely to experience invalidation by the
courts. Conversely, ﬁrms that are more selective in patenting are more likely to have their
patents upheld. This would generate positive correlation between εi and Invalidityi in equation
(1) and thus an upward bias in the OLS estimate of β. There could also be measurement error in
our measure of invalidation, creating attenuation bias toward zero (though we show robustness
to alternative deﬁnitions below).
       To address endogeneity, we need an instrument that aﬀects the likelihood of patent
invalidation but does not belong directly in the patenting equation. We exploit the fact that
judges in the Federal Circuit are assigned to patent cases randomly by a computer program.
This ensures that judges with high propensity to invalidate are not assigned to cases because
of unobservable characteristics that are correlated with ﬁrm patenting. Randomization of
judges is not suﬃcient to ensure decisions are random, however, because information that

   9
     In column 4 of appendix Table A2 we show that the results are robust (and stronger in magnitute) without
this dummy.




                                                     12
becomes available to the judges during the litigation process case might be correlated with
future patenting of the ﬁrm. The instrument we construct below also takes this concern into
account.
       Our instrumental variable, the Judges Invalidity Propensity (JIP) index, is deﬁned for
each case involving ﬁrm i as

                   JIPi = fi1 fi2 fi3 + fi1 fi2 (1 − fi3 ) + fi1 (1 − fi2 )fi3 + (1 − fi1 )fi2 fi3

where fi1 , fi2 , fi3 are the fractions of votes in favour of invalidity by each of the three judges
assigned to the case calculated for all decisions excluding the case involving ﬁrm i. In other
words, the decision for the focal ﬁrm does not enter into the computation of the instrument for
that decision.10 This feature ensures that any case-speciﬁc information that might be correlated
with the decision and future patenting is removed.
       Of course, this instrument works only if judges have diﬀerent propensities to vote for
patent invalidity. Galasso and Schankerman (2015) show that the propensity to invalidate
patents varies widely among judges over the sample period, ranging from a low of 24.4 percent
to a high of 76.2 percent. This is conﬁrmed in the distribution of the JIP index across cases,
which has a mean of 0.35 but varies from 0.16 to 0.54.11
       Our estimation procedure instruments the Invalidity dummy with the predicted prob-
ability of invalidation obtained from the probit model P = P (JIP, X). When the endogenous
regressor is a dummy, this estimator is asymptotically eﬃcient in the class of estimators where
instruments are a function of JIP and other covariates (Wooldridge, 2002). Speciﬁcally, we
estimate the following two-stage model:

                                      Invalidityi = αPi + θ ′ Xi + ui                                       (2)

                        log(P ostP atentsi + 1) = β Invalidityi + λ′ Xi + εi                                (3)

where the set of controls X is the same in both stages.

  10
    In Galasso and Schankerman (2015) we show that, under plausible assumptions on the dispersion of private
information, JIP provides a consistent estimate of the probability of invalidation in a strategic voting model
where the evidentiary threshold is interpreted diﬀerently by diﬀerent judges.
  11
     We use the term ‘bias’ to refer to this variation in the propensity to invalidate, but it can also reﬂect
diﬀerences in their expertise and ability to process information in the diﬀerent technology ﬁelds covered by the
patent cases. Part of the variation in JIP may reﬂect year eﬀects because ‘biased’ judges may be active only for
a limited period of time. To address this, we regressed JIP against year ﬁxed eﬀects and ﬁnd that they explain
only about 11 percent of the variation.



                                                         13
         In Appendix Table A.1 we summarize the relationship between patent invalidation and
judge panels in our data. Probit models conﬁrm a strong positive link between patent invalida-
tion and the JIP index, and this is robust to including a set of controls for patent characteristics.
Moreover, OLS regressions with JIP as dependent variable conﬁrm the randomization of judges
to cases. The portfolio size of the patent owner, the age of the patent and its technology class
are all unrelated to JIP. Only the year eﬀects are signiﬁcantly correlated with JIP, which arises
mechanically because some of the ‘biased’ judges are active only for a subset of years.12


5        Empirical results

Table 2 examines how Federal Circuit invalidation aﬀects subsequent patenting by the focal
ﬁrm. Column 1 presents OLS estimates of the baseline speciﬁcation relating the number of
patent applications in a ﬁve-year window after the court decision to the invalidity dummy and
additional controls. There is no statistically signiﬁcant correlation between patent invalidation
and future patents. This result is not causal, however, since we might expect unobservable fac-
tors to aﬀect both the invalidity decision and subsequent innovation. This intuition is conﬁrmed
by a Rivers-Vuong test that provides strong evidence against the exogeneity of invalidation.13
         In column 2 we instrument the Invalidity dummy with the predicted probability of in-
validation obtained from the ﬁrm-level probit regression from column 2 of Table A1 (we report
the ﬁrst-stage regression for this speciﬁcation in column 1 of Table A6). The IV estimate of
β — which gives the local average treatment eﬀect of invalidation — is highly signiﬁcant and
large. Exponentiation of the coeﬃcient implies that patent invalidation causes a reduction in
ﬁrm patenting of about 50 percent in the ﬁve years following the Federal Circuit decision.14
Interestingly, the size of this eﬀect is very similar to the ﬁnding in in Farre-Mensa, Hegde
and Ljungqvist (2015), who study the impact of patent grant on a sample of start-up ﬁrms,
exploiting the quasi-random assignment of examiners at the USPTO. We show later that this

    12
    A battery of additional tests conﬁrming the exogeneity of the instrument is presented in Galasso and
Schankerman (2015).
    13
    Following Rivers and Vuong (1998), we regress Invalidity on JIP and the other controls in a linear probability
model. We construct the residuals (v) for this model and then regress subsequent patenting on Invalidity, v and
other controls. The coeﬃcient on v is positive and statistically signiﬁcant.
    14
     Under U.S. law, the patentee does not generally owe damages or attorney fees to the patent challenger, and
licensees do not recover past royalties if a patent is invalidated (Geﬀner v. Linear Rotary Bearings, Inc., 124
F.3d 229, Fed. Cir. 1997). Thus, our estimate of the incentive eﬀect is not confounded by additional ﬁnancial
obligations associated with invalidation.



                                                       14
local average treatment eﬀect hides important heterogeneity, with the impact of patent rights
strongly depending on characteristics of the patentee and competitive landscape. Before doing
that, we perform a variety of tests to conﬁrm the robustness of our main ﬁnding.
       First, in the baseline speciﬁcation the Invalidity dummy is deﬁned as one if any of
the patents litigated in the case is invalidated. In multi-patent cases, this classiﬁcation may
generate measurement error. We conduct two tests to check whether our estimates are sensitive
to the treatment of invalidity decisions involving multiple patents. In column 3 of Table 2 we
adopt a more restrictive deﬁnition of invalidation, where the dummy is one only if all the
patents in a case are invalidated. With this more stringent deﬁnition, the fraction of cases in
which invalidation takes place drops from 40 to 36 percent.15 There is essentially no change
in the estimated eﬀect of invalidation. Additionally, in column 4 we drop the cases involving
multiple patents from the sample. Again the coeﬃcient is very similar to the baseline estimate,
conﬁrming that our ﬁnding is not sensitive to the treatment of multi-patent cases.
       Second our sample contains 240 cases involving repeat litigants. In about 75 percent of
these cases, the spell between the two Federal Circuit decisions is less than 5 years. This is a
concern since the impact of the decision of the court is potentially contaminated by another
decision taking place in the same time frame. To address this concern, in Appendix Table
A2 we present the estimates when we drop cases for which the ﬁve year window after the
decisions overlaps with another case for the same patentee. The estimated eﬀect of invalidation
is stronger (though not statistically diﬀerent) from the one in our baseline. We also re-estimated
dropping all cases with repeat litigants and again the coeﬃcient is very similar to the baseline
estimate.
       There is also a concern that some Federal Circuit decisions may involve rulings that limit
the scope of patentable subject matter rather than simply assessing the validity of the focal
patent. To address this, we identiﬁed the most important Federal Circuit decisions that relate
to patentable subject matter during our sample period. Dropping those decisions (only 3 in
our sample) and re-estimating the model we obtain coeﬃcients that are nearly identical to the
baseline estimates.
       Finally, there are 237 cases where we cannot directly retrieve an assignee number from
the USPTO data based on the patents litigated in the case. As described in Section 3, for

  15
    About 50 percent of cases involving multiple patents result in no patents being invalidated, and 32 percent
result in the invalidation of all patents in the case. Thus the two invalidation measures diﬀer in only about 40
cases.



                                                      15
these observations we identify the patentee from the disambiguated name of the inventor and
by manual searches on Google patents. In Appendix Table A2 we conﬁrm that our baseline
results are robust to dropping these manually-cleaned observations from the sample.


6        Unbundling the eﬀect of patent rights

The preceding analysis shows that patent rights are an important innovation incentive, on
average. However, the model developed in Section 2 predicts that the impact of patent rights
should depend on characteristics of the patentee (small vs large) and technology (core vs
peripheral patent). In this section we unbundle the average eﬀect of patents and explore
these, and other, dimensions of heterogeneity.

6.1      Small vs large ﬁrms

We ﬁrst test the hypothesis that innovation incentives from patent rights are more important
for small patentees than large ones. To do so, we deﬁne a ‘large ﬁrm’ dummy variable equal to
one for ﬁrms in the top quartile of our sample in terms of patent applications in the ten years
prior to the Federal Circuit decision (this threshold corresponds to 108 patents).16 Thus, in
the analysis that follows it is best to think of our ‘small ﬁrm’ sub-sample as representing both
small and medium-sized ﬁrms.
         Table 3 present IV regressions that allow for diﬀerential impacts of patent rights for
small and large ﬁrms. In columns 1 and 2, split sample regressions of the baseline model reveal
a strong negative eﬀect of invalidation on small ﬁrms, but no signiﬁcant eﬀect for large ﬁrms.
Column 3 presents a full sample regression that allows the invalidity eﬀect to diﬀer for small
and large ﬁrms.17 Again we ﬁnd no evidence of any eﬀect for large ﬁrms — the point estimates
are small, though with large standard errors. By contrast, loss of a patent causes a large and
statistically signiﬁcant reduction of 48 percent in future patenting by small ﬁrms, and the two
coeﬃcients are statistically diﬀerent from each other at the 0.05 level.

  16
     Over the decade 1991-2001, in the aggregte USPTO data only 0.05 percent of ﬁrms are large according to
this deﬁnition. If we drop invididuals and unassigned patents, the fraction is about one percent. However, large
ﬁrms account for about 50 percent of patenting activity in that period.
    17
    To estimate the regression in column 3, we follow Wooldrige (2000) and exploit a two-stage procedure. In the
ﬁrst stage Invalidity×Small is regressed on instruments P ×Small and P ×Large and other controls. Similarly,
Invalidity×Large is regressed on instruments P ×Small and P ×Large and other controls. In the second stage,
the predicted values from these regressions are used to replace the two endogenous variables. Our speciﬁcations
include the direct eﬀect of the large dummy along with the interactions with the invalidity dummy.




                                                      16
         We did additional regressions that vary the threshold portfolio size to deﬁne large ﬁrms,
which we report in columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table A3. The results in Table A3 are
robust to these alternative thresholds: the invalidation coeﬃcient for small ﬁrms remains large
and highly signiﬁcant, but there is no evidence of any eﬀect for large ﬁrms. In particular,
the diﬀerence between the impact for small and large ﬁrms holds even if we set the portfolio
threshold for large ﬁrms as low as 30 patents. But interestingly, when we raise the threshold to
150 patents, the coeﬃcient of invalidation for small ﬁrms remains signiﬁcant, though somewhat
smaller, and again it is statistically insigniﬁcant for large ﬁrms. For both thresholds we reject
the hypothesis that the coeﬃcients for small and large ﬁrms are the same (p-values=0.03 and
0.01, respectively). These experiments indicate that the importance of patent rights for follow-
on innovation is not limited to very small ﬁrms, but also extends over the middle range of ﬁrm
sizes.
         To this point we deﬁne ﬁrms size based on the number of patents in its portfolio. We
also checked whether this ﬁnding holds if we deﬁne ﬁrm size in relative, rather than absolute,
terms. To do this, we reclassify ﬁrms as small or large on the basis on their patent portfolio
size relative to other patentees in the same (two-digit) technology ﬁeld. Column 4 in Table 3
presents the parameter estimates using this classiﬁcation: the results are nearly identical to
the coeﬃcients in column 3.
         We also examine a more traditional measure of ﬁrm size, the number of employees. To do
this, we use USPTO data which requires ﬁrms to report their ‘small entity status’ (less than 500
employees) when they pay patent renewal fees.18 These data are available only for patents ﬁled
on or after December 12, 1980, which are about 70 percent of our sample. Roughly 35 percent
of the matched patentees are classiﬁed as small entities and nearly all of them (97 percent) have
a portfolio smaller than 108 patents. However, only 36 percent of large entities have more than
108 patents in their portfolio. Column 3 in Table A3 reports a regression based on the small
entity status which shows that the invalidation eﬀect does not vary with employment size, as
measured here, but its dependence on the size of the ﬁrm’s patent portfolio remains robust.

  18
   In an attempt to obtain a ﬁner measure of ﬁrms’ employment, we matched our data with Bureau Van Dijk
(ORBIS) data. Unfortunately, matching was successful only for a very small fraction of our sample because the
ORBIS data are very sparse for the early part of our sample period.




                                                     17
6.2    Core vs peripheral patents

The model in Section 2 distinguishes between core and peripheral technologies, building on
ideas in the sociology and management literatures. Core technologies, and the associated
patents and business models, create the sustainable competitive advantage for the ﬁrm, with
peripheral technologies/patents typically building on the core to extract greater value and
provide a protective buﬀer (Thompson, 1967). Our model assumes that future innovation
builds only on core technologies, which implies that only the loss of a core patent would aﬀect
incentives for follow-on innovation by the patentee. The more general point is that we expect
patent rights over a core technology to be more important for subsequent innovation than
peripheral patents.
       We investigate this hypothesis by constructing two measures of core patents. The ﬁrst is
based on whether the litigated patent falls in a technology ﬁeld that represents the main focus
of the ﬁrm’s patenting activity. We identify the (two-digit) technology ﬁeld of each patent
in our sample and compute the share of the patentee’s portfolio belonging to the ‘focal’ ﬁeld
where the litigated patent is assigned. On average, the litigated patents in our sample belong
to technology ﬁelds which account for roughly 61 percent of the patenting of the ﬁrm, but
there is substantial variation in ﬁeld shares (standard deviation = 0.36). For about 37 percent
of litigated patents, all of the ﬁrm’s portfolio is in the same technology ﬁeld, but for about
12 percent the share is below 10 percent. We deﬁne a dummy variable, Core=1 if the ﬁrm
litigates a patent that belongs to a technology ﬁeld accounting for at least 66 percent of the
ﬁrm’s patenting (i.e. share above the median). For multi-patent cases, we set Core=1 if the
case involves at least one core patent.
       The second measure exploits the pattern of self-citations made by the patentee. We
construct the ratio between the self-citations received by the focal patent before the Federal
Circuit decision and the maximum number of self-citations that the focal patent could have
received before the decision.19 On average, patents in our sample receive 8 percent of the
maximum possible self-citations and about 60 percent of the patents receive no self-citations.
The dummy variable Core is set equal to 1 if the ﬁrm litigates a patent with a fraction of
self-cites above the 75th percentile. Also for this measure, in multi-patent cases we set Core=1
if the case involves at least one core patent.

  19
     This is equivalent to the degree centrality of the patent in the network generated by the patents applied for
by the patentee between the grant of the focal patent and the Federal Circuit decision (Jackson, 2008).



                                                       18
      Table 4 presents estimates of the invalidation eﬀect for core and peripheral patents. In
columns 1 and 2 we present the estimates based on these two alternative measures of Core. The
results are striking. In both cases it is only the loss of core patents that causes a reduction in
follow-on innovation. There is no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect for the invalidation of peripheral
patents, and we reject the hypothesis that the coeﬃcients are the same for small and large ﬁrms
(p-values= 0.03 and 0.07, respectively).
      We conduct several robustness checks. First, we construct the share of patents in the focal
ﬁeld exploiting a ﬁner classiﬁcation, the three-digit USPTO classes. Litigated patents belong
to (three digits) technology ﬁelds that account for about 54 percent of the ﬁrm’s patenting on
average (standard deviation = 0.41). As before, we set Core=1 if the ﬁrm litigates a patent in
a ﬁeld with share above the sample median. The estimated coeﬃcients (unreported) are nearly
identical to those in column 1. Second, in Appendix Table A4, we vary the cut-oﬀ share used
to classify a patent as core using the two-digit technology classiﬁcation. As we increase the
threshold from 0.25 to 0.75 the estimated eﬀects increase monotonically. This indicates that
the loss of a core patent is most damaging to innovation when the ﬁrm is highly specialized in
the technology ﬁeld (as before, losing a non-core patent has no signiﬁcant impact).

6.3   Low vs high value patents

We also examine whether invalidation of more valuable patents has a stronger impact on sub-
sequent patenting. Follow-on innovation incentives may be aﬀected not only by invalidation of
patents on core technologies that future innovation builds on, but also by the loss of revenue,
especially for small, cash-constrained ﬁrms that ﬁnance innovation with internal funds. To
consider this, we examine whether invalidation of more valuable patents has a stronger impact
on subsequent patenting. We construct a measure of patent importance exploiting the number
of citations received by the patent from other ﬁrms (non-self cites) before the Federal Circuit
decision. To take into account that the citation proﬁle of patents varies across technology areas
and depends on the age of the patent (Mehta et al, 2010), we ﬁlter the citations with age
dummies and 32 technology subcategory eﬀects.
      In column 3 of Table 4 we deﬁne a patent as High Value if it has (ﬁltered) citations above
the 75th percentile in our sample. In column 4 we use the 90th percentile as the threshold.
These regressions show that invalidation of more valuable patents has a stronger negative
impact on future patenting. Invalidation of low-value patents does not have a statistically
signiﬁcant eﬀect, but the estimates has a large standard error; we can reject that the equality

                                                19
of the impact for the low and high value patents only at the 10 percent level.
      Of course, there is the concern that the High Value dummy may simply capture core
patents. This is not supported by the correlation between Core and High Value, which is only
-0.01; the fraction of core patents is essentially the same within the sets of high and low value
patents. To conﬁrm this, we run an IV regression with separate interactions between invalidity
and the high value dummy, and invalidity and the core patent dummy. The (unreported)
coeﬃcients on both interaction terms are negative and statistically signiﬁcant. This reinforces
the idea that the two variables capture conceptually distinct characteristics of the patent, and
that Core is not simply a proxy for High Value.


7     Explaining the impact for small ﬁrms

The empirical results show that patent rights are critically important for innovation by small
ﬁrms. In this Section we investigate three potential explanations for this ﬁnding. First, patents
can soften the impact of product market rivalry with large ﬁrms and improve the ability of
small ﬁrms to license their innovation to large ﬁrms for commercialisation (Gans, Hsu and
Stern, 2002; Gans and Stern, 2003). Second, patents may enhance the ability of small ﬁrms
to access debt and venture capital ﬁnance (Conti, Thursby and Thursby, 2013; Hochberg,
Serrano and Zeidonis, 2014). Finally, patents serve as valuable bargaining chips to get access
to patented inputs needed for research and help resolve disputes through cross-licensing and
other arrangements (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004; Galasso, 2012). We want to identify
which of these channels are important, not least because they have diﬀerent policy implications.

7.1   Competition with large ﬁrms

Patent rights can be crucial for small innovators when they face competition from larger,
established ﬁrms in technology (and product) markets. There are three reasons for this. First,
product market rivalry is likely to be more intense when there are many large ﬁrms active in the
ﬁeld. While the relationship between patent rights, competition and innovation is theoretically
ambiguous, recent research indicates that patents are particularly important when competition
is intense (Spulber, 2013; Aghion, Howitt and Prantl, 2015). Second, the presence of multiple
large ﬁrms increases the bargaining power of small innovators, and thus the licensing rent they
can extract from a patented innovation. Third, large ﬁrms are likely to be well-positioned to
compete in developing and commercializing innovation that builds on an invalidated patent



                                               20
(thus undermining the original patent owner in the follow-on patent race). This is so because
large ﬁrms have the requisite complementary assets and greater ﬂexibility in directing their
research eﬀorts (Gans and Stern, 2003).
       For these reasons, we expect patent invalidation would be more damaging to innovation
incentives for small, high-tech ﬁrms that operate in ﬁelds with many established large ﬁrms. To
test this hypothesis, we need a measure of the potential competitors among large ﬁrms in the
technology ﬁeld of the litigated patent (‘focal ﬁeld’). We identify all ﬁrms that have a portfolio
of at least 75 patents, in the ten-year window preceding the Federal Circuit decision, and at
least 50 percent of their portfolio in the two-digit technology area of the litigated patent. On
this measure, the mean number of large ﬁrms active in the focal technology ﬁeld is 38 (median
= 13). We then deﬁne a dummy variable Few Large Firms=1 if the number of large patentees
in the focal ﬁeld is in the ﬁrst quartile of the sample (corresponds to 5 large ﬁrms).
       Column 1 in Table 5 presents the IV estimates of the invalidation eﬀect for small ﬁrms
operating in a focal technology ﬁeld with few versus many large patentees. The results show
that patent invalidation reduces innovation only when small ﬁrms are in technology ﬁelds where
large ﬁrms are more active. The impact is large: invalidation for these small ﬁrms reduces their
future patenting by about 67 percent. But invalidation has no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on
innovation for small ﬁrms in ﬁelds where few large ﬁrms are present. In Appendix Table A5
we present additional regressions that vary the thresholds for the number of large ﬁrms, their
share of patenting in the focal ﬁeld, and the fraction of patenting used to classify a large ﬁrm
as active in the ﬁeld. The results in column 1 of Table 5 remain robust.20
       We next examine whether the eﬀect of patent invalidation for small ﬁrms is concentrated
in a few speciﬁc technology ﬁelds, or is more pervasive. To do this, we begin by extending
our baseline model (which used a dichotomous breakdown into small and large ﬁrms) with a
more ﬂexible speciﬁcation that allows the impact of invalidation to vary continuously with the
logarithm of the number of large ﬁrms in the ﬁeld (again deﬁned as those with at least 75
patents and 50 percent in the focal, two-digit technology ﬁeld). The IV estimates conﬁrm that
the negative impact of invalidation is larger (in absolute value) for small ﬁrms when they face

  20
    We also examine whether this ﬁnding simply reﬂects instances where there are fewer ﬁrms in total — less
competition overall — rather than being something speciﬁc about the interaction between small and large ﬁrms.
To do this, we construct a measure of the ‘equivalent number of ﬁrms’ in a ﬁeld, deﬁned as the reciprocal of the
Herﬁndahl concentration index, and include this control variable in the IV regressions reported above. These
regressions conﬁrm that the impact of invalidation for small ﬁrms is larger when small ﬁrms face larger ﬁrms in
the focal technology ﬁeld, controlling for our measure of overall competition in that ﬁeld.



                                                      21
a greater number of large ﬁrms in the technology ﬁeld. Using these estimates, we compute
the implied impact of patent invalidation on small ﬁrm innovation for each of the two-digit
technology ﬁelds (36 in total), based on the sample mean number of large ﬁrms in each ﬁeld.
      The results (not reported) show that the impact varies somewhat across broad one—
digit technology ﬁelds: the largest eﬀect is in Pharmaceuticals, where the estimate (standard
error) is -1.79 (0.74), as compared to a low of -0.34 (0.42) in Electronics. More striking is the
large variation across two-digit areas within any given one-digit ﬁeld. For example, within
the Pharmaceuticals category, the invalidation eﬀect on small ﬁrms varies from -2.98 (1.28) in
Drugs to -0.23 (0.37) in Genetics and Biotechnology. Within Electronics the eﬀect varies from
-1.71 (0.72) in Semiconductor Devices to -0.24 (0.36) in Nuclear and X-rays. This diversity
characterizes all six one-digit technology areas. It reﬂects the fact that most of the variation
in the number of large ﬁrms arises within the six broad ﬁelds (only 30 percent of the total
variance is across one-digit ﬁelds), and it is not concentrated in few broad technology ﬁelds.
      The approach above has a limitation: it does not recognize that large ﬁrms in diﬀerent,
but technologically related, ﬁelds may also be eﬀective potential competitors. To address this
concern, we build on Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen (2013) who develop a ‘Mahalanobis’
index that measures the technological proximity between diﬀerent patent classes based on the
frequency with which ﬁrms tend to patent in speciﬁc subset of ﬁelds (patent co-location). We
compute the number of large ﬁrms in each two-digit technology ﬁeld and then weight them
by the Mahalanobis index of proximity between that ﬁeld and the one in which the litigated
patent falls (Appendix A.4 for details). This provides a more reﬁned measure of the number of
competition from large ﬁrms, which may also prove useful in other contexts, such as empirical
models of entry.
      We re-deﬁne the dummy Few Large Firms=1 if the Mahalanobis index of large patentees
is in the bottom decile of the distribution. The IV estimates using this measure, reported in
Table A5, conﬁrm our earlier results: invalidation has a strong and signiﬁcant eﬀect for small
ﬁrms facing potential competition from many large ﬁrms.

7.2   Access to ﬁnance

Small ﬁrms face diﬃculty in ﬁnancing their innovation due to information asymmetries in
capital markets (Hall and Lerner, 2010). Recent empirical studies show these frictions can be
mitigated through debt and venture capital secured by patents (Conti, Thursby and Thursby,
2013; Hochberg, Serrano and Ziedonis, 2014; Farre-Mensa, Hegde and Ljungqvist, 2015). If

                                               22
our ﬁnding that patent invalidation causes a decline in innovation by small ﬁrms is driven by
this channel, we would expect to observe a larger reduction for small ﬁrms that rely on the
(subsequently invalidated) patent to obtain ﬁnance.
       To test this, we collect information on whether patents in our sample are used to secure
loans. Following Hochberg, Serrano and Ziedonis (2014), we manually examine the assignment
records for each of the patents in our sample from the USPTO and Google-Patent databases
and identify all instances where patents are assigned to banks or other ﬁnancial institutions
A complete description of the nature of the transactions is not provided in the assignment
data, but often these assignments are ﬂagged as “security interest” or “collateral assignment,”
conﬁrming the ﬁnancial nature of the transactions. About 15.5 percent of the patents in our
sample are pledged as collateral at least once during their life, but only 6.5 percent of the patents
(96 patents) are pledged as collateral before the Federal Circuit decision. We generate a dummy
variable Collateral=1 if the patent is used as collateral before the Federal Circuit decision,
and re-estimate the baseline model that includes an interaction between the invalidation and
collateral dummy variables. If ﬁnancial constraints are an important channel through which
loss of patent rights aﬀects innovation, the eﬀect of invalidation should be stronger for the
patents used as collateral.
       The results (column 2, Table 5) show that the impact of patent invalidation is about
twice as large for patents pledged as collateral than for patents not pledged.21 While the
diﬀerence between the two coeﬃcients is not statistically signiﬁcant, the coeﬃcients provide
some additional evidence that patent rights are important for small, high-tech companies to
gain access to ﬁnance. While our evidence relates to collateral for bank loans, patent rights
are likely to play a similar role for venture capital ﬁnancing. We also point out that even if the
patent is not used as collateral before the litigation, it is possible that the loss of licensing income
(current and prospective) associated with patent invalidation could reduce later innovation for
ﬁrms that are liquidity-constrained. Our earlier results contrasting the eﬀects of invalidation
of low vs high-value patents is consistent with this interpretation.

  21
     We also tested wheher the eﬀect of invalidation on innovation is larger for young ﬁrms, since this is where
informational asymmetries are likley to be most severe. We deﬁne age of the patent owner as the diﬀerence
between the year of the Federal Circuit decision and the application year of the oldest patent in the USPTO data
for the speciﬁc assignee. We redo the IV regressions for small ﬁrms allowing for an interaction between Invalidity
and a dummy for small ﬁrms, and another interaction with young ﬁrms, using two alternative thresholds for
young (5 and 9 years). In both cases, there is no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the eﬀect of invalidation
between patents of young and old ﬁrms.




                                                       23
7.3   Access to patented inputs

The third channel we consider relates to the role of patents as bargaining chips for enforcing
rights and reducing the transaction costs of obtaining external, patented inputs. Patent port-
folios shape the expectation of repeated interaction between patentees, which allows ﬁrms to
resolve disputes ‘cooperatively’ without resorting to the courts (Lanjouw and Schankerman,
2004). Moreover, innovators ‘trade’ patent rights through cross-licensing agreements to avoid
costly litigation and preserve their ‘freedom to operate’ in innovation (Galasso, 2012). Losing
a patent may make it more diﬃcult to access external patent rights, especially for ﬁrms with
small patents portfolios. If this channel is important, we would expect patent invalidation to
have a more negative eﬀect on small innovators when they operate in technology ﬁelds with
fragmented ownership of patent rights — this is where ﬁrms need to engage in multiple licensing
negotiations and the risks of hold-up and bargaining failure are more severe (Ziedonis, 2004;
Galasso and Schankerman, 2010).
      To test this hypothesis, we construct a concentration measure Conc4, equal to the patent-
ing share of the four largest assignees in the two-digit technology ﬁeld of the litigated patent
during the ﬁve years preceding the Federal Circuit decision (the mean/standard deviation of
Conc4 are 0.08/0.06, respectively). In column 3 we contrast the IV estimates of patent invalida-
tion for small ﬁrms operating in fragmented ﬁelds (Conc4 below the median) and concentrated
ﬁelds (Conc4 above the median). The point estimates are very similar, and not statistically
diﬀerent from each other. We conclude that the impact of invalidation on innovation by small
ﬁrms in our sample is not driven by access to external (patented) inputs.


8     Exit from patenting

We have shown that the loss of a patent sharply reduces subsequent innovation by small ﬁrms,
and that this is due both to reduced access to capital markets and intensiﬁed competition by
large ﬁrms. In this section we investigate whether losing patent rights increases the risk that the
ﬁrm exits from the technology competition entirely. One of the hallmarks of entrepreneurship is
the well-documented fact that small ﬁrms have both high rates of entry and exit (e.g., Dunne
et al, 1989). In high technology markets where the incentives for innovation are key, it is
important to understand the role of patent rights in aﬀecting this process.
      In this Section we examine how patent invalidation aﬀects exit. To do this, we deﬁne a
dummy variable for exit equal to one if the focal ﬁrm in the litigation does not apply for any


                                                24
patents in the ﬁve-year window after the court decision (for such presumptive exiters, we also
conﬁrmed that they do not apply for patents in any subsequent part of sample period beyond
this window). This measure may overestimate the degree of exit for two reasons. First, the
ﬁrm may stop patenting but remain in the product market (though for high-technology ﬁrms,
this seems unlikely). Second, for invalidation decisions late in the sample period, censoring
may lead us to ascribe exit when patenting will occur after the end of the sample. One ﬁnal
concern is that small ﬁrms are often acquired and thus wrongly appear as not engaging in any
further innovation activity. But it is not clear whether patent invalidation makes this more or
less likely (the ﬁrm would be a less patent-rich target for acquisition, but at the same time less
expensive).
       Table 6 presents IV estimates of a linear probability model of exit, including controls
for technology ﬁeld, pre-decision patent portfolio size, and ﬁrm age dummies for intervals 0-5,
6-10 and greater than 10 years (age is measured as date of the court decision minus date of the
ﬁrm’s ﬁrst patent application). The results are presented using various (pre-decision) patent
portfolio thresholds for deﬁning ‘small ﬁrms’ in order to identify whether the impact of patent
invalidation on exit varies with ﬁrm size.22
       Column 1 shows that the loss of patent rights has no eﬀect on exit, when we pool small
and large ﬁrms. However, this local average treatment eﬀect hides an important diﬀerence
between small and large ﬁrms. The results in the other columns show that the loss of a patent
sharply increases the exit probability for small ﬁrms, and the eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant.
Not surprisingly, we see no evidence that invalidation increases exit by large ﬁrms. Interest-
ingly, the estimated impact of invalidation on exit for small ﬁrms monotonically increases as
we tighten the deﬁnition of small ﬁrms (moving from columns 2 to 6). For ﬁrms with a patent
portfolio less than 30, invalidation raises the exit probability by 0.347, which is about a 53
percent increase relative to the sample mean for this size category.23 For very small ﬁrms, with
portfolio of three patents or less, the coeﬃcient corresponds to a 63 percent increase in the
sample mean exit rate for that category.
       In summary, the evidence shows that losing a patent sharply both reduces the level

  22
   Given the sample size, we are not able to estimate separate coeﬃcients for multiple size categories at the
same time.
  23
    For these ﬁrms the average exit rate is roughly 62 percent, which is broadly consistent with an annual exit
probability of about 10 percent in a ﬁve year window. While such survival rate is in line with the estimates
in the literature, our ﬁndings cannot be easily contrasted with other studies because our measure of exit only
tracks absence of patenting after the Federal Circuit decision.


                                                      25
of innovation for continuing, small ﬁrms and raises the probability of exit (from patenting
activity).


9    Assessing the impact of patent rights and the Court

In our earlier study, we examined the impact of patent invalidation on follow-on innovation by
other ﬁrms, as measured by citations (Galasso and Schankerman, 2015). The main empirical
ﬁnding is that invalidation raises subsequent citations by about 50 percent on average, but
the impact is localized. It is predominantly driven by the invalidation of patents owned by
large ﬁrms, which increases later innovation by small ﬁrms. There was no signiﬁcant eﬀect of
invalidation for other ﬁrm size pairings. By contrast, the current paper studies the impact of
patent invalidation on follow-on innovation by the patent owner, and ﬁnds that invalidation
reduces subsequent patenting by small ﬁrms, but has no signiﬁcant impact on large ﬁrms.
      In this section, we combine these ﬁndings to assess the overall impact of patent rights on
follow-on innovation for the (selected) sample of patents litigated in the Federal Circuit Court,
and the impact of the Court itself. We perform several counterfactual exercises which weigh up
the negative impact on follow-on innovation from invalidation of small ﬁrm patents against the
positive eﬀect from invalidation of patents held by large ﬁrms (Appendix A5 provides details).

      Impact of patent rights in the Federal Circuit sample
      In our ﬁrst counterfactual we estimate what the eﬀect on later innovation would have
been if the Federal Circuit had invalidated all the patents litigated during the sample period.
This exercise provides a measure of how much the patents rights on those innovations aﬀected
follow-on innovation.
      We ﬁnd that invalidating all Federal Circuit patents would have increased follow-on
innovation. The positive impact from invalidating all the large ﬁrm patents in our sample (small
ﬁrms are induced to do more patenting) is larger than the negative eﬀect from invalidating all
the small ﬁrm patents (reduction by the patent owners). The increase in patenting by small
ﬁrms is 80 percent larger than the decline, leading to a net increase in follow-on innovation of
roughly 3,000 patents. To gauge the magnitude, this represents roughly a 30 percent increase
in small ﬁrms ﬁrm patenting relative to what would happen if the Federal Circuit always
upheld the lower court decisions. If we adjust for quality (lifetime citations) of the follow-on
patents, the eﬀect remains positive but is much smaller - the increase is 20 percent larger than
the reduction, implying a net increase of about 16,000 citations, which represents a 8 percent


                                               26
increase over the same benchmark measured in citations.

      Impact of the Federal Circuit Court
      The second exercise we conduct is to compute the overall eﬀect of Federal Circuit reversal
decisions on follow-on innovation (i.e., all cases where the appellate court reversed the lower
court’s ruling, either upholding or invalidating the patent). This calculation gives an estimate
of the impact of having the Federal Circuit itself — as compared to leaving all lower court
judgements uncontested. We ﬁnd that, on average, reversal decisions by the Federal Circuit
had essentially no eﬀect on subsequent patenting. The positive and negative eﬀects of its
reversals of lower court decisions approximately compensate each other and lead to a very
small change in the total level of patenting relative to the benchmark above - 0.7 percent
decline in patent counts and 2 percent increase in quality-adjusted patenting (citations).

      These computations are only illustrative, and two important caveats should be kept
in mind. First, the invalidation impacts we estimate are local average treatment eﬀects and
thus they apply only to the sub-population of Federal Circuit patents that are induced into
treatment (invalidation) by the instrument. Second, these computations do not take into
account the eﬀects that changes in Federal Circuit decisions may have had on the selection of
patents into litigation and appeal.   Diﬀerent behavior by the Federal Circuit, or not having
the appellate court at all, would presumably change the settlement and litigation strategies of
the parties to the dispute.
      Most importantly, these ﬁndings do not imply that removal of patent rights would nec-
essarily be beneﬁcial. Invalidation of patents in a regime with patent rights is very diﬀerent
from a regime without patent rights. First, in the presence of patent rights, R&D is conducted
under the expectation of obtaining rents in the form of product market monopoly proﬁts and
licensing royalties. Without patent protection, ﬁrms would use other means of capturing rents
(including secrecy) and if these are less remunerative, the level of innovation (and information
diﬀusion) would be reduced. Second, patents play an important signalling role in capital mar-
kets, and in particular, enable small ﬁrms to attract venture capital investors more eﬀectively.
Third, we would expect the direction of technical change to be diﬀerent in a regime without
patents. Innovators will have greater incentives to invest in research that is more easily pro-
tected through trade secrets and less susceptible to reverse engineering and copying. These
considerations would need to be accounted for in a full assessment of the net beneﬁts of patent
rights.

                                              27
10     Concluding remarks

In this paper we estimate the causal eﬀect of patent invalidation on innovation using decisions
of the U.S. Federal Circuit Court. Identiﬁcation exploits the randomised assignment of judges
panels hearing each case. There are three key empirical ﬁndings. First, loss of a patent right
causes the owner to reduce subsequent innovation (patent activity) by about 50 percent, on
average. Second, this eﬀect is driven by small ﬁrms that lose patents on technologies that are
core to their innovation focus. The impact is especially strong when small ﬁrms operate in
technology areas where large ﬁrms are particularly active. Finally, we ﬁnd that the loss of
patent rights also sharply increases the probability of exit from patenting by small (but not
large) ﬁrms.
      These ﬁndings complement Galasso and Schankerman (2015), who show that patent
invalidation increases innovation by other ﬁrms, but the eﬀect is localized in particular tech-
nology ﬁelds and is driven by invalidation of patents owned by large patentees that triggers
more follow-on innovation by small ﬁrms. Taken together, these two studies show that patent
rights aﬀect innovation by small and large ﬁrms very diﬀerently. This suggests that limited
reduction in the strength/scope of large ﬁrms’ patent rights might be expected to promote
follow-on research by small ﬁrms, and unlikely to reduce signiﬁcantly innovation incentives for
large ﬁrms. This conclusion is consistent with recent work by Acemoglu et al. (2013), who show
that ﬁscal stimulus policies for are more eﬀective when targeted at small ﬁrms. While the law
and economics literature has discussed possible instruments to diﬀerentiate patent rights across
innovators — e.g., patent ﬁling and renewal fees, the scope for injunctions, and presumption of
validity by courts— there are serious practical challenges in implementing such policies. Our
results suggest that more research on these issues is warranted.
      Finally, there is one important caveat to bear in mind. We focus on judicial invalidation
of speciﬁc patents, not a reduction in the strength of overall patent rights. It remains to be
shown whether or not our conclusions hold for policies that would aﬀect the strength or scope
of patent rights more broadly. It would be wrong to jump to that conclusion on the basis of
this analysis.




                                              28
References

 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Nicholas Bloom and William R. Kerr (2013), “Innovation,
    Reallocation and Growth,” NBER Working Paper 18993

 [2] Aghion, Philippe, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griﬃth and Peter Howitt
    (2005), “Competition and Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 120: 701-728

 [3] Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (1992), “A Model of Growth through Creative De-
    struction,” Econometrica, 60: 323-351

 [4] Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt and Susanne Prantl (2015), “Patent Rights, Product Mar-
    ket Reforms and Innovation,” Journal of Economic Growth 20: 223-262

 [5] Arora, Ashish, Marco Ceccagnoli and Wesley Cohen (2008), “R&D and the Patent Pre-
    mium,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26: 1153-1179

 [6] Arrow, Kenneth (1962), “Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention,”
    in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors (Princeton:
    Princeton University Press)

 [7] Baten, Joerg, Nicola Bianchi and Petra Moser (2015), “Does Compulsory Licensing Dis-
    courage Invention? Evidence From German Patents After WWI,” NBER working paper
    21442

 [8] Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky (1986), “The Nash bargaining solu-
    tion in economic modelling,” RAND Journal of Economics, 17: 176-188

 [9] Bloom, Nick, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen (2013), “Identifying Technology
    Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 81: 1347—1393

[10] Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine (2013) “The Case Against Patents,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 27: 3-22

[11] Budish, Eric, Benjamin Roin and Heidi Williams (2015), “Do Firms Underinvest in Long-
    Term Research? Evidence from Cancer Clinical Trials,” American Economic Review, 105:
    2044-2085



                                             29
[12] Burk, Dan (2016) “On the Sociology of Patenting,” Minnesota Law Review, 10: 421-452

[13] Cassiman, Bruno and Masako Ueda (2006), “Optimal project rejection and new ﬁrm start-
    ups,” Management Science, 52: 262-275

[14] Cohen, Wesley (2010), “Fifty years of empirical studies of innovative activity and perfor-
    mance,” Handbook of the Economics of Innovation (Amsterdam: Elsevier)

[15] Conti, Annamaria, Jerry Thursby and Marie Thursby (2013), “Patents as signals for
    startup ﬁnancing,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 61: 592-622

[16] Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson (1989), “The growth and failure of
    US manufacturing plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104: 671-698

[17] Farre-Mensa, Joan, Deepak Hegde, and Alexander Ljungqvist (2015), “The Bright Side of
    Patents,” NBER working paper 21959

[18] Galasso, Alberto (2012), “Broad Cross-License Negotiations,” Journal of Economics and
    Management Strategy, 21: 873-911

[19] Galasso, Alberto and Mark Schankerman (2010), “Patent thickets, courts, and the market
    for innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics, 41: 472-503

[20] Galasso, Alberto and Mark Schankerman (2015), “Patents and Cumulative Innovation:
    Causal Evidence from the Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130: 317-369

[21] Gans, Joshua, David Hsu, and Scott Stern (2002), “When Does Start-Up Innovation Spur
    the Gale of Creative Destruction?,” RAND Journal of Economics, 33: 571-586

[22] Gans, Joshua and Scott Stern (2003), “The product market and the market for “ideas”:
    commercialization strategies for technology entrepreneurs,” Research Policy, 32: 333—350

[23] Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Jaﬀe and Manuel Tratjenberg (2001), “The NBER Patent Citation
    Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working Paper 8498

[24] Hall, Bronwyn and Josh Lerner (2010), “The ﬁnancing of R&D and innovation,” in Hand-
    book of the Economics of Innovation (Amsterdam: Elsevier)

[25] Hochberg, Yael, Carlos Serrano and Rosemarie Ziedonis (2014), “Patent Collateral, In-
    vestor Commitment, And The Market For Venture Lending,” NBER Working Paper 20587

                                              30
[26] Jackson, Matthew (2008), Social and economic networks (Princeton: Princeton University
    Press)

[27] Jones, Charles and John Williams (1998), “Measuring the Social Rate of Return to R&D,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 1119-1135

[28] Lanjouw, Jean and Mark Schankerman (2004), “Protecting Intellectual Property Rights:
    Are Small Firms Handicapped?” Journal of Law and Economics, 47: 45-74

[29] Lemley, Mark (2015) “Faith-Based Intellectual Property,” UCLA Law Review 62: 13-28

[30] Li, Guan-Cheng, Ronald Lai, Alexander D’Amour, David Doolin, Ye Sun, Vetle Torvik,
    Amy Yu and Lee Fleming (2014), “Disambiguation and co-authorship networks of the U.S.
    patent inventor database (1975—2010),” Research Policy, 43: 941-955

[31] Loury, Glenn (1979) “Market structure and innovation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    93: 395-410

[32] Mehta, Aditi, Marc Rysman, and Tim Simcoe (2010) “Identifying the age proﬁle of patent
    citations: New estimates of knowledge diﬀusion,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 25:
    1179-1204

[33] Rivers, Douglas and Quang Vuong (1998), “Limited Information Estimators and Exogene-
    ity Tests for Simultaneous Probit Model,” Journal of Econometrics, 39: 347-65

[34] Sampat, Bhaven and Heidi Williams (2015), “How do patents aﬀect follow-on innovation?
    Evidence from the human genome,” NBER Working Paper 21666

[35] Schankerman, Mark and Ariel Pakes (1986), “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in
    European Countries during the Post-1950 Period,” Economic Journal, 96: 1052-1076

[36] Schankerman, Mark (1998), “How valuable is patent protection? Estimates by technology
    ﬁeld,” RAND Journal of Economics, 29: 77-107

[37] Segal, Ilya and Michael D. Whinston (2003), “Robust predictions for bilateral contracting
    with externalities,” Econometrica 71: 757-791

[38] Song, Jaeyong, Paul Almeida and Geraldine Wu (2003), “Learning—by—Hiring: When is
    mobility more likely to facilitate interﬁrm knowledge transfer?,” Management Science 49:
    351-365

                                             31
[39] Spulber, Daniel (2013), “How do competitive pressures aﬀect incentives to innovate when
    there is a market for inventions?,” Journal of Political Economy 121: 1007-1054

[40] Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo (2005) “Testing for weak instruments in linear IV
    regression,” in Identiﬁcation and inference for econometric models: Essays in honor of
    Thomas Rothenberg (Cambridge University Press)

[41] Thompson, James (1967), Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administrative
    Theor y (New York: McGraw Hill)

[42] Williams, Heidi (forthcoming), “How Do Patents Aﬀect Research Investments?,” Annual
    Reviews of Economics, forthcoming

[43] Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross-Section and Panel Data (Cam-
    bridge: MIT Press)

[44] Ziedonis, Rosemarie (2004), “Don’t Fence Me In: Fragmented Markets for Technology and
    the Patent Acquisition Strategies of Firms,” Management Science, 50: 804-820




                                            32
Appendix
A.1. Analysis of the model

First, we need to obtain the expression for L(N, Θ). If there is only one large ﬁrm, the expected
payoﬀ of the small ﬁrm in the licensing subgame is L(1, Θ) = Θz. With two ﬁrms the payoﬀ is
L(2, Θ) = Θz(1 + δ(1 − z)). By induction, we obtain
                                        N−1
                                                                   1 − δ N (1 − z)N
                         L(N, Θ) = Θz          δ i (1 − z)i = Θz                    .
                                                                     1 − δ(1 − z)
                                         i=0

Note that L′ (N ) > 0. The impact of invalidation is

                                                             1 − (1 − α)c−1
                          ∆r = Λ 1 − (1 − α)c −                                                       (4)
                                                          1 − 2Λχα (1 − α)c−1
which is decreasing in c (and n given our assumption that c = λn). Thus for small ﬁrms |∆r|
is minimized when c is set at the upper bound of the size range for small ﬁrms, namely c = λκ.
The corresponding value is

                                                           1 − (1 − α)λκ−1
                       L(N ) 1 − (1 − α)λκ −                                            .
                                                   1 − 2L(N )χα (1 − α)λκ−1

Consider a large ﬁrm with nL > κ patents. The invalidation eﬀect is larger for the small ﬁrm
if


                                                              1 − (1 − α)λκ−1
                           L(N ) 1 − (1 − α)λκ −
                                                       1 − 2L(N )χα (1 − α)λκ−1

                                                       1 − (1 − α)λnL −1
                     >     Θ 1 − (1 − α)nL −                                       .
                                                   1 − 2Θχα (1 − α)λnL −1

Because Θ > L(N ) and the right hand side of the inequality is monotonic in nL and tends to
zero as nL → ∞, there exists an n̄ > κ for which the left hand side is equal to the right hand
side. This proves the ﬁrst part of the proposition.
       Notice that (4) can be positive or negative.24          Moreover (4) decreases in χ and ∆r =
Λα(1 − α)c−1 > 0 when χ = 0. This implies that, for all parameter values, there exists an χ′
such that ∆r > 0 if χ < χ′ . The derivative of (4) respect to N is equal to

  24
     For example, if Λ = 1, c = 2 and α = 0.5 then ∆r = (0.25 − 0.375 χ) /(1 − 0.5χ) which is negative for
χ > .66.



                                                     33
                    d∆r                                          1 − (1 − α)c−1
                            = L′ (N ) 1 − (1 − α)c −
                    dN                                      1 − 2L(N )χα (1 − α)c−1

                                           2L′ (N )χα (1 − α)c−1 1 − (1 − α)c−1
                                −L(N )                                          2     .
                                                                          c−1
                                                 1 − 2L(N )χα (1 − α)

The ﬁrst term is positive when χ < χ′ . The second term is negative and goes to zero as χ → 0.
                                                d∆r
This implies that there is an χ∗ ≤ χ′ for which      > 0 if χ < χ∗ .
                                                dN

A.2. Generalized bargaining framework

Our model assumed take-it-or-leave-it oﬀers for exclusive licensing deals. We now show robust-
ness to more general bargaining models. Consider a setting in which the patentee approaches
one of the ﬁrms. If the ﬁrm needs the technology, there is Nash bargaining between the ﬁrm
and the licensee with weights β and 1 − β, respectively. If the ﬁrm does not need the tech-
nology, the patentee moves to the next ﬁrm and payoﬀs are discounted by δ. We solve the
game by backward induction. When only one large ﬁrm is left, the Nash bargaining solution
                                       β
is computed maximizing Θ − x               x1−β which gives L(1, Θ) = zΘ(1 − β). When two ﬁrms re-
main, the patentee negotiates with the ﬁrst ﬁrm with an outside option of δL(1, Θ). This gives
L(2 , Θ) = L(1, Θ) [1 + ∆δ] where ∆ = (1 − z) + βz. Solving the problem recursively we obtain

                                                              1 − δ N ∆N
                                    L(N, Θ) = Θz(1 − β)                  .                                  (5)
                                                               (1 − δ∆)

Equation (5) provides a substantial generalization of our baseline game. When β = 0 the model
collapses to our baseline model in which the patentee has full bargaining power. As β increases
the patentee has greater negotiating power. When β = 1/2 the solution is equivalent to the
equilibrium payoﬀ of the Rubinstein’s alternating oﬀer game with no discounting, as shown in
Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1986). More importantly, note that L′ (N ) > 0 as long as
β < 1. In other words, our comparative statics hold in more general bargaining environments
as long as the bargaining power of the patentee is not zero.25

  25
    This is consistent with the results in Segal and Whinston (2003) showing that in common agency models the
payoﬀ of the principal increases with the number of agents N in a wide class of games. They show robustness
of this result to settings in which agent’s utility depends on the principal’s unobservable contracts with other
agents.




                                                      34
A.3. Generalized innovation production

We now generalize the functional form for the probability of successful innovation and show
that, under mild conditions, the comparative statics results still hold. We assume that V (c, r)
is a continuous function satisfying Vc > 0, Vr > 0, Vrr < 0, Vrc > 0 and limc→∞ Vrc = 0. These
properties are satisﬁed by most standard production functions with decreasing returns. We
also generalize R&D costs to any continuous function, C(r) with Cr > 0 and Crr > 0.
      If the ﬁrm commercializes the technology itself, it obtains revenue given by the increasing
and concave function Θ(n).Alternatively, the ﬁrm can negotiate a licensing deal with one of
N symmetric ﬁrms, each of whom needs the technology with probability z. The ﬁrm bargains
with potential licensees sequentially. If a license is struck, the ﬁrm earns Θ. We assume that
Θ(1) < L(N, Θ) and L(N, Θ) < limn→∞ Θ(n). Under these assumptions, there is a portfolio
threshold size κ — deﬁned by Θ(κ) = L(N, Θ) — where ﬁrms with n < κ (‘small ﬁrms’) choose
to commercialise their innovation through licensing and ﬁrms with n ≥ κ develop it internally.
Unlike in the baseline model in the text, we now assume that χ(r) ≃ 0, which implies that
I(c, r) = V (c − 1, r). That is, competition in the patent race fully dissipates the value of the
(now publicly available) knowledge.
      Then the ﬁrm chooses its R&D to maximise

                              L(N, Θ)V (c, r) − C(r) if n < κ

                                 Θ(n)V (c, r) − C(r) if n ≥ κ

where κ is deﬁned as the portfolio threshold for which Θ(κ) = L(N, Θ). In this setting the
optimal level of R&D investment for a small ﬁrm satisﬁes L(N, Θ)Vr = Cr which implies

                                      dr      LVrc
                                         =            ≥ 0.
                                      dc   Crr − LVrr

Thus R&D investment declines when the small ﬁrm loses a core patent. Moreover

                                  d2 r         LN Vrc Crr
                                         =                  ≥0
                                 dcdN        (Crr − LVrr )2

                                  d2 r         LΘ Vrc Crr
                                       =                      ≥0
                                 dcdΘ        (Crr − LVrr )2
which implies that the eﬀect of invalidation is stronger where there are more potential licensees
in the technology ﬁeld and where the value of licensing is larger. By assumption (that only



                                               35
core patents facilitate subsequent innovation), there is no eﬀect from losing a peripheral patent
for small ﬁrms. For ﬁrms with n ≥ κ , optimal R&D satisﬁes Θ(n)Vr = Cr and thus

                                   dr           Θn Vr
                                        =               ≥0
                                   dp        Crr − ΘVrr

                                   dr        Θn Fr + ΘVcr
                                        =                 ≥0
                                   dc         Crr − ΘVrr

These derivatives go to zero as n → ∞ and c → ∞ because Θn and Fcr are decreasing functions.

A.4. Mahalanobis measure of potential competition

The measure of potential competition is speciﬁc to each litigated patent. Let i denote the tech-
nology ﬁeld of the litigated patent. We identify all the N large ﬁrms (with > 75 patents) active
in the ten-year window before the Federal Circuit decision and measure their patenting across
the 426 USPTO three-digit technology classes. Let skj denote the share of ﬁrm k′ s patenting
that falls in class j. We deﬁne the (N, 426) matrix X that contains the normalized patent class
shares across ﬁrms, and the (426, 426) matrix W = X ′ X. Each element in W , denoted by wij ,
is the uncentered correlation coeﬃcient between the diﬀerent three-digit technology ﬁelds. If
technology ﬁelds i and j coincide frequently within a given ﬁrm (i.e., there is a lot of patent
co-location), then wij will be close to one; if they never coincide wij is zero.
      To compute the number of large ﬁrms potentially active in the technology ﬁeld i of the
litigated patent, we deﬁne weights for each of the N large ﬁrms, denoted by θk , k ∈ (1, N ) :
                                                426
                                         θk =         wij skj .
                                                i=1

The weight for each large ﬁrm (potential competitor) depends on its distribution of patents
across the three-digit technology ﬁelds and on how close those ﬁelds are to the techology class
of the litigated patent. A ﬁrm with all its patents in the same three-digit class of the litigated
patent receives a weight of one. Firms with a large amount of patents in classes that tend to
overlap frequently with the class of the litigated patent receive a weight close to one, those
patenting heavily in more distant classes receive a weight of zero.
      Our Mahalanobis measure of potential competition for the litigated patent, Npm , is then
deﬁned as
                                          Npm =          θk .
                                                  k∈N




                                                 36
A.5. Assessing the impact of patent rights and the Court

Patents owned by large ﬁrms (which are upheld) receive on average 4.4 citations by small ﬁrms
in the ﬁve-year window after the Federal Circuit decision. In our earlier study, we found that
invalidation increases citations to the focal patent by small ﬁrms by 520 percent in the ﬁve-
year window, but that about 20 percent of this eﬀect comes from the downstream innovators
substituting from other patents to the focal (invalidated) patent. That is, 80 percent of the
overall citation eﬀect reﬂects an increase in follow-on innovation (and thus patents) by small
ﬁrms. Thus, in our sample, invalidation of a large ﬁrm patent generates, on average, about 18
new patents by small ﬁrms (4.4 × 5.2 × 0.8 = 18.3). In Section 6, we estimate that invalidation
of a small ﬁrm patent causes a 47 percent reduction in follow-on patenting by the patentee. In
our sample, small ﬁrms that do not experience invalidation ﬁle 8 patents in the ﬁve years after
invalidation, on average. This implies that invalidation of a patent owned by a small ﬁrms
reduces subsequent innovation by the patent holder by roughly 4 patents (8 × 0.47 = 3.8).


Impact of patent rights in the Federal Circuit sample There are 986 small ﬁrm patents
in our sample and 393 large ﬁrm patents. Thus, invalidation of all the Federal Circuit patents
would generate 7,074 new patents (393 × 18) and at the same time prevent 3,944 new patents
(986 × 4). This implies an overall increase in cumulative innovation (3,130), with a positive
eﬀect 80 percent larger than the negative eﬀect.
      To adjust for patent quality we look at the lifetime citations received: (i) by the patents
of small ﬁrms that build on Federal Circuit patents of large ﬁrms and (ii) by patents of small
ﬁrms litigating at the Federal Circuit. On average, patents of small ﬁrms that are upheld by
the Federal Circuit receive 21.2 citations. If we look instead at the citations received by patents
of small ﬁrms which cite Federal Circuit patents owned by large ﬁrms in our sample, we ﬁnd
that they receive 14.4 citations on average. This suggest that, on average, the value of the
patent induced by Federal Circuit invalidation is lower than the value of the patent prevented
by Federal Circuit invalidation.
      Adjusting for patent quality, we still ﬁnd a positive eﬀect but of smaller magnitude.
Invalidation of large ﬁrms generates 99,036 citation-weighted patents (7, 074 × 14) and prevents
82,824 citation-weighted patents (3, 944 × 21). Thus the increase is 19 percent larger than the
corresponding decrease and quality adjusted patents go up by 16,212 cites.
      The benchmark level of patenting is obtained by looking at the entire set of patents



                                                37
validated and invalidated by district courts, and computing the total amount of follow-on inno-
vation by small ﬁrms if decisions were not reversed. This is done assuming that an invalidated
patent of a large ﬁrm generates 22 follow-on small ﬁrms patents, a validated patent of a large
ﬁrms generates 4 patents, a validated small ﬁrm patent generates 8 and a small ﬁrm invalidated
patent generates 4. Multiplying these number with the number of decisions of each type we
ﬁnd that in the absence of Federal Circuit reversals, we would observe 10,588 follow-on patents
and 192,192 follow-on cites.
      Notice that the patenting eﬀect (3,130) is 29 percent of the follow-on patents in the
absence of Federal Circuit (10,588) and the quality adjusted eﬀect (16,212) is 8.4 percent of
the benchmark level of 192,192 cites.


Impact of Federal Circuit court In our sample, the Federal Circuit reversed about 27
percent of the lower court decisions. Reversal is more common for invalidity decisions (about
38 percent) than for validity decisions (about 13 percent). The reversal rate appear similar for
large and small ﬁrms (about 27 percent).
      Our data shows that, compared to district court decisions, Federal Circuit reversals
lead to 42 fewer large ﬁrm patents invalidated and 171 fewer small ﬁrms patent invalidated.
Multiplying these ﬁgures by the eﬀect of invalidation of small and large ﬁrm patents in our
sample, we ﬁnd that Federal Circuit decisions reduced follow-on innovation by 72 patents
(171×4−42×18). Once we adjust for patent quality, the conclusion is slightly diﬀerent. Federal
Circuit reversals increased follow-on innovation by 3,780 citation-weighted patents (171 × 4 ×
21 − 42 × 18 × 14).
      Compared to the benchmark level, the overall eﬀect of Federal Circuit reversals is quite
small: -72 patents is equivalent to a 0.7 percent decline and +3,780 citation-weighted patents
is equivalent to a 1.96 percent increase.




                                              38
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                         Mean       Std. Dev.       Min          Max


Invalidity                               0.40         0.49           0             1

PostPatents                              213.9       961.9           0          12,988

PrePatents                               335.9       1150.6          1          14,208
PreCites                                  25.6        56.3           0           893
PreSelfCites                              2.3         6.6            0           114

Patent Age                                9.8          5.0           1            30

NOTES: Sample of 1379 patents involved in Federal Circuit invalidity decisions for period
1983-2010. Invalidated=1 if Federal Circuit invalidates at least one claim of focal patent.
Table 2: Patent Invalidation and Innovation
                                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)

Estimation Method                                    OLS                  IV             IV             IV
Dep Variable                                    log(PostPat+1)      log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1)


Invalidity                                          -0.057             -0.681**                                -0.597*
                                                    (0.082)             (0.344)                                (0.367)

All invalidated                                                                           -0.669**
                                                                                           (0.323)

log(PrePatents)                                     0.548***           0.554***           0.553***            0.518***
                                                     (0.029)            (0.030)            (0.029)             (0.033)

Year Effects                                        YES***               YES**             YES***              YES***
Tech. Effects                                        YES                  YES               YES                  YES
Age Effects                                          YES                  YES               YES                  YES

                                                                     predicted            predicted         predicted
Instrument                                                        probability from       probability     probability from
                                                                       probit            from probit          probit

IV Test                                                                  52.31              65.71               46.44


                                                                                                            drop multi-
Sample                                                full                full               full
                                                                                                           patent cases
Fed. Circuit Cases                                    1038               1038                1038                811

NOTES: *significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. Robust standard errors
clustered at the litigant level are reported in parentheses. PostPatents= number of patent applications of assignee in 5
year window after Federal Circuit decision. Invalidity=1 if at least one patent in the case is invalidated. All invalidated=1
if all patents in the case are invalidated. PrePatents = number of patent applications of assignee in 10 year window before
Federal Circuit decision. Age = age dummies in years from filing date of patents at Federal Circuit decision. Year= year of
Federal Circuit Decision. Technology fields= 6 categories defined in Hall et al (2001). IV test is the F-statistics from the
Stock and Yogo (2005) weak ID test. We add 1 to PostPatent to include firms with no patenting. Regressions include a
dummy for firms with no patents, a dummy for firms in the top 2 percent of patent portfolio size, and dummies for serial
litigants.
Table 3: Impact of Patent Invalidation by Firm Size
                                          (1)                   (2)                 (3)                 (4)

Estimation Method                         IV                   IV             IV                       IV
Dep Variable                        log(PostPat+1)       log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1)           log(PostPat+1)


Sample                                   large                small                full                full



Invalidity                               0.369              -0.604***
                                        (1.014)              (0.198)

Invalidity X Small                                                              -0.638***           -0.548**
                                                                                 (0.244)             (0.267)

Invalidity X Large                                                                0.801               0.128
                                                                                 (0.748)             (0.417)

Fed Circuit Decisions                     261                   777                1038                1038

IV test                                   7.55                 55.78              25.56               51.36

Equality test: p-value                                                             0.04                0.03


                                                                                                     >95th
Cutoff for large firm                >108 patents         >108 patents        >108 patents        percentile in
                                                                                                      field

NOTES: * significant at 10 percent ** significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. Robust standard
errors clustered at the litigant level are reported in parentheses. All regressions control for log(PrePatents), a
dummy for patentees in the top2 percent of portfolio size, dummies for repeat litigants, age, technology and
year effects. In columns 1-3: Large=1 if portfolio in 10 year window >108 patents. In column 4 Large=1 if
portfolio is above 95th percentile of assignees with at least one patent in tech field. IV test is the F-statistics
from the Stock and Yogo (2005) weak ID test. The p-value of the difference is obtained from testing equality
between InvalidityXSmall and InvalidityXLarge. Columns 3 and 4 include direct effect for the dummy Large.
Table 4: Invalidation of Core and High-Value Patents

                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Estimation Method                           IV                  IV                  IV                  IV
Dep Variable                          log(PostPat+1)      log(PostPat+1)      log(PostPat+1)      log(PostPat+1)

Invalidity X Core                        -0.977***           -1.019***
                                          (0.309)             (0.372)

Invalidity X NoCore                        -0.162               -0.356
                                           (0.436)             (0.354)

Invalidity X High-Value                                                           -1.277**            -1.600**
                                                                                   (0.595)             (0.764)

Invalidity X Low-Value                                                             -0.226              -0.373
                                                                                   (0.314)             (0.315)


Fed Circuit Decisions                       1038                1038                1038                1038

IV test                                     30.84               30.63               28.71               32.61

Equality test: p-value                      0.03                0.07                0.04                0.08

                                                                             High value if cites High value if cites
                                     Core from share in    Core from self-
                                                                                above 75th          above 90th
                                        2 digit fields       citations
                                                                                 percentile          percentile



NOTES: * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent, *** significant at 1 percent. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses clustered at the litigant level. All regressions control for log(PrePatents), age,
technology, year effects and dummies for largest patentees and repeat litigants. In column 1 Core=1 if share of
patents in the focal 2-digit technology class is above the median. In column 2 Core=1 if the ratio between the self-
citations received and maximum possible number of self-citations that the focal patent could receive is in top
quartile. In column 3 High Value=1 if filtered citations received before the decision is above the 75th percentile.
In column 4 High Value=1 if filtered citations received before the decision is above the 90th percentile. Columns 1
and 2 include direct effect for the dummy Core, columns 3 and 4 include direct effect for the dummy High-Value.
Table 5: Testing Alternative Mechanisms

                                                         (1)                    (2)                   (3)

Estimation Method                                      IV             IV             IV
Dep Variable                                     log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1)


Invalidity X Many Large Firms                       -0.939***
                                                     (0.287)

Invalidity X Few Large Firms                           -0.246
                                                      (0.224)

Invalidity X Collateral                                                     -1.175**
                                                                             (0.546)

Invalidity X NoCollateral                                                  -0.551***
                                                                            (0.198)

Invalidity X Fragmented Field                                                                     -0.649***
                                                                                                   (0.238)

Invalidity X Concentrated Field                                                                    -0.593**
                                                                                                    (0.262)

Fed Circuit Decisions                                    777                    777                   777

IV test                                                20.18                  35.85                  27.99

Equality test: p-value                                  0.02                   0.25                  0.84


Sample                                             Small Firms            Small Firms           Small Firms

NOTES: * s i gni fi ca nt a t 10 percent, ** s i gni fi ca nt a t 5 percent and *** s i gni fi ca nt a t 1 percent.
Robus t s tanda rd errors cl us tered a t the l i ti ga nt l evel a re reported i n parenthes es . Al l
regres s i ons control for l og(PrePatents ), a ge, technol ogy a nd yea r effects . Col l a tera l =1 i f pa tent
i s tra ns ferred to a ba nk for s ecuri ty i nteres t. Fra gmented fi el d= C4 i ndex of patentees bel ow
s a mpl e medi a n. Many l a rge fi rms =1 i f more tha n 5 l a rge pa tentees i n the fi el d wi th at l ea s t
50% of portfol i o i n fi el d. Ea ch regres s i on i ncl udes the di rect effect for i ntera cted dummi es .
Table 6: Invalidation and Exit from Patenting

                                              (1)                 (2)                   (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)

Estimation Method                             IV                   IV                   IV                 IV                IV                 IV
Dep Variable                                Exit                  Exit                 Exit               Exit              Exit               Exit




Invalidity                                  0.204
                                           (0.142)
Invalidity X Small                                             0.266**               0.277**           0.347**           0.435***            0.514**
                                                                (0.129)              (0.137)            (0.146)           (0.166)            (0.222)

Invalidity X Large                                               -0.056               -0.012            -0.033             0.058              0.103
                                                                (0.148)              (0.134)            (0.142)           (0.133)            (0.125)

Fed Circuit Decisions                       1038                 1038                 1038               1038              1038                1038

IV test                                     53.63                24.99                26.80              26.34             25.04               14.89

Equality test: p-value                                            0.01                 0.02              <0.01              0.01               0.03


Cut-off for large firms                                        108 pats              50 pats            30 pats            5 pats             3 pats

NOTES: * s i gni fi ca nt a t 10 percent, ** si gni fi ca nt a t 5 percent a nd *** si gni fi ca nt a t 1 percent. Robust sta nda rd errors cl us tere d a t
the l iti ga nt l evel a re reported i n pa renthes es . All regres si ons control for l og(PrePa tents ), a ge of pa tent, technol ogy effects , yea r
effects , dummi es for la rges t fi rms , dummi es for repea t l i ti ga nts, dummi es for fi rms wi th a ge 0-5, 6-10 a nd a dummy for i ndi vi dua l
i nventors . The dependent va ria bl e is equa l to one if there is no pa tenti ng a cti vi ty by the pa tentee a fter the Federa l Ci rcui t
decis i on. Col umns 2-6 i ncl ude di rect the effect for the dummy La rge.
Table A1: Composition of Judge Panels and Patent Invalidation
                                              1                       2                      3                    4
Estimation Method                           Probit                  Probit                  OLS                  OLS
Dependent Variable                       Invalidated             Invalidated                JIP                  JIP

Judges Invalidity
Propensity (JIP)                           2.748***                2.207***
                                            (0.708)                 (0.832)

log(PrePatents)                                                      0.008                -0.001                -0.001
                                                                    (0.017)               (0.001)              (0.001)

Year Effects                                   NO                   YES***                  NO                 YES***
Age Effects                                    NO                    YES                    NO                   YES
Tech. Effects                                  NO                    YES                    NO                   YES

Fed. Circuit Cases                            1038                   1038                  1038                  1038

NOTES: * s i gni fi ca nt at 10 percent, ** s i gni fi ca nt a t 5 percent a nd *** s i gni fi ca nt at 1 percent. Robus t
s ta nda rd errors a re reported i n pa renthes es . Inva l i dated=1 i f a t l eas t one pa tent i n the ca s e i s
i nva l ida ted. PrePa tents = number of pa tent a ppl i cati ons of a s s i gnee i n 10 yea r wi ndow before Federa l
Ci rcui t deci s i on. Age = a ge dummi es i n yea rs from fi l i ng da te of patents a t Federal Ci rcui t deci s i on. Yea r=
yea r of Federa l Ci rcui t Deci s i on. Technol ogy fi el ds = 6 ca tegori es defi ned i n Hal l et al (2001).
Table A2: Robustness of Baseline Regressions - IV Estimates
                                             (1)                   (2)                     (3)                    (4)

Dep Variable                          log(PostPat+1)         log(PostPat+1)         log(PostPat+1)         log(PostPat+1)

                                     no overlapping                                 drop manually
Sample                                                    no repeat litigants                                     full
                                         cases                                      matched firms



Invalidity                               -0.672**               -0.629**                -0.645*               -1.895***
                                          (0.309)                (0.291)                (0.344)                (0.426)

Dummy for PostPat=0                         YES                    YES                    YES                     NO


                                        predicted             predicted               predicted              predicted
Instrument                           probability from      probability from        probability from       probability from
                                          probit                probit                  probit                 probit


IV test                                    57.05                  56.57                  57.28                  67.43

Fed. Circuit Cases                          848                    798                    801                    1038

NOTES: * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. Robust standard errors
clustered at the litigant level are reported in parentheses. PostPatents= number of patent applications of assignee in 5 year
window after Federal Circuit decision. Invalidated=1 if at least one patent in the case is invalidated. All regressions control
for log(PrePatents), technology, age, year effects and dummies for largest firms and repeat litigants.
Table A3: Impact of Patent Invalidation by Firm Size- Robustness
                                    (1)                (2)               (3)

Estimation Method                  IV             IV             IV
Dep Variable                 log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1)



Invalidity X Small              -0.664***          -0.848***            -0.816
                                 (0.252)            (0.273)            (0.535)

Invalidity X Large                1.221              0.164             -0.647*
                                 (0.808)            (0.519)            (0.349)

Fed Circuit Decisions              1038               1038               768

IV test                           24.77              32.93              13.66

Equality test: p-value             0.01               0.03               0.72



                                                                     not small
Large Firm                    >150 patents        >30 patents      entitity status
                                                                     at USPTO

NOTES: * significant at 10 percent ** significant at 5 percent and *** significant
at 1 percent. Robust standard errors clustered at the litigant level are reported in
parentheses. All regressions control for log(PrePatents), a dummy for patentees
in the top2 percent of portfolio size, dummies for repeat litigants, age, technology
and year effects. IV test is the F-statistics from the Stock and Yogo (2005) weak ID
test. The p-value of the difference is obtained from testing equality between
InvalidityXSmall and InvalidityXLarge. Regressions include the direct effect for
the dummy Large.
Table A4: Core Technologies - Robustness

                                                       (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)

Estimation Method                                    IV             IV             IV             IV
Dep Variable                                   log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1)



Invalidity X Core                                  -0.631**              -0.918***             -0.977***             -0.978***
                                                    (0.300)               (0.292)               (0.309)               (0.319)

Invalidity X NoCore                                 -0.321                  -0.016                -0.162               -0.156
                                                    (0.721)                (0.515)               (0.436)              (0.404)

Fed Circuit Decisions                                 1038                  1038                  1038                  1038

IV test                                              21.08                  27.43                 30.84                 32.07

Equality test: p-value                                0.64                   0.05                  0.03                 0.02



Core share                                            0.25                   0.50                  0.66                 0.75


NOTES: * s i gni fi ca nt at 10 percent, ** s i gni fi ca nt a t 5 percent a nd *** s i gni fi ca nt a t 1 percent. Robus t s tanda rd
errors cl us tered a t the l i ti ga nt l evel a re reported i n pa renthes es . Al l regres s i ons control for l og(PrePa tents ),
a ge, technol ogy effects , yea r effects a nd dummi es for l a rges t fi rms a nd repeat l i ti ga nts . Core=1 i f s ha re of
patents i n the focal 2-di gi t technol ogy cl a s s i s a bove the s peci fi c cut-off. Regres s i ons i ncl ude the di rect control
for the dummy Core.
Table A5: Large Firm Competition in the Technology Field- Robustness

                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)

Estimation Method                               IV            IV             IV             IV
Dep Variable                              log(PostPat+1)log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1) log(PostPat+1)



Invalidity X Many Large Firms                -0.861***         -0.708***        -0.759***         -0.598***
                                              (0.264)           (0.211)          (0.219)           (0.177)

Invalidity X Few Large Firms                   -0.339            -0.142           -0.154           -0.019
                                               (0.226)          (0.303)           (0.305)          (0.793)

Fed Circuit Decisions                           777              777              777               777
Sample                                       small firms      small firms      small firms       small firms

IV test                                         21.94            33.96             30.23            24.55


Many Large Firms if                         >8 large firms   >6 large firms   >6 large firms   >23 large firms

                                                                                            identified with
                                            50% portfolio    40% portfolio 33% portfolio in
Large firm in the field if                                                                   Mahalanobis
                                              in field         in field         field
                                                                                                 norm

NOTES: * significant at 10 percent, ** significant at 5 percent and *** significant at 1 percent. Robust
standard errors clustered at the litigant level are reported in parentheses. All regressions control for
log(PrePatents), age, technology effects, year effects and the direct effect of Many Large Firms.
Table A6: First Stage Regressions

                                                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)                (7)


                                                                Invalidity X      Invalidity X      Invalidity X      Invalidity X Invalidity X           Invalidity X
Dep Variable                                   Invalidity
                                                                   Large             Small             Core             No Core High Value                 Low Value



Baseline Regression
                                                0.969***
                                                 (0.122)

Split Sample

   X Large                                                        0.812***            -0.053
                                                                   (0.138)           (0.089)

   X Small                                                          -0.031          1.062***
                                                                   (0.050)           (0.099)

   X Core                                                                                             1.063***           -0.025
                                                                                                       (0.188)           (0.093)

   X No Core                                                                                            -0.003          0.953***
                                                                                                       (0.047)           (0.120)

   X High Value
                                                                                                                                          0.826***            -0.007
                                                                                                                                           (0.125)           (0.089)

   X Low Value                                                                                                                             -0.013           1.059***
                                                                                                                                           (0.052)           (0.115)


Exit Regressions
   X Large                                                        0.932***            -0.052
                                                                   (0.110)           (0.048)

   X Small                                                          -0.075          0.900***
                                                                   (0.092)           (0.142)

NOTES: * s ignifica nt a t 10 percent, ** s igni fi ca nt a t 5 percent a nd *** s ignifica nt a t 1 percent. Robus t s ta nda rd errors clus tered a t the firm le vel
a re re ported in pa renthe s es . La rge i f portfol io > 108 pa tents . Core=1 i f s ha re of pa tents i n the foca l 2-digit technology cla s s is a bove the me dia n.
High Va l ue=1 i f fi ltere d cita ti ons received before the decis i on is a bove the 75th percenti le . Regres s i ons include the direct e ffects for the
intera cted dummie s a long with a ll the othe r s econd-s ta ge controls .
