                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     STATE TAXES AND SPATIAL MISALLOCATION

                                      Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
                                        Eduardo Morales
                                   Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                         Owen M. Zidar

                                      Working Paper 21760
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21760


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2015, Revised August 2018




We are grateful to the editor and five anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions.
We thank Costas Arkolakis, Lorenzo Caliendo, Dave Donaldson, Nirupama Rao, and Jon Vogel
for their discussions of the paper. We also thank David Atkin, Arnaud Costinot, Klaus Desmet,
Cecile Gaubert, David Lagakos, Enrico Moretti, Pat Kline, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Esteban
Rossi-Hansberg, and Aleh Tsyvinski for helpful comments. Pawel Charasz, Stephanie Kestelman,
Matt Panhans, Francesco Ruggieri, Prab Upadrashta, Victor Ye, and John Wieselthier provided
excellent research assistance. Fajgelbaum gratefully acknowledges support from the UCLA
Ziman Center. Morales thanks the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the Cowles Foundation
at Yale University for their hospitality and support. Suárez Serrato gratefully acknowledges
support from the Kauffman Foundation. Zidar gratefully acknowledges support from the Kathryn
and Grant Swick Faculty Research Fund, Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago,
and the National Science Foundation under Grant Number 1752431. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M.
Zidar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M. Zidar
NBER Working Paper No. 21760
November 2015, Revised August 2018
JEL No. E6,F12,H71,R13

                                          ABSTRACT

We study state taxes as a potential source of spatial misallocation in the United States. We build a
spatial general equilibrium framework that incorporates salient features of the U.S. state tax
system, and use changes in state tax rates between 1980 and 2010 to estimate the model
parameters that determine how worker and firm location respond to changes in state taxes. We
find that heterogeneity in state tax rates leads to aggregate welfare losses. In terms of
consumption equivalent units, harmonizing state taxes increases worker welfare by 0.6 percent if
government spending is held constant, and by 1.2 percent if government spending responds
endogenously. Harmonization of state taxes within Census regions achieves most of these gains.
We also use our model to study the general equilibrium effects of recently implemented and
proposed tax reforms.

Pablo D. Fajgelbaum                              Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles            Duke University
8283 Bunche Hall                                 213 Social Sciences Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095                            Box 90097
and NBER                                         Durham, NC 27708
pfajgelbaum@gmail.com                            and NBER
                                                 jc@jcsuarez.com
Eduardo Morales
Department of Economics                          Owen M. Zidar
Princeton University                             Department of Economics &
291 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building               Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton, NJ 08544                              Princeton University
and NBER                                         237 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
ecmorales@princeton.edu                          Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                 and NBER
                                                 ozidar@princeton.edu
1       Introduction
    Regional fiscal autonomy varies considerably across countries. In some countries, such as France,
Japan, and the United Kingdom, regional governments do not set tax policy. In others, such as
Germany, Italy, and Spain, regional governments have varying degrees of autonomy to set tax
rates, grant tax breaks, and introduce or abolish taxes. As a result, tax rates can vary considerably
across regions. Over time, several countries have adjusted their reliance on regional tax policies;
for example, Canada, Australia, and India have moved towards greater regional tax harmonization
in recent decades. The reasoning from recent research studying dispersion in distortions – across
firms, as in Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009), or across cities, as in
Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013) – suggests that regional tax heterogeneity may have negative
aggregate effects by distorting the spatial allocation of resources. Early studies of local public
finance reinforce this logic by showing that, in some cases, allocative efficiency requires equal tax
payments across locations (Flatters et al., 1974; Helpman and Pines, 1980).
    To the best of our knowledge, however, no quantitative evidence on the general equilibrium
tradeoffs between centralized and decentralized tax systems exists. We develop a spatial general
equilibrium model that incorporates salient features of the U.S. state tax code and quantify the
aggregate effects of dispersion in tax rates across U.S. states. The United States is a typical example
of a country with a decentralized tax structure, both in terms of the share of total tax revenue
collected by regional governments and the degree of spatial dispersion in tax rates.1 In our model,
workers decide where to locate and how many hours to work based on each state’s taxes, wage,
cost of living, amenities, and availability of public goods, and firms decide where to locate, how
much to produce, and where to sell based on each state’s taxes, productivity, factor prices, market
potential (a measure of other states’ market sizes discounted by trade frictions), and provision of
public goods. We use the over 350 changes in state tax rates implemented between 1980 and 2010
to estimate the model parameters that determine how workers and firms reallocate in response to
changes in state taxes. Using the estimated model, we compute the general equilibrium effects
on worker welfare and aggregate income of replacing the current U.S. state tax distribution with
counterfactual distributions featuring varying degrees of dispersion in tax rates.
    Overall, we find that tax dispersion leads to aggregate losses. In private consumption equivalent
units, harmonizing state taxes increases worker welfare by 0.6 percent if every state’s government
spending is kept constant. The gains to workers increase to 1.2 percent when we take into account
the impact that the change in taxes would have on each state’s government spending. Importantly,
most of these gains could be achieved by harmonizing taxes only across states located in the same
U.S. Census region. We also use our model to study the general equilibrium effects of recently
implemented and proposed state tax reforms, such as the limits to the State and Local Tax (SALT)
deduction imposed by the 2017 tax reform. We find that eliminating SALT increases tax dispersion,
    1
     According to data for the year 2011 from the OECD Fiscal Decentralization Database, the share of total tax
revenue collected by U.S. states (20.9%) is very similar to that collected by regions in Germany (21.3%), Spain
(23.1%), or Switzerland (24.2%). The standard deviation of the distribution of income tax rates across U.S. states
(1.6 percentage points) is similar to that observed across regions in Spain (1.9 percentage points) but smaller than
that observed across European Union countries (6.3 percentage points).


                                                         1
results in welfare losses, and has heterogeneous effects across states depending on each state’s taxes,
income distribution, and composition of trading partners.
   Our model embeds a canonical local public finance environment with many states, several fixed
(land and structures) and mobile (workers and firms) factors of production, and state governments
that use the tax revenue to finance the provision of public services which may be valued by workers
or used as intermediate goods in production. We generalize this framework in several directions.
First, we account for the main sources of tax revenue of U.S. state governments – sales, individual
income, and corporate income taxes apportioned through firm sales and factor usage – as well as for
federal taxes. Second, we allow states to have heterogeneous productivities, amenities, endowments
of fixed factors, and trade frictions with other regions; specifically, we model trade costs using the
standard approach in the quantitative trade literature (Eaton and Kortum, 2002; Anderson and
van Wincoop, 2003). Third, we assume that firms are monopolistically competitive, as in Dixit and
Stiglitz (1977) and Krugman (1980). Fourth, we allow workers’ preferences and firms’ productivities
to have idiosyncratic components that vary across states. These four ingredients allow our model
to match the observed responses of workers and firms to changes in taxes, and to rationalize as an
equilibrium outcome of our model the distribution of economic activity and trade flows observed
in any given year.
   Our framework can be mapped to existing quantitative models of trade and economic geography.
We leverage properties of these models to implement counterfactuals with respect to the state tax
distribution, since a change to the tax distribution in our model is equivalent to a specific set
of changes in amenities, productivities, bilateral trade costs, and trade imbalances in a standard
trade and economic geography model such as Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017). Importantly,
determining this specific set of equivalent changes in fundamentals and trade imbalances requires
using the general equilibrium relationships predicted by our model to determine how much tax
bases change in the counterfactual.
   We rely on a simpler version of our model to establish theoretically how worker welfare and
aggregate output depend on features of the U.S. state tax distribution. Eliminating dispersion in
state tax rates while keeping government spending constant may have a positive or negative effect
on worker welfare. As pointed out by Wildasin (1980), for any fixed arbitrary distribution of public
spending, efficiency requires equalization across states of tax payments per worker. The reason is
that efficiency requires equalization across locations of the marginal product of labor (which is equal
to the wage) net of the marginal social cost of attracting a worker to a location (which is equal
to consumption per capita). Absent compensating differentials (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow, 2009),
no dispersion in tax rates implies that tax payments are equalized. What is distinctive about a
spatial environment like ours is that wages and consumption per capita vary across locations due to
compensating differentials. Therefore, a change in tax rates may either increase or decrease alloca-
tive efficiency depending on its impact on the dispersion of tax payments per worker. Specifically,
eliminating dispersion in tax rates increases welfare if the cross-state correlation between tax rates
and fundamentals (productivity and amenities) is sufficiently large, since eliminating dispersion in
tax rates reduces dispersion in tax payments per worker in this case. The impact of tax dispersion


                                                  2
on real aggregate income is also theoretically ambiguous: eliminating tax dispersion may increase
or decrease aggregate real income depending on the initial correlation between state tax rates and
both state amenities and expenditure in public goods.
   Four structural parameters are key for determining the impact of any change in taxes on worker
welfare and aggregate output: the elasticities of worker and firm mobility with respect to after-tax
real earnings and profits, respectively, and the weights that public services have in both workers’
preferences and firms’ productivity. To estimate these parameters, we use estimating equations
derived from our model and a longitudinal dataset containing each state’s number of workers and
establishments, tax rates, and government revenue between 1980 and 2010. Our model generates
a worker-location equation that models each state’s employment share as a function of that state’s
after-tax real earnings and government spending, and a firm-location equation that models each
state’s share of establishments as a function of that state’s after-tax market potential, factor prices,
and government spending. We then use observed worker and firm responses to actual changes in
taxes and state government spending to estimate the parameters entering these two equations. For
example, small estimated partial elasticities of employment shares and firm shares with respect
to government spending are rationalized in our model as a consequence of small weights of public
services in worker preferences and firm productivity, respectively.
   Our estimation procedure uses several approaches to instrument for each state’s changes in
taxes, factor prices, and government spending. We instrument for these potentially endogenous
covariates using either taxes in other states or two Bartik-type instruments that exploit variation
in each state’s exposure to national industry shocks and national shocks that affect sources of tax
revenue differentially. This latter instrument exploits the fact that if, for example, a state’s tax
revenue comes mostly from sales taxes, then national sales booms will generate especially high
tax revenues for that state. Regardless of instrumentation strategy, the resulting estimates always
imply that workers’ and firms’ location decisions are more responsive to after-tax real wages or
profits, respectively, than to government spending. Our baseline estimates yield a partial elasticity
of state employment with respect to after-tax real wages of 1.1 and with respect to government
spending of 0.2, and a partial elasticity of the share of establishments in a state with respect to
after-tax market potential of 0.8 and with respect to government spending of 0.1.
   The outcomes of our counterfactuals also depend on state-specific production technologies,
productivities, amenities, and trade costs. These additional parameters are calibrated such that the
model exactly reproduces, as an equilibrium outcome, the distribution of labor and intermediate-
input income shares, wages, employment, trade flows, and trade imbalances across states observed
in 2007. We find that the distributions of states’ GDP and tax revenue shares in GDP implied by
the estimated model are very similar to those observed in the data, even though we do not use this
information to quantify the parameters of our model.
   Using the estimated model, we implement a series of counterfactuals that demonstrate the im-
portance of state tax dispersion for aggregate outcomes in the U.S. From a theoretical perspective,
the question of how the distribution of state tax rates impacts the allocation of workers and firms
and, through it, aggregate outcomes, is distinct from the question of how the distribution of states’


                                                   3
government spending impacts economic activity. Hence, when evaluating each counterfactual dis-
tribution of state taxes, we implement the analysis in two steps: first, holding the level of public
spending of every U.S. state constant at its initial level; and, second, allowing state spending to
change in response to the implied changes in tax revenue. The first step allows us to isolate the
impact of the tax distribution operating through spatial efficiency. The second step allows us to
take into account the impact of the tax distribution through changes in government spending.
   As mentioned above, we find that dispersion in U.S. tax rates across states leads to aggregate
welfare and output losses. These results are robust to alternative assumptions on how preferences
for government spending vary across states. In particular, they hold both in the extreme case in
which we assign zero weight to public services in workers’ preferences and firms’ productivity, and in
the case in which we assume that the observed ratio of government spending to GDP in each state
reflects its residents’ preferences for public services. These results are also robust to alternative
ways of measuring effective state tax rates; e.g., adjusting corporate tax rates for the share of
establishments in a state that are C-corporations, and adjusting income, sales, and corporate taxes
to account for local taxes.
   We compute the aggregate implications of partial harmonizations that homogenize tax rates
only across subsets of states. We find that, as taxes are harmonized across a greater number of
U.S. states, the overall dispersion in tax payments per capita shrinks and, consequently, welfare
gains increase. Quantitively, however, we find that harmonizing taxes across states within the same
U.S. Census region generates welfare gains that are similar to those obtained under complete har-
monization. This regional harmonization result suggests that regional coordination of tax policies
could achieve most of the gains from harmonization across all U.S. states.
   Our quantitative results show that the gains from tax harmonization would be different if the
distribution of fundamentals across U.S. states were different from that implied by the 2007 data.
Consistent with our theoretical analysis, a tax harmonization that keeps government spending
constant would lead to a larger increase in worker welfare if there were a higher correlation between
initial state tax rates and amenities or productivity. Therefore, the answer to the question of
whether a harmonized tax system that keeps government spending constant through a system of
transfers is superior to an alternative tax distribution that features dispersion in tax rates across
regions will depend both qualitatively and quantitatively on the specific country in question.
   In terms of evaluating proposed tax reforms, we focus on the effects of eliminating the State and
Local Tax (SALT) deduction, which is one of the largest expenditures in the U.S. tax code and which
was substantially reduced by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. Eliminating SALT would increase
dispersion in tax payments, since places with high state taxes and high-income taxpayers would
pay even higher taxes. Consequently, we find that eliminating SALT reduces welfare by roughly
0.6 percent and aggregate real GDP by approximately 0.3 percent if government spending is held
constant, and by 0.8 and 0.4 percent, respectively, if government spending responds endogenously.
Southeastern states experience the largest gains. The hardest hit states are those with a large share
of high income people and high tax rates, especially in the Northeast. Cross-state trade linkages
are also important for determining the winners and losers of the reform. For example, Mississippi


                                                  4
enjoys the largest gains in real GDP despite having positive state income taxes, reflecting the
concentration of gains in nearby states. Similarly, among states with no state income tax, Florida
and Tennessee enjoy larger gains than states like Nevada, which is near states with high income
tax rates.
    We also use our model to study the general equilibrium impact of actual tax reforms that have
taken place in the U.S. in recent years and of potential policy changes currently being discussed.
Over the past thirty years, U.S. state tax rates have increased on average, and they have become
more reliant on sales taxes. Overall, we find that these changes increased worker welfare and
aggregate output, and that these gains are driven in part by less dispersion in tax payments per
capita across states.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 relates our work to the existing
literature. Section 3 describes features of the U.S. state tax system that motivate our analysis.
Section 4 introduces our model and describes its general equilibrium implications. Section 5 studies
theoretically how dispersion in taxes affects welfare and aggregate output in a simplified version
of our model. Section 6 presents our estimation approach, and Section 7 discusses our analysis
of counterfactual changes in taxes. Section 8 concludes. We provide additional derivations and
figures, and details on both our estimation approach and data sources in an Online Appendix.


2       Relation to the Literature
Misallocation       Our paper contributes to the literature on the aggregate effects of misallocation.
Distortions across firms are often measured as an implied wedge between an observed allocation
and a model-implied undistorted allocation, as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Recent papers have
adopted a similar methodology to analyze misallocation across geographic units, such as Desmet
and Rossi-Hansberg (2013), Brandt et al. (2013), and Behrens et al. (2017).2 These wedges capture
distortions that may be due to multiple sources. Rather than inferring distortions from wedges,
we focus on quantifying the potential misallocation caused by dispersion in state taxes that we
directly observe in the data, and we use the observed variation in these taxes to estimate key model
parameters. Similarly, Albouy (2009) studies how federal tax progressivity impacts the allocation
of workers and aggregate outcomes.

Trade and Economic Geography                Our framework shares several components with recent quan-
titative economic geography models, such as Allen and Arkolakis (2014), Ramondo et al. (2016),
Redding (2015), and Caliendo et al. (2018). Our research question – the impact of state taxes on
the U.S. economy – drives our modeling choices, estimation approach, and counterfactuals. Relative
to this literature, we incorporate into our framework the main taxes imposed by U.S. states and
by the federal government as well as a government sector that uses tax revenue to finance public

    2
     See also Hsieh and Moretti (2018). A related literature on spatial misallocation studies rural-urban income
gaps; e.g., Gollin et al. (2013) and Lagakos and Waugh (2013) find productivity gaps between agricultural and non-
agricultural sectors which are suggestive of misallocation, and Bryan and Morten (2018) study whether these income
gaps reflect spatial misallocation.


                                                        5
services valued by workers and firms. Alongside workers with idiosyncratic preferences for location
as in Tabuchi and Thisse (2002) and others, we also introduce imperfect firm mobility through
firms that receive idiosyncratic productivity draws across states. A central feature of our analysis
is that we perform counterfactuals with respect to policy variables that are directly observed (U.S.
state tax rates) and use the observed variation in these same policies to identify the key model
parameters.

Fiscal Competition The literature on fiscal competition, summarized among others by Oates
(1999) and Keen and Konrad (2013), typically considers static and perfectly competitive economies
with two or more regions and several factors of production, some of which are immobile and some
of which are mobile, which may be used to produce a consumption good and a non-traded public
good. These basic ingredients are included in our model. Our model generalizes this structure to a
multi-region setting in which the distribution of state characteristics can be disciplined using data
on the distribution of economic activity. A central question in this literature has been whether
jurisdictions setting tax policies according to the equilibrium of a non-cooperative game deliver a
socially efficient allocation. A recent quantitative study in the literature is Ossa (2018), who uses
an economic geography model with home-market effects to compute the Nash equilibrium of a game
where states use lump-sum taxes to finance firm subsidies. Our focus does not involve computing
the equilibrium of a non-cooperative game, so it does not require taking a stand on the objective
function or the information sets of policy makers, or on the process through which observed taxes
are determined.3

Factor Mobility in Response to Tax Changes                          We estimate elasticities of firm and worker
location with respect to taxes to identify key structural parameters. Evidence on the effect of
taxes on worker mobility includes Bartik (1991) and, more recently, Moretti and Wilson (2017).
Estimates of worker mobility across regions include Bound and Holzer (2000), Notowidigdo (2013),
and Diamond (2016). In terms of firm mobility, Holmes (1998) uses state borders to show that
manufacturing activity responds to business conditions, and a large literature studies the impact
of local policies on business location. Within this literature, Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016)
provide evidence on the impact of corporate taxes on worker and firm mobility, Suárez Serrato
and Wingender (2016) show that local economic activity responds to public spending, and Giroud

    3
     Within this literature, a body of work following Tiebout (1956) illustrates how heterogeneity across workers in
preferences for government services can play a central role in determining the efficiency properties of tax policies set as
the outcome of a non-cooperative game among jurisdictions. Quantifying these heterogeneous preferences for a large
set of worker types and states is empirically challenging and, therefore, our model assumes that all workers located
in the same state have the same valuation for public spending (but this valuation may vary across states). However,
as some of our counterfactuals hold real government spending fixed, worker location decisions in our counterfactuals
do not vary depending on how workers value government services but only on how they value changes in after-tax
real earnings. We show that our counterfactual results are robust to several alternative approaches to modeling the
valuation that workers have for government services. Moreover, within most states, individuals with high valuations
of public goods would be able to find a high public good community, and vice-versa for those with low valuations of
public goods. Specifically, 36 states have a county that spends less than the national 25th percentile of per capita
local government spending, and 43 states have a county that spends more than the national 75th percentile of per
capita local government spending.


                                                            6
and Rauh (2015) show that C-corporations reduce their activity when states increase corporate
tax rates.4 Appendix D.9 compares our estimates to estimates from this prior literature. While
the aim of this literature is to quantify the local effects of actual policy changes, we use similar
empirical specifications and variation in the data to estimate key parameters of a general equilibrium
model, and then use these estimates to study how counterfactual policy changes in one state or
simultaneously in many states impact aggregate outcomes in the U.S. economy.5


3       Background on the U.S. State Tax System
    Our benchmark analysis focuses on three sources of state tax revenue: personal income taxes,
corporate income taxes, and sales taxes. The revenue raised through these three sources accounted,
respectively, for 35, 7, and 32 percent of total state tax revenue in 2007, and collectively amounted
to 4 percent of U.S. GDP.6 In this section, we describe how we model each tax, present statistics
summarizing the dispersion in tax rates across states, and provide some evidence on how state
taxes relate to cross-state trade flows. Appendix F details the sources of the data we use.

3.1     Main State Taxes
Individual Income Tax              States tax the individual income of their residents. In 2007, the average
state income tax rate was 3.1%; the states with the highest average income tax rates were Oregon
(6.0%), North Carolina (5.0%), Minnesota (4.8%), and New York (4.8%), while seven states had
no income tax. State income tax rates tend to be progressive, but less so than federal income tax
rates. In our analysis, we approximate the schedule of income keep tax rates in each state, defined
                                                                                                                 y
as one minus the tax rate, through a log-linear function of income y: 1 − tyn (y) = ayn,state y −bn,state .
As Heathcote et al. (2017) recently argue, these functional forms accurately approximate U.S. tax
schedules. We compute the parameters of this tax schedule, (ayn,state , byn,state ), for each state and
year using the average effective tax rate from NBER TAXSIM, which runs a fixed sample of tax
returns through each state’s income tax schedule every year and accounts for most features of the
tax code. Appendix Table A.3 reports the 2007 income tax schedule parameters.

Corporate Income Tax                States also tax businesses. The tax base and tax rate on businesses
depend on the legal form of the corporation. In our baseline analysis, we treat all businesses
    4
       Additionally, Devereux and Griffith (1998) estimate the effect of profit taxes on the location of production
of U.S. multinationals, Goolsbee and Maydew (2000) estimate the effects of the labor apportionment of corporate
income taxes on the location of manufacturing employment, Hines (1996) exploits foreign tax credit rules to show
that investment responds to corporate tax regulations. Chirinko and Wilson (2008) and Wilson (2009) also provide
evidence consistent with the view that state taxes affect the location of business activity.
     5
       Our paper is also related to the literature that has analyzed the general equilibrium effects of tax changes.
Shoven and Whalley (1972) and Ballard et al. (1985) point out the importance of general equilibrium effects when
analyzing large changes in policy. See Nechyba (1996) for an early Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model
of local public goods. A large literature in macroeconomics also studies the dynamic effects of taxes in the standard
growth and real business cycle model; Mendoza and Tesar (1998), among others, study dynamic effects of taxes in
an international setting.
     6
       We focus on general sales taxes in our analysis. Selective sales taxes (e.g., alcohol sales taxes) jointly account
for an extra 15% of tax revenue. The biggest remaining category is license taxes (6.2%).


                                                           7
as C-corporations — traditional corporations subject to the corporate income tax — since they
account for the majority of businesses’ net income in the United States.7 In 2007, the average
state corporate income tax rate was 6.6%; the states with the highest corporate tax rates were
Iowa (12%), Pennsylvania (10%), and Minnesota (9.8%), while five states had no corporate tax.
State tax authorities determine the share of a C-corporation’s national profits allocated to their
state using apportionment rules, which aim to measure the corporation’s activity share in their
state. To determine this activity share, states put different weight on three apportionment factors:
the share of the corporation’s national payroll, property value, and sales. Payroll and property
factors thus depend on where goods are produced and typically coincide; the sales factor depends
on where goods are sold.8 Apportionment through sales tends to be more prevalent: thirteen states
exclusively apportion through sales, while roughly three quarters of the remaining states apply
either a 50 or 33 percent apportionment through sales.

Sales Tax         Sales taxes are usually paid by the consumer upon final sale, and states typically do
not levy sales taxes on firms for purchases of intermediate inputs or goods that they will resell. In
2007, the average statutory general sales tax rate was 4.9%; the states with the highest sales tax
rates were California (7.25%), Mississippi (7%), New Jersey (7%), Maryland (7%), and Tennessee
(7%), while five states had no sales taxes.

3.2     Stylized Facts on State Taxes
    Panels (a) to (c) of Figure 1 show that tax rates and tax revenue vary considerably across states.
Panel (a) shows the 2007 distribution of sales, income, corporate, and sales-apportioned corporate
tax rates.9 Corporate tax rates are the most dispersed; the 90-10 percentiles of the distributions of
general sales, average personal income, and corporate income tax rates are 6.8%-1.5%, 4.6%-0%,
and 9.2%-1.0%, respectively. For each type of tax, there are at least five states with 0% rates.




    7
       C-corporations are incorporated and officially registered business entities whose owners enjoy limited liability.
The other main type of business entities are private “pass-through” businesses, which are taxed at the owner rather
than the entity level, i.e., the income that these private businesses earn passes through to the owners, who pay
personal income taxes on their share of the firm’s income. C-corporations accounted for 66% percent of total business
receipts in 2007 (PERAB, 2010). In robustness checks, we also explore how our results change when we adjust state
corporate tax rates for the fraction of C-corporations revenue in each state’s total business revenue.
     8
       For example, a single-plant firm j located in state i with sales share sjni in each state n pays a corporate tax
          j
rate of t = tcorp          l   P j x                corp                           x    x corp
                 f ed + ti +      n sni tn , where tf ed is the federal tax rate, tn = θn tn     is the corporate tax apportioned
through sales in state n (where tcorp       n   is the  corporate tax  rate of state n and   θnx is its sales apportionment), and
tli = (1 − θix ) tcorp
                  i     is the corporate tax apportioned through property and payroll in state i.
     9
       The sales-apportioned corporate tax rate is the product of the sales apportionment factor and the corporate
rate; i.e. txn = θnx tcorp
                       n     (see footnote 8). Table A.2 in Appendix F.2 shows the state tax rates in 2007 in all 50 states.
Table A.1 shows the federal income, corporate, and payroll tax rates in 2007.


                                                               8
                                                                    Figure 1: Stylized Facts on State Taxes
                                  (a) Distribution of Tax Rates Across States                                                                                  (b) Tax Revenue as Share of GDP Across States




                                                                                                                   State Tax Revenue as Share of GDP in 2007
                   .4




                                                                                                                                                               .08
                   .3




                                                                                                                                                               .06
  Density
                   .2




                                                                                                                                                               .04
                   .1




                                                                                                                                                               .02
                   0




                                  0                         5                                   10
                                                   State Tax Rates in 2007




                                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                                                       NH
                                                                                                                                                                       AK
                                                                                                                                                                       TX
                                                                                                                                                                       WY
                                                                                                                                                                       SD
                                                                                                                                                                       DE
                                                                                                                                                                       NV
                                                                                                                                                                       MT
                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                                         IL
                                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                        FL
                                                                                                                                                                       ND
                                                                                                                                                                       TN
                                                                                                                                                                       AL
                                                                                                                                                                        IA
                                                                                                                                                                       MO
                                                                                                                                                                       OR
                                                                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                                                                                                       OK
                                                                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                                                                       OH
                                                                                                                                                                       MD
                                                                                                                                                                       VA
                                                                                                                                                                       GA
                                                                                                                                                                        MI
                                                                                                                                                                       VT
                                                                                                                                                                       NE
                                                                                                                                                                        IN
                                                                                                                                                                       SC
                                                                                                                                                                       UT
                                                                                                                                                                       AZ
                                                                                                                                                                       CT
                                                                                                                                                                       NC
                                                                                                                                                                       KY
                                                                                                                                                                       NM
                                                                                                                                                                        RI
                                                                                                                                                                       KS
                                                                                                                                                                       NY
                                                                                                                                                                       MA
                                                                                                                                                                       WI
                                                                                                                                                                       NJ
                                                                                                                                                                       MN
                                                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                                                                                       WV
                                                                                                                                                                        ID
                                                                                                                                                                       MS
                                                                                                                                                                       AR
                                                                                                                                                                       ME
                                                                                                                                                                        HI
                                         Sales                  Individual Income
                                         Corporate              Sales Apportioned Corporate                                                                                               Income                      Sales                     Corporate



                                       (c) State Tax Rate Progressivity                                                                                                          (d) Trade Shares and Tax Rates



                                                                                                                                                     -4.1
                8
  State Income Tax Rate in 2007
                            6




                                                                                                                   Log Bilateral Trade Share
                                                                                                                                                     -4.2
                 4




                                                                                                                                                     -4.3
         2      0




                                                                                                                                                     -4.4




                                  0          50                100              150                  200
                                                  Adjusted Gross Income ($1000)                                                                                      .01              .02               .03                .04               .05               .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x
                                                                                                                                                                 Destination Corporate Tax Rate Weighted by Sales Apportionment (i.e., t )
                                             State Avg.             Iowa              Indiana
                                                                                                                                                                     Note: Slope is -1.44 (.85). Controls for destination GSP. Includes origin, destination, and year FE.




Notes: Panel (a) shows the density of tax rates across states in 2007. Specifically, sales (tcn ) and corporate income
(tcorp
  n    ) tax rates are statutory, while individual income tax rates (tyn ) are estimated using NBER’s tax simulator
TAXSIM. For each state, we compute average state tax liabilities and divide them by average Adjusted Gross Income
(AGI) in that state. Finally, we compute sales apportioned corporate income tax rates (txn ) by multiplying tcorp
                                                                                                             n    by
sales apportionment weights. Panel (b) shows state government tax revenue as a share of state GDP. Individual
income, corporate income, and general sales tax revenues are drawn from Census Government Finances. Panel (c)
shows how average state income tax rates in 2007 vary with taxpayer AGI for each state. For each level of AGI, we
                                                                                                               y
compute each state’s tax rate as tyn,state = 1 − ayn,state y −bn,state . Progressivity is heterogeneous across states. For
instance, the effective tax rate in Indiana is higher than Iowa for AGI below $30K, while the opposite is true for
AGI above $30K. Panel (d) shows the OLS estimate of the coefficient from a regression of intra-U.S. trade flows on
state corporate tax rates. Specifically, we compute bilateral trade shares as sin =                                                                                                                           Pxin ,        where xin denotes sales
                                                                                                                                                                                                               i xin
from state n to state i, and sales-apportioned corporate tax rates                                                                                                           (txi )    in destination states. The panel includes
information on bilateral trade flows among the 48 contiguous states for the years 1993, 1997, 2002, 2007, and 2012.
Each observation is an origin-destination-year triplet. We account for origin state, destination state, and year fixed
effects. Observations are weighted by destination state population. Table A.4 provides further evidence on the
relationship between state bilateral trade shares and trade-dispersion costs.




                                                                                                           9
     These differences in tax structures across states are associated with differences in the total tax
revenue collected. Panel (b) shows the distribution of tax revenue as a share of state GDP by type
of tax. The share of the sum of income, general sales, and corporate tax revenue in GDP varies
across states between 1.1% and 6.5%. Local (sub-state) governments also tax residents. State taxes
amount to roughly 65% of state and local tax revenue combined.10 Panel (c) plots our estimated
individual income tax schedules for all states in 2007. Some states like Indiana have flatter average
tax rates as a function of income, whereas others like Iowa have substantially more progressive
tax rates. Finally, panel (d) shows that inter-state exports are lower to destinations with high
sales-apportioned corporate taxes (see Table A.4 in Appendix A for additional evidence), after
controlling for state and year fixed effects.

3.3      State Tax Revenue and Government Spending
     Besides taxes, transfers from the federal government are a major source of revenue for U.S.
state governments. On average across states, these transfers amounted to roughly 3.3% of their
GDP in 2007. Once these federal government transfers are taken into account, state governments
typically have balanced budgets (Poterba, 1994). Federal transfers therefore allow state spending
to exceed state tax revenue. The actual process determining these transfers is complex. However,
empirically, for the period 1980 to 2010, the size of the total direct expenditures of each state is
well approximated by a state-specific multiplier of that state’s tax revenue. Letting Rnt be state
                     G = (1 + ψ ) R
n’s tax revenue and Ent        n   nt be state n’s direct expenditures in year t, of which ψn Rnt
is the part financed through federal transfers, the estimates of the regression

                                          G
                                      ln Ent = ln (1 + ψn ) + ln Rnt + εnt                                         (1)

yield an R2 of 0.97.11 We adopt this relationship when modeling federal transfers in our quantitative
model.


4        Economic Geography Model with State Taxes and Public Goods
     We model a closed economy with N states indexed by n or i. A mass of workers, normalized
to be of measure one, receives idiosyncratic preference shocks, which impact how they sort across
states. After the location decision has been made, each worker receives a productivity draw and
chooses how many hours to work. In our baseline model, a fixed mass of firms, also normalized to
be of measure one, sorts across states according, in part, to idiosyncratic productivity draws. For
    10
      Heterogeneity in tax rates across states is also present when both state and local taxes are taken into account.
Figure A.1 in Appendix A reproduces panel (a) of Figure 1 using the sum of state and local tax rates. It shows
that cross-state differences in tax rates increase when local tax rates are taken into account. Local governments rely
mostly on property taxes. State tax revenue make up roughly 92%, 87%, and 79% of consolidated state and local
revenue from income, corporate, and sales taxes, respectively, but only 3% of consolidated property tax revenue.
   11                            G
      We measure the variable Ent  using “state direct expenditures” from the Census of Governments. The main direct-
expenditure items include: education, public welfare, hospitals, highways, police, correction, natural resources, parks
and recreation, government administration, and utility expenditure. Panel (a) of Appendix Figure A.2 illustrates the
                               G
close relationship between Ent   and Rnt in 2007.


                                                          10
robustness, we also examine an alternative model in which firms freely enter each location subject
to entry costs. We let Ln and Mn be the measure of workers and firms that locate in state n.
    Each state n has an endowment Hn of fixed factors of production (land and structures), an
amenity level un , and a productivity level zn . There is an iceberg cost τni ≥ 1 of shipping from
state i to state n (if one unit is shipped from i to n, 1/τni units arrive). Firms are single-plant and
sell differentiated products. They use the fixed factor, workers, and intermediate inputs to produce
output. Workers only receive labor income, which they spend in the state where they live. Firms
and fixed factors are owned by immobile capital owners exogenously distributed across states.
    State governments collect personal income taxes tyn (y) that depend on individual income y,
sales taxes tcn , and corporate income taxes apportioned through sales, txn , and through payroll and
property, tln . Each state uses the tax revenue to finance the provision of public services, which
enter as shifters of both that state’s amenity and productivity. The sensitivity of a state’s amenity
to public services may vary across states.
    The federal government collects personal income taxes tyf ed (y), payroll taxes tw
                                                                                     f ed , and corporate
taxes tcorp
       f ed . Federal taxes are used to finance federal transfers to state governments as well as federal
public goods that benefit any worker independently of their location (e.g., national defense).

4.1    Workers
   A continuum of workers l ∈ [0, 1] decides in which state to work and consume. Each worker l
                      N
observes a vector ln n=1 of idiosyncratic state-specific preferences and decides the state of resi-
                 

dence. Then, the worker discovers her own productivity level znl in that state. This productivity
draw captures heterogeneity in job opportunities and gives rise to a non-degenerate income distri-
bution within each state. After observing her productivity in state n, each worker l chooses her
number of working hours, hln . The total income of a worker l in state n is thus wn hln znl , where wn
is the wage per efficiency unit and hln znl are the efficiency units that worker l supplies in that state.
    Workers have preferences over amenities, public goods, and final consumption goods, and ex-
perience disutility from working.12 The direct utility of a worker who lives in state n, consumes cn
units of the private good, and works hn hours is ln Un (cn , hn ), where

                                                        α
                                      Un (c, h) = un gn W,n c1−αW,n dn (h) .                                     (2)

The amenity level un captures both natural characteristics, like the weather, and the rate at which
the government transforms total real spending into services valued by workers; this rate includes
the fraction of the state budget used to finance public services valued by workers. It may also
capture utility from a national public good provided by the federal government. The parameter
αW,n captures the weight of state-provided services in preferences. This weight may vary across
states, reflecting complementarities between state-specific features such as the weather or natural

  12
     The framework could be generalized to allow for direct consumption of the fixed factor by workers in the form
of housing. Furthermore, housing supply could be allowed to be elastic. While adding these elements would be
straightforward, measuring state-specific property taxes or housing supply elasticities would be less so because they
vary considerably across cities within states, as documented by Saiz (2010).


                                                         11
amenities and government services. In turn, real government spending enjoyed by each worker
in state n, gn , equals total real government spending, Gn , normalized by a function of the total
number of workers living in state n, LχnW :

                                                         Gn
                                                gn =          .                                    (3)
                                                         LχnW

The parameter χW captures the degree to which public goods are rival, and ranges from χW = 0
(non-rival) to χW = 1 (rival). Workers also face disutility from effort, captured by the term dn (h).
This disutility function is allowed to vary by state in order to give the model enough flexibility to
match cross-state differences in the per-worker number of hours worked. The indirect utility of a
worker l living in state n is ln vn , where
                                                                  
                                    vn ≡ En max Un (cn (wn hz) , h)                                (4)
                                                h


is the expected value over the possible realizations of the individual productivity shock z in state
n, and where cn (y) is the quantity of final goods consumed by an individual with income y in state
n. We refer to vn as the “appeal” of state n.
   From the consumer’s budget constraint, and letting Pn be the price of the final good in state
n, the final good consumption of an individual with income y living in state n is

                                                        1 − Tn (y)
                                           cn (y) =                y,                              (5)
                                                           Pn

where the real keep-tax rate is

                                                (1 − tyf ed (y))(1 − tyn (y))
                                 1 − Tn (y) ≡                                   .                  (6)
                                                               1 + tcn

This formulation takes into account that state income taxes can be deducted from federal taxes.
   The idiosyncratic taste draw ln is assumed to be independent and identically distributed
across individuals l and states n. Hence, the fraction of workers located in state n is Ln =
Pr n = arg maxn0 vn0 ln0 . Assuming that the idiosyncratic taste draws follow a Fréchet distri-
                        

bution, Pr(ln < x) = exp(−x−εW ) with εW > 1, then
                                                         v εW
                                                          n
                                               Ln =                ,                               (7)
                                                          v

where                                                          !1/εW
                                                 X
                                          v≡            vnεW             .                         (8)
                                                    n

The ex-ante expected utility of a worker over the distribution of taste draws {ln }N
                                                                                    n=1 is proportional
to v. A larger value of εW implies that idiosyncratic taste draws are less dispersed across states; as
a result, locations become closer substitutes and an increase in the relative appeal of a location (an
increase in vn /v) leads to a larger response in the fraction of workers who choose to locate there.

                                                        12
   We make additional functional-form assumptions to reach a closed-form solution for vn . First,
                                                                                                       y
we assume log-linear keep-tax schedules at the state and federal levels: 1 − tyn (y) = ayn,state y −bn,state
                              y
and 1 − tyf ed (y) = ayf ed y −bf ed . These schedules are progressive (regressive) when the coefficients
byn,state and byf ed adopt positive (negative) values. Together with (6), these forms imply

                                                                             y
                                                         ayn y −bn
                                            1 − Tn (y) =           ,                                        (9)
                                                         1 + tcn

where
                                                                 1−bf ed
                                    ayn ≡ ayf ed ayn,state                    ,                            (10)
                                    byn ≡   byn,state   +   byf ed   −   byn,state byf ed .                (11)

Second, we assume disutility from hours worked of the form
                                                                                     !
                                                       h1+1/η
                                    dn (h) = exp −αh,n                                   .                 (12)
                                                       1 + 1/η

Together with (4), this functional form implies that utility is separable between consumption and
leisure and, thus, all workers in a state n work the same number of hours:
                                                                  1
                                                1 − αW,n       y
                                                                   1+1/η
                                    hn =                 (1 − bn )       .                                 (13)
                                                  αh,n

Finally, we assume that productivity draws across workers located in state n follow a Pareto dis-
tribution with scale and shape parameters (zL,n , ζn ):

                                                       Z −ζn
                                      h      i            
                                        l
                                    Pr zn ≤ Z = 1 −          .                                             (14)
                                                      zL,n

This assumption leads to the empirically consistent prediction of a fat-tailed income distribution.
The expressions (9) to (14) imply the following solution for the common component of utility
defined in (4):

                                                                                   1 1−bn 1−αW,n
                                                                                          y
                                                        ayn
                                                
                   ζn                  α
                                                                  
                                                                                −1 1+1/η
   vn =            y               un gn W,n                        wn zL,n hn e                   .       (15)
        ζn − (1 − bn ) (1 − αW,n )                  (1 + tcn ) Pn

Equation (15) captures several forces determining workers’ location. The first term reflects wage
heterogeneity within the state. Wage heterogeneity vanishes as ζn → ∞, in which case the individual
productivity distribution converges to a mass point at zL,n . The average returns to locating in state
n are also a function of the common component of amenities, public spending per capita, after-tax
wages and hours worked.
   From the definitions of Ln and vn in (7) and (15), the partial elasticity of the share of workers
who locate in state n with respect to the nominal wage per efficiency unit is εW (1 − byn ) (1 − αW,n )


                                                            13
while εW αW,n is the partial elasticity with respect to real government services per worker, gn . We
will rely on these relationships to estimate εW and {αW,n }N
                                                           n=1 in Section 6.2.


4.2    Capital Owners
    Immobile capital owners located in state n own a fraction ωn of a portfolio that includes the
profits of all firms in the economy and the payments to all fixed factors. In our model, a larger
ownership rate relative to other states results in larger trade imbalances. Therefore, we will calibrate
the ownership shares ωn to match the observed trade imbalances across states.13 Capital owners
spend their income locally, pay sales taxes on consumption, and pay the highest marginal rate for
both federal and state income taxes (Cooper et al., 2016). We do not need to specify the number
of capital owners or their utility function at any stage of our analysis.

4.3    Final Good
    In each state, a competitive sector assembles a final good from differentiated varieties through
a constant elasticity of substitution aggregator with elasticity σ,
                                                                                  !    σ
                                             XZ                      σ−1            σ−1
                                                               j       σ
                                    Qn =                      qni            dj             ,                (16)
                                               i   j∈Ji

                                                               j
where Ji denotes the set of varieties produced in state i and qni is the quantity of variety j produced
in state i which is used for production of the final good in state n. Letting pjni be the price of this
variety in state n, the cost of producing one unit of the final good in state n (and also its price
before sales taxes) is
                                                                                  !    1
                                             XZ                     1−σ             1−σ

                                    Pn =                      pjni           dj             .                (17)
                                               i   j∈Ji

The final good Qn is non-traded and can be used by consumers (workers and capital-owners) for
aggregate consumption of workers and capital owners (CnL and CnK ), by firms as an intermediate
input in production (In ), and by state governments (Gn ) and the federal government (Gfned ) as an
input for the supply of public services:

                                     Qn = CnL + CnK + In + Gn + Gfned .                                      (18)

4.4    Firms
    In our baseline model, we assume that there exists a fixed mass of firms which must decide in
which state to locate.14 Assuming that these firms heterogeneous in terms of their productivity
across locations, this approach enables us to use data on firms’ location choices to estimate a
  13
      Two alternative modeling approaches would be to assume that all workers own equal shares of the national
portfolio, or that the returns of that portfolio are spent outside of the model. Under these approaches, the model
would lead to empirically inconsistent predictions for trade imbalances across states.
   14
      This modeling approach is similar to Martin and Rogers (1995). See also Chapter 3 of Baldwin et al. (2005).


                                                          14
parameter determining the elasticity of the number of firms located in a state with respect to its
taxes. In this approach, taxes do not affect the mass of firms in the economy. To account for this
possible effect of taxes, we also explore the implications of an alternative model that features free
entry of firms with homogeneous productivity to each location, as in Krugman (1991) and Helpman
(1998). We describe the main implications of this alternative model at the end of this section.

Production Technologies          Each firm j ∈ [0, 1] produces a differentiated variety and is endowed
with state-specific productivities {zij }N                          j
                                         i=1 . To produce quantity qi in region i, firm j combines its
own productivity in that location zij , a fixed factor hj , efficiency units of labor lj , and intermediate
inputs ij , through a Cobb-Douglas technology:
                                      "  β 
                                          j       j
                                                    1−β #γ  j 1−γ
                                       1 h      l             i
                            qij = zij                                ,                                   (19)
                                       γ β     1−β           1−γ

where γ is the value-added share in production and 1 − β is the labor share in value added. The
fixed factor acts as a source of congestion: the higher the number of firms and workers located in
a given state, the higher the relative price of this fixed factor.

Profit Maximization given Firm Location                    Each firm decides in which state to produce and
how much to sell in every state. Firms are monopolistically competitive. Consider a firm j located
in state i whose productivity is z. Its profits are

                                                           N                N
                                                                                        !
                                             
                                                     j
                                                          X             ci X
                            πi (z) = max 1 −        ti          xjni   −           j
                                                                              τni qni       ,            (20)
                                       j
                                     {qni }                              z
                                                          n=1                  n=1
                                                                                                1    1
        j
where ti is the corporate tax rate of firm j if it were to locate in state i, xjni = Pn Qnσ (qni
                                                                                              j 1−
                                                                                                 ) σ are
its sales to state n, and                                 1−β β γ 1−γ
                                  ci =           1 + tw
                                                      f ed wi   ri   Pi                                  (21)

is the the minimum unit cost of a bundle of factors and intermediate inputs, where wi is the wage
per efficiency unit, ri stands for the cost of a unit of land and structures in state i and tw
                                                                                             f ed are
federal payroll taxes. This definition of ci accounts for the fact that, unlike consumers, firms do
not face sales taxes when purchasing the final good to use it as an intermediate.
   All firms face corporate taxes apportioned through sales, payroll, and land and structures. A
firm j located in state i whose share of sales to state n is sjni pays a share sjni txn of its pre-tax
national profits in corporate taxes to state n. Firms located in i also pay a fraction tli of its pre-tax
national profits in corporate taxes to state i, and a rate tcorp
                                                            f ed in federal corporate income taxes. As
a result, the overall corporate tax rate of firm j is:

                                                                N
                                         j
                                         ti = tcorp                    txn sjni .
                                                                X
                                                       l
                                               f ed + ti +                                               (22)
                                                                n=1

Due to the sales apportionment of corporate taxes, the decision of how much to sell in each state

                                                          15
is not separable across states. When a firm increases the fraction of its sales to state n (i.e.,
when sjni increases), the average tax rate on the firm’s national profits changes depending on the
sales-apportioned corporate tax in state n, txn . Firms thus trade off the marginal pre-tax benefit of
exporting more to a given state against the potential marginal cost of increasing the corporate tax
rate on all its profits.

Pricing Distortion Through Corporate Taxes                         Despite the non-separability of the sales deci-
sion across markets, the solution to the firm optimization problem in (20) retains convenient aggre-
gation properties inherited from the standard CES maximization problem with constant marginal
production costs in Krugman (1980) or Melitz (2003). We describe these properties here and refer
to Appendix B.1 for details. Specifically, all firms located in a state i choose the same sales shares
across destinations irrespective of their productivity; i.e., sjni = sni for all firms j located in i. From
                                                                                      j
(22), this property leads to a common corporate tax rate across firms, ti = ti . Additionally, firms
set identical, constant markups over marginal costs, but these markups vary bilaterally depending
on corporate taxes. The price set in n by a firm with productivity z located in state i is:

                                                            σ        σ ci
                                        pni (z) = τni                      ,                                 (23)
                                                          σ − t̃ni σ − 1 z

where
                                                    txn −           x
                                                            P
                                                                n0 tn0 sn0 i
                                           t̃ni ≡                              .                             (24)
                                                            1 − t̄i
The term t̃ni is a pricing distortion due to heterogeneity across states in the sales-apportioned corpo-
rate tax rates. This distortion increases with the sales tax in the importing state, txn , implying that
prices will be higher in states with higher sales-apportioned corporate taxes.15 If sales-apportioned
corporate tax rates were common across all states (txn = tx for all n, and, thus t̃in = 0 for all i
and n), firms’ prices would be as predicted in the standard CES framework; i.e., the markup over
marginal cost would equal σ/(σ − 1).

Firm Location Choice            We assume that firm-level productivity zij can be decomposed into a
term zi0 common to all firms located in i and a firm- and state-specific component ji , i.e., zij = zi0 ji .
The common component of productivity is assumed to be:
                                                              αF
                                                         Gi
                                          zi0   =                     zi1−αF .                               (25)
                                                        MiχF

This common component has an endogenous part that depends on the amount of public spending
and an exogenous part, zi . The endogenous part equals total real government spending, Gi , divided
by a function of the number of firms located in state i, MiχF , where the parameter χF captures
rivalry among the mass of firms Mi in the access to public goods. The exogenous part captures
natural characteristics that impact productivity, like natural resource availability, the rate at which

  15
     This relationship is consistent with the stylized fact shown in panel (d) of Figure 1 and the regressions in
Appendix A.2.


                                                           16
the government transforms real spending into services valued by firms, and the share of public
goods provided by state governments that increase the productivity of the firms located in their
states. Firm j decides to locate in state i if i = arg maxi0 πi0 (zij0 ). The idiosyncratic component
of productivity, ji , is independent and identically distributed across firms and states and is drawn
from a Fréchet distribution, Pr(ji < x) = exp(−x−εF ). As a result, the profits of firm j when
it locates in state i, πi (zij ) = πi (zi0 )(ji )σ−1 , are also Fréchet-distributed with shape parameter
εF / (σ − 1) > 1. The fraction of firms located in state i is thus
                                                                          εF
                                                                       ! σ−1
                                                             πi zi0
                                                  Mi =                          ,                                          (26)
                                                               π̄

where πi (z) is defined in (20) and π̄ is proportional to the expected profits before drawing the
idiosyncratic productivity shocks {ji }N
                                        i=1 . Equation (26) indicates that the fraction of firms located
in n depends on the common component of profits in n, πi (zi0 ), relative to that in other locations.
A larger value of εF / (σ − 1) implies that the idiosyncratic productivity draws are less dispersed
across states; as a result, states become closer substitutes and an increase in the relative profitability
of a state leads to a larger response in the fraction of firms that choose to locate in it.

Equilibrium State Productivity Distribution and Aggregation                                     As firms choose where to
locate based on their state-specific productivity draws, the productivity distribution in each state
is endogenous. State-level outcomes can be formulated as a function of a single moment z̃i of the
productivity distribution in each state i:16

                                                                   − ε1
                                                       z̃i = zi0 Mi    F
                                                                           .                                               (27)

The productivity of the representative state-i firm, z̃i , is larger than the unconditional average of the
distribution of productivity draws (i.e., z̃i > zi0 ), reflecting selection. This equation describes one of
the congestion forces in the model: as firms are heterogeneous and self-select based on productivity,
a higher number of firms locating in a state i is associated with lower average productivity in that
state.
    Aggregate outcomes in state i can be constructed as if all of the Mi firms located there had
the (endogenous) productivity level z̃i . Appendix B.2 presents the expressions for the state-level
outcomes needed to compute the general equilibrium of the model.

Alternative Model with Free Entry of Firms                         For robustness, we also perform counterfactuals
under the alternative assumption of free entry in each state i of firms with a common productivity
level zi0 defined in (25). Conditional on entering state i, firms solve the problem (20) for z = zi0 ,
leading also to (22) to (24). To enter state i, firms must pay a cost equal to fE,i units of the
cost-minimizing bundle of factors and inputs ci in (21). In this alternative model, the zero-profit
                                              1
    By definition, z̃i = ( j∈J (zij )σ−1 dj) σ−1 . To reach (27), we use the equality π (z̃i ) = π̄ (implied by the Fréchet
   16
                          R
                              i
assumption on the distribution of productivity draws), equation (26), and the relationship πi (zi0 )/πn (z̃i ) = (zi0 /z̃i )σ−1 .


                                                              17
condition πi (zi0 ) = ci fE,i thus determines the number of firms in each state i. Appendix B.2
presents the expressions for the state-level outcomes needed to compute the general equilibrium of
the model under this free entry assumption. As in the baseline model, the number of firms in each
state turns out to also be proportional to aggregate sales in the state.17

4.5    State Governments
    State governments use state tax revenue Rn and transfers from the federal government Tnf ed→st
to finance spending in public services, Pn Gn . The budget constraint of state n is thus

                                             Pn Gn = Rn + Tnf ed→st ,                                            (28)

where the tax revenue collected by the state is

                                             Rn = Rncorp + Rny + Rnc ,                                           (29)

and where Rncorp , Rnc , and Rny denote government revenue from corporate, sales, and income taxes,
respectively. These expressions are defined in (A.15) to (A.17) in Appendix B.2.
    Consistent with the empirical evidence in Section 3.3, we assume that transfers from the federal
government to state governments are proportional to the tax revenue collected by these state
governments, where the constant of proportionality ψn may vary by state: Tnf ed→st = ψn Rn .
Combined with (28), this relationship implies that Pn Gn = (1 + ψn ) Rn . While the distribution of
federal transfer rules {ψn }N
                            n=1 impacts all model outcomes in levels, they do not have any impact
on the counterfactual results we report in Section 7.

4.6    Federal Government
    The federal government uses income and corporate taxes to finance transfers to state govern-
ments and to purchase the final good produced in each state, Gfned , which it employs as an input
in the production of a national public good. Our analysis assumes that public services from the
federal government are valued in the same way across locations.

4.7    General Equilibrium
    A general equilibrium of this economy consists of distributions of workers and firms {Ln , Mn }N
                                                                                                   n=1 ,
aggregate quantities {Qn , CnL , CnK , In , Gn , Gfned }N
                                                        n=1 , wages per efficiency unit and cost of fixed fac-
tors {wn , rn }N                                N
               n=1 , and final good prices {Pn }n=1 such that: i) final good producers optimize, setting
their prices according to (17); ii) workers make consumption, work hours and location decisions
optimally, as described in Section 4.1; iii) budget constraints of capital owners hold; iv) firms make


  17
      Under free entry, the number of firms in state i is Mi = (1 − ti )Xi /(σci fE,i ). Under a fixed mass of ex-ante
heterogeneous firms, Mi = (1 − ti )Xi /(σπ̄). The free-entry model has thus an additional parameter per state, the
entry cost fE,i , which can be calibrated to exactly match the observed number of firms per state. However, as
illustrated in Section 6.4, the distribution of firms across states is well approximated by our baseline model.


                                                         18
production, sales, and location decisions optimally, as described in Section 4.4; v) government bud-
get constraints hold, as described in Section 4.5; vi) final good markets clear in every location, i.e.,
(18) holds for all n; vii) the labor market clears in every state, i.e., labor supply (7) equals labor
demand (given by (A.7) in Appendix B.2) for all n; viii) the land market clears in every state, i.e.,
                                                                            P
(A.8) in Appendix B.2 holds; and ix) the national labor market clears, i.e., n Ln = 1.

4.8   Adjusted Fundamentals and Implementation of Counterfactuals
   According to our model, taxes in any state may affect outcomes in every state. However, as
                                                                N
shown in Appendix B.3, state tax rates tcn , tyn (·), txn , tln n=1 only impact state outcomes through
                                      
                                                   A }N , z A , uA }N ,
their effect on a set of adjusted fundamentals, {{τin i=1 n      n n=1
                                                                        
                                                    1       1
                                                     −        +αF χF
                                       1 − t̄n     σ−1     εF
                             znA =                                           GαnF zn1−αF ,         (30)
                                       σ−1
                              A         σ
                             τin   =          τin ,                                                (31)
                                     σ − t̃in
                                                            !1−αW,n
                                         1 − Tn znL wn                        α
                             uA
                              n =                                        GnW,n un ,                (32)
                                             1 + tcn

and on the set of relative trade imbalances {Pn Qn /Xn }N
                                                        n=1 (i.e., the ratio between state expen-
ditures and sales). Adjusted fundamentals (znA , τin
                                                  A , uA ) become identical to state fundamentals
                                                       n
(productivity zn , amenity un , and trade costs τin ) if we assume away preferences for government
spending (αF = αW,n = 0) and set all tax rates to zero.
   In our model, the distribution of outcomes across states depends on the distributions of adjusted
fundamentals and relative trade imbalances similarly to how it depends on the state fundamentals
and relative trade imbalances in standard economic geography models such as Allen et al. (2014) or
Redding (2015). Therefore, the effect of a counterfactual change in the tax distribution predicted
by our model is identical to the effect of a specific set of changes in amenities, productivities, trade
costs, and trade imbalances in a standard economic-geography model. Importantly, the mapping
from taxes to adjusted fundamentals and relative trade imbalances depends on the specific features
of the tax system that we incorporate in our framework. Thus, to compute our model-predicted
impact of counterfactual changes in the tax distribution, we simultaneously use a mapping from
changes in fundamentals to changes in outcomes that is standard in existing economic-geography
models, as well as a mapping from changes in taxes to changes in adjusted fundamentals that is
specific to our environment. The first mapping is presented in (A.35) to (A.42) in Appendix B.5,
and the second one in (A.43) to (A.46).

4.9   Agglomeration and Congestion Forces
   Our model features agglomeration forces that push workers and firms to locate in the same state,
as well as congestion forces that push them to spread across different states. Specifically, our model
features agglomeration through standard home market effects. Because of trade costs, workers


                                                       19
(who consume final goods) and firms (which purchase intermediate inputs) have an incentive to
locate near or in states with low price indices and large markets; in turn, the price index of a state
decreases with the number of firms located in that state, and its market size increases with the
number of workers located in it. Our model also features agglomeration through public service
provision as long as public goods are not fully rival (i.e., as long as either χF or χW are less than
one). States with a larger number of firms and workers have higher tax revenue and public spending
and, thus, higher utility per worker (see (4)) and firm productivity (see (25)).
    At the same time, our baseline model features congestion through immobile factors in produc-
tion, leading to a higher marginal production cost in a state as employment increases in that state
(see (A.8) in Appendix B.2); through selection of heterogeneous firms, leading to a lower average
firm productivity in a state as the number of firms increases (see (27)); and through the presence
of immobile capital owners, who spend their income where they are located.18


5     Impact of Tax Dispersion in Simple Theoretical Frameworks
    In this section, we discuss theoretically how changes in the dispersion in state tax rates holding
government spending constant in every state impacts two aggregate outcomes: the welfare of the
representative U.S. worker, as defined in (8), and the aggregate real income of all factors. We defer
to Section 7 for a discussion of the additional effects caused by the changes in government spending
implied by the changes in taxes.
    We consider a special case of the model presented in Section 4. We assume away trade frictions,
workers’ intensive margin of labor supply, and heterogeneity in firms and workers, and impose that
the public good is non-rival. We also assume that state sales and income taxes are the only taxes
in the economy. This simplified version retains the ingredients of existing frameworks in the macro
and local public finance literatures, including key spatial economics forces such as location-specific
amenities and local congestion through fixed factors of production. We provide here an intuitive
discussion of the predictions of this simplified model followed by formal propositions, and relegate
the proofs to Appendix C. As we shall see in Section 7, the intuitions derived in this simpler model
hold up in the full quantitative model.
    To gain intuition, suppose momentarily that, in addition to the restrictions from the previous
paragraph, there were no differences in public spending per capita or amenities across states (gn = g
and un = u for all n). In this case, the production side of the model would be the same as in
standard models of labor allocation across firms, such as Hsieh and Klenow (2009), where the

   18
      When there is no dispersion in sales-apportioned corporate taxes across states (txn = tx for all n), no cross-
ownership of assets across states, and same preferences for government spending across states (αW,n = αW for all
n), our baseline model fits in the class of models studied by Allen et al. (2014). Conditions (A.33) and (A.34) in
Appendix B.4 show the restrictions to our model parameters implied by the relevant uniqueness condition included
in that paper. Our baseline estimates satisfy these restrictions. While we do not derive an analogous uniqueness
condition for the general version of our model, we have found no evidence of multiple equilibria in the system of
equations we employ to compute the counterfactual predictions discussed in Section 7. Specifically, when numerically
computing these counterfactual predictions, we experiment with multiple different starting values of our algorithm
and always find the same results, suggesting that the system of equations we employ to compute such predictions
indeed has a unique solution.


                                                        20
aggregate production function of each location can be interpreted as a firm. Spatial efficiency,
defined as any allocation on the utility frontier that takes into account the utility of workers and
capital owners, would then be attained by maximizing total output through equalization of the
marginal products of labor across locations, M P Ln = M P Ln0 for all n and n0 .
   In this context, dispersion in tax rates would create dispersion in marginal products, which
is inefficient. To see why, note that in any spatial equilibrium workers must be indifferent about
where to locate, leading to the same consumption per worker everywhere. That is, denoting as cL
                                                                                              n
the consumption of a worker in state n, any spatial equilibrium with homogeneous workers would
require cL    L                            0
         n = cn0 for any two states n and n . In a world without trade costs, uniform per-capita
consumption across states would imply that after-tax wages would be equal across any two states;
i.e., (1 − Tn ) wn = (1 − Tn0 ) wn0 . Since wages equal marginal products, spatial dispersion in sales
or income tax rates entering in Tn would result in spatial dispersion in the marginal product of
labor, and in a spatial equilibrium that is inefficient.
   Consider now the more relevant case in which public spending per capita and amenities differ
across states. Given any distribution of these variables, spatial efficiency is no longer attained by
maximizing total output. Instead, it requires the equalization of M P Ln − cL
                                                                            n across locations. To
see why, note that reallocating a worker from one location to another entails an output gain (equal
to the difference in the marginal product of labor across those two locations) as well as a cost in
terms of final goods consumed (equal to the difference in the per capita consumption cL
                                                                                      n of those
two locations). In any spatial equilibrium of this more general model, consumption per worker
cL
 n will vary across locations to compensate for the differences in public spending per capita and
amenities. Because M P Ln = wn , this means that wn − cL
                                                       n , the tax payment per worker, must
be equalized across locations for efficiency. This point was established by Flatters et al. (1974),
Wildasin (1980), and Helpman and Pines (1980). Note that, as a result, efficiency now requires
dispersion in the marginal product of labor across locations.
   We summarize these results in the following proposition.

Proposition 1. Consider a tax structure with only sales and income taxes. Assume no trade
costs (τin = 1 for all i, n), perfect substitutability across varieties (σ → ∞), homogeneous firms
(εF → ∞), homogeneous workers with constant labor supply (εW → ∞, ζn → ∞ and hn constant),
and non-rival public goods (χW = 0). Then:
   i) (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009) In the absence of compensating differentials (gn and un constant
across locations), no dispersion in state wages, wn , is necessary for efficiency. This requirement
implies that no dispersion in tax rates Tn across states is necessary for efficiency.
   ii) (Flatters et al., 1974; Wildasin, 1980; Helpman and Pines, 1980) In the presence of com-
pensating differentials (gn and un may vary across locations), no dispersion in state wages minus
personal consumption expenditures, wn − cL
                                         n , is necessary for efficiency. This requirement implies
that no dispersion in the per capita tax payments Tn wn across states is necessary for efficiency.

   The first part of this proposition is a special case of the second one. In the absence of com-
pensating differentials, we have that (1 − Tn ) wn = (1 − Tn0 ) wn0 for all states n and n0 . Therefore,


                                                   21
the condition of tax payment equalization established in the second part of the proposition implies
tax rate equalization. As pointed out by Wildasin (1980), this reasoning holds for any arbitrary
distribution of public service provision, including the efficient one, and regardless of whether that
distribution is determined within the model to satisfy a government budget constraint or exoge-
nously given. Under more general conditions than those assumed in the proposition, some dispersion
in per capita tax payments may be required for efficiency. However, in assessing the implications
of the full quantitative model, we shall see that the intuition provided by the second part of Propo-
sition 1 is consistent with the results: the gains from changes in tax rates given a distribution of
spending in public services are larger in counterfactuals in which the reduction in the dispersion in
tax payments per capita is larger.
    Proposition 1 implies that, given a distribution of spending in public services, an elimination
of dispersion in tax rates will increase the efficiency of the allocation if it reduces the dispersion of
the tax payments per capita, Tn wn . The next proposition formalizes that the impact of dispersion
in tax rates on dispersion in tax payments per capita depends on the relationship between state
tax rates and fundamentals in the initial allocation.

Proposition 2. In addition to the restrictions from Proposition 1, assume no cross-state dispersion
in preferences for government spending (αW,n = αW for all n). Then, eliminating the dispersion
in the real keep-tax rates (i.e., setting Tn = T for all n), while keeping constant both its mean and
the government spending in every state:
                                                 1              1
    i) increases worker welfare if corr(Znβ , (1 − Tn ) β ) is low enough, and decreases worker welfare
          1             1                                       1/γ β              1
if corr(Znβ , (1 − Tn ) β ) is large enough, where Zn = zn0 /γ      Hn (un GαnW ) 1−αW ; and
    ii) may increase or decrease the aggregate real income depending on the joint distribution of Tn ,
un , and Gn .

    The first part of the proposition reflects that, when the correlation between Tn and fundamen-
                                                            1            1
tals is sufficiently large (in the sense that corr(Znβ , (1 − Tn ) β ) is low enough), so is the correlation
between taxes and wages, leading to high dispersion in tax payments per capita in the initial allo-
cation.19 In this case, eliminating dispersion in Tn increases welfare through less dispersion in tax
payments per capita. To understand the second part of Proposition 2, bear in mind that aggregate
real income is maximized when marginal products of labor are equalized across regions. There-
fore, eliminating dispersion in worker keep tax rates will increase or decrease aggregate real income
depending on whether this change in the tax system reduces or increases cross-state dispersion in
the marginal product of labor. It is straightforward to construct examples in which an elimination
of tax dispersion reduces output; for example, this result may happen in cases with an initially
negative correlation between keep tax rates and amenities.20 However, as implied by the first part
of Proposition 1, an elimination of tax dispersion will necessarily increase aggregate output if there
   19
      In the proof of Proposition 2 in Appendix C, we provide a more general correlation condition that does not
impose restrictions on εW and χW .
   20
      E.g., let An ≡ un Gα
                         n
                           W
                              and Bn = (1 − Tn )1−αW . Consider a case with two states, n = 1, 2 and two levels of
keep tax rates, B1 = 1/A1 and B2 = 1/A2 . In this case, output is maximized because marginal products of labor are
equalized across both states in equilibrium (v 1/(1−αW ) = M P Ln for n = 1, 2). Therefore, in this example, eliminating
tax dispersion increases dispersion in marginal products, reducing output.


                                                          22
is no dispersion in compensating differentials (un = u for all n and either Gn = G for all n or
αW = 0).
    An important implication of Proposition 2 is that the model described in Section 4 includes
forces pushing aggregate outcomes in opposite directions in response to a reduction in the dispersion
in income and sales taxes. Furthermore, the relative strength of these opposing forces and thus the
resulting impact of such a counterfactual change in taxes depends on the value of parameters such
as the amenities and productivities of each state.


6     Data and Estimation
    This section describes how we quantify the model parameters. Section 6.1 discusses the cali-
bration of the production function, preference parameters, state fundamentals, and ownership of
capital by state. Section 6.2 discusses the estimation of the elasticities of employment and firm
mobility with respect to state taxes, and the estimation of the weights of public goods on workers’
preferences and firms’ productivity. Section 6.3 describes how these parameter estimates collec-
tively determine the location of workers and firms. Section 6.4 shows that the estimated model
matches features of data not used in our parametrization. Appendix F describes the data sources
that we use.

6.1     Calibrated Parameters
Production Technologies, Preference Parameters, and the Distribution of Efficiency
Units    The value-added share γ and share of labor in value added 1 − β are calibrated from
KLEMS Data for the U.S. We use 2007 data to compute 1 − γ = .45 as the ratio of expenditure in
intermediate inputs to gross output, and 1−β = .62 as the ratio of labor compensation to gross value
added. In our model, the elasticity of substitution across varieties σ impacts the partial elasticity
of import shares with respect to bilateral trade costs. A common practice in the international trade
literature is to identify this elasticity from variation in tariffs across countries. No tariff applies
to the exchange of goods between U.S. states, complicating the estimation of σ in our context.
Therefore, we set its value to 4, which is a central value in the range of estimates used in the
international trade literature; see Head and Mayer (2014). We set the disutility of effort η = 2.84
following Chetty et al. (2011). Finally, the parameters (zL,n , ζn ) that characterize the distribution
of efficiency units within each state are chosen to match the distribution of hourly wages across
individuals within each state, as described in Appendix D.2.1.

Fundamentals       The system of equations (A.35)-(A.46) that characterizes the general equilibrium
impact of changes in taxes, described in Appendix B.5, is a function of all fundamentals across states
(endowments of land and structures Hn , productivities zn , parameters ζn and zL,n of the skill dis-
tributions, amenities un , disutility from labor αh,n , trade costs τin , and, in the version of the model
with free entry of firms, entry costs fE,n ). According to this system, these fundamentals affect
the equilibrium of the economy through the joint distribution of expenditures, sales revenue, and


                                                   23
employment shares across states. This property of the system of equilibrium conditions allows us
to compute the effect of counterfactual changes in these fundamentals without having to separately
determine the value of each different fundamental.21 Specifically, one only needs to set the com-
posite of the fundamentals Ain defined in (A.29) to be consistent with the observed expenditure
shares through (A.27).22

Ownership Rates Equation (A.23) in Appendix B.2 shows that the set of ownership rates
{ωn }N
     n=1 are uniquely identified as a function of observables, technology parameters in state n, and
the parameter σ. The parametrized model exactly matches the distribution of trade imbalances
across states in 2007. We measure these trade imbalances as the ratio of aggregate expenditures to
sales.

6.2      Estimated Elasticities
    In this section, we describe how we estimate the parameters governing the dispersion of work-
ers’ idiosyncratic preferences for each state, εW , the share of public goods in worker preferences,
{αW,n }N
       n=1 , the dispersion of firms’ idiosyncratic productivities in each state, εF , and the share of
public goods in firms’ productivity, αF . Appendix D.9 shows that our baseline estimates are in line
with the previous literature, which relies on alternative identifying assumptions.

6.2.1     Estimation of Workers’ Location Preferences and Value of Public Goods

    Combining the definition of the state appeal in (4), the labor supply equation in (7), the
expression for hours worked in (13), and the government budget constraint in (28), we obtain the
following expression for the share of workers living in state n:

                     ln Lnt = a0,n ln ỹnt + a1,n ln R̃nt + a2,n ln Ant + ψtL + ξnL + νnt
                                                                                       L
                                                                                          ,                    (33)

where the coefficients a0,n ≡ εW (1 − αW,n )/(1 + χW εW αW,n ), a1,n ≡ εW αW,n /(1 + χW εW αW,n ) and
a2,n ≡ εW /(1 + χW εW αW,n ) are functions of structural parameters. The variables ỹnt and R̃nt are
measures of after-tax real labor earnings and real government spending, respectively, and Ant is a




   21
      This feature of our model is shared by the trade and economic geography models discussed in the Introduction.
Dekle et al. (2008) show how to undertake counterfactuals with respect to trade costs without having to identify all
fundamentals separately.
   22
      Appendix Table A.5 shows that the model-predicted relation between the composite of the fundamentals Ain
and proxies of both trade costs between states i and nand amenities in each of these two states are consistent with
the data.


                                                        24
measure of within-state wage dispersion. Specifically:
                                                                 1−bynt
                                              aynt   hnt znL wnt
                                   ỹnt   ≡                              ,                         (34)
                                            1 + tcnt        Pnt
                                            Rnt
                                  R̃nt    ≡      ,                                                 (35)
                                            Pnt
                                                        ζn
                                   Ant    ≡            y                   .                       (36)
                                            ζn − (1 − bnt ) (1 − αW,n )

Finally, the term ψtL + ξnL + νnt
                               L ≡ (ε /(1 + χ ε α
                                     W       W W W,n )) ln unt /vt accounts for year and state fixed
effects and deviations from these state and year fixed effects in states’ amenities, unt . To construct
the covariates in (34)-(36), we measure state-specific after-tax labor earnings combining hours and
earnings data from the March Current Population Survey (CPS), information on sales tax rates from
the Book of States and on income tax rates from NBER’s TAXSIM, and regional price index data
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We construct a measure of real government spending as
the sum of sales, individual income, and corporate income tax revenue reported in the U.S. Census
of Governments divided by the corresponding regional price index. The wage dispersion term Ant
depends on the wage distribution parameter ζn , income tax schedule parameters bynt (from NBER’s
TAXSIM), and the structural parameter αW,n . We provide in Appendix F.3 detailed descriptions
of how we construct each of these covariates.
   The structural parameters {αW,n }N                                      N             N
                                    n=1 enter (33) through {(a0,n , a1,n )}n=1 and {Ant }n=1 . In
practice, as shown in Appendix Table A.8, the terms {Ant }N
                                                          n=1 have minimal effect on the esti-
mates. Therefore, intuitively, we can think of the parameter αW,n as being identified by the vector
(a0,n , a1,n ); i.e., αW,n = a1,n /(a0,n + a1,n ). The parameters εW and χW are however not sepa-
rately identified from the coefficients in (33) alone. We thus present estimates of the parameter εW
conditional on different values of χW .

Endogeneity       If state amenities {unt }N,T                                          L T
                                           n=1,t=1 are not fully captured by the year {ψt }t=1 and
state {ξnL }N                                                                                       L
            n=1 fixed effects, our model predicts that the state-year specific error term in (33), νnt ,
will be correlated with the regressors ỹnt and R̃nt . The key source of this correlation is the impact
that amenities have on the location of workers. If, for example, there is a positive amenity shock in
California, then workers will move to this state. This outward shift of the labor supply curve would
lower wages, thus causing a reduction in the after-tax labor earnings in California. Thus, following
a positive amenity shock, we would observe an increase in the number of workers in California.
Ceteris paribus, this inflow of workers would generate a decrease in wages and, as a result, after-
tax labor earnings. This negative correlation between amenity improvements and after-tax labor
earnings would tend to generate a downward bias in Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates
of the parameters {a0,n }N
                         n=1 . Similarly, our model predicts that an amenity-induced increase in
the number of workers in a state raises tax revenue in this state, therefore increasing government
service provision and generating a positive correlation between amenity improvements in a state
and the state’s real government spending. This positive correlation would tend to generate an



                                                       25
upward bias in the OLS estimates of {a1,n }N
                                           n=1 . Since our estimates of the parameters capturing
workers’ preferences for government services in state n, αW,n , are decreasing in our estimates of the
reduced-form parameter a0,n and increasing in our estimates of a1,n , OLS estimates of aW,n will
tend to be biased upwards. To obtain consistent estimates of {aW,n }N
                                                                    n=1 , we rely on two different
sets of instruments: (1) a vector of “external” state tax rates Z Tnt ; and, (2) a vector of Bartik-type
instruments Z B
              nt .


Instruments        For each state n, the instrument vector Z Tnt is a weighted-average of tax rates
                                                      ∗y ∗x
in states other than n. Specifically, Z Tnt ≡ (t∗c
                                                nt , tnt , tnt ) is a vector of inverse-distance weighted
averages of sales (indexed as c), income (y), and sales-apportioned corporate (x) tax rates in every
state other than n:

                          X                                     ln(distni )−1
                  t∗z
                   nt ≡          dni tzit ,   with dni = P                      −1
                                                                                      for z = c, y, x.           (37)
                          i6=n                               i0 6=n ln(distni0 )

These instruments will be relevant as long as they affect after-tax earnings and tax revenues in
state n. Our model is consistent with the relevance of the instrument vector Z Tnt : it predicts that,
for example, an income tax increase in Oregon would cause some workers to move to other states,
affecting the after-tax equilibrium earnings and total tax earnings in the states to which they move.
Conversely, our model does not take a stand on the political process that determines states’ tax
rates and, thus, is silent about the validity of the instrument vector Z Tnt . However, all variables in
vector Z Tnt are valid instruments if changes in taxes in nearby states are not correlated with state
                            L.
n’s residual amenity level νnt
    Our second instrument vector Z B
                                   nt ≡ (BtkPnt , BtkTRnt ) includes two Bartik (1991)-type in-
struments:


            X Lkn,1974 P AYkt − P AYk,t−10                                 X         REVτ,n,1974 REVτ,t − REVτ,t−10
BtkPnt =                                   ,           BtkTRnt =                                                    ,
              Ln,1974      P AYk,t−10                                                REVn,1974      REVτ,t−10
             k                                                          τ ={c,y,x}
                                                                                                                 (38)
where k indexes one-digit SIC industries, P AY denotes real annual payroll, τ indexes different
types of taxes (i.e., personal income taxes, corporate income taxes, and sales taxes), and REV
denotes tax revenue. The instrument BtkPnt uses variation in each state’s exposure to national
industry shocks.23 For example, if a state n is very dependent on a particular industry k (i.e.,
Lkn,1974 /Ln,1974 is high) and this industry experiences relative growth at the national level, then
after-tax real earnings in state n are likely to grow. The instrument BtkTRnt uses variation in
each state’s exposure to revenue-source national shocks. Suppose a state relies mostly on sales
taxes for tax revenue (i.e., REVsales,n,1974 /REVn,1974 is relatively high), then national sales booms
(i.e., (REVτ,t − REVτ,t−10 )/REVτ,t−10 is relatively high for τ = sales) will cause especially high

  23
    There is a recent literature exploring the properties of shift-share instruments. See Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin,
and Swift (2018) and Borusyak, Hull, and Jaravel (2018) for a discussion of identification approaches in this setting.
See Adão, Kolesár, and Morales (2018) for discussion of inference procedures.


                                                         26
tax revenues for that state and, consequently, a growth in government spending. Empirically,
initial revenue-share weighted national tax revenue shocks are good predictors of state tax revenue
changes.24
    We use data on ỹnt , R̃nt , and Ant , a fixed value of χW , and a vector of instruments Z L
                                                                                               nt (where
                                                                             N
ZL                     T       B
 nt may equal either Z nt or Z nt ) to identify the parameters εW and {αW,n }n=1 in the following
moment conditions:
                                           L                 L 0
                                        E[νnt ∗ (Z L     L
                                                   nt , ξ , ψ ) ] = 0,                                     (39)
       L is the residual from equation (33). This orthogonality restriction assumes that the state-
where νnt
                               L , are mean independent of the vector of instruments Z L , conditional
year specific amenity shocks, νnt                                                      nt
on ξ L , which denotes a complete set of state dummies, and ψ L , which denotes a complete set of
year dummies. Given the unconditional moment conditions in (39), we use the optimal two-step
Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimator (Hansen, 1982) to estimate the parameters of
interest. We report the resulting estimates in Table 1.

Estimates of Worker Preferences              Our estimates exploit several approaches to deal with the
potential variability in αW,n across states.
    First, we impose the assumption that αW,n = αW for every state n. Conditional on imposing
that public goods enjoyed by workers are rival (i.e., χW = 1), our estimates of εW and αW using
external taxes as instruments, Z L      T
                                 nt = Z nt , equal 2.10 and 0.23, with standard errors 0.8 and 0.07,
respectively. The results using the Bartik-style instruments, Z L      B
                                                                nt = Z nt , are similar. Combining
both vectors of instruments, Z L       T      B
                               nt = (Z nt , Z nt ), we obtain estimates of εW and αW equal to 1.73
and 0.16. We use this last set of estimates as our baseline specification.
    Second, we allow for workers’ preferences for public goods to vary by state and use the ob-
served ratio of tax revenue to GDP in each state to calibrate the corresponding parameter αW,n .
Specifically, we assume that αW,n = Rn /GDPn , where Rn /GDPn denotes the average ratio of tax
revenue to GDP during the sample period. This approach yields estimates of αW,n between 0.01
and 0.06. Conditional on these calibrated values of the parameter vector {αW,n }N
                                                                                n=1 and χW = 1,
the resulting estimate of εW is 1.48 (0.33).
    Third, rows five and six present estimates of εW under two alternative assumptions. First, we
impose again the assumption that αW,n = αW for every state n and calibrate the value of αW
to equal the cross-state mean value of the states’ tax revenue to GDP ratio (i.e., αW,n = 0.04).
Second, we impose the extreme assumption that public services have no impact on workers’ utility
(i.e., αW,n = 0 for every state n). Under these assumptions, we obtain estimates of εW equal to
1.25 (0.35) and 1.04 (0.30), respectively.
    As columns 1 and 3 in Table 1 show, imposing instead the assumption that public goods are
non-rival (i.e., χW = 0) does not affect the estimated value of αW , and only slightly decreases the
estimates of εW . Appendix D.6 provides additional estimates, robustness tests, and discussion.

  24
     See, e.g., columns 2 and 5 of Appendix Table A.11, which shows a regression of the endogenous covariates in
33 on BtkPnt and BtkTRnt . Appendix Table A.13 shows a similar table for firms. Appendix D.6 and D.7 provide
additional discussion.


                                                      27
                             Table 1: GMM Estimates of Worker Parameters

                                                                      εW                     αW
          Instruments      Restrictions on αW,n
                                                              χW = 0 χW = 1           χW = 0 χW = 1
               Z Tnt       αW,n = αW                          1.42*** 2.1***          .23***    .23***
                                                                (.36)     (.8)         (.07)     (.07)
               ZB
                nt         αW,n = αW                          1.79*** 2.25**           .11*      .11*
                                                                (.63)    (.93)         (.06)     (.06)
            Z Tnt , Z B
                      nt   αW,n = αW                          1.36*** 1.73***         .16***    .16***
                                                                 (.3)    (.52)         (.06)     (.06)
                                      Rn
            Z Tnt , Z B
                      nt   αW,n =    GDPn                      .75*** 1.48***
                                                                (.23)    (.33)
                                               Rn
            Z Tnt , Z B
                      nt   αW,n = 0.04 = Mean GDP n
                                                              1.19*** 1.25***
                                                                (.32)    (.35)
            Z Tnt , Z B
                      nt   αW,n = 0                           1.04*** 1.04***
                                                                 (.3)     (.3)

Notes: This table shows the GMM estimates for structural parameters entering the labor mobility equation. The
data are at the state-year level. Each column uses information on 712 observations. Every specification includes state
and year fixed effects. Observations are weighted using state population. The instrument vectors used to compute the
estimates in each row are indicated under the heading “Instruments”. Similarly, restrictions on αW,n are described
under the heading “Restrictions on αW,n ”. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.


Interpretation of Estimates of Worker Preferences Our model assumes that workers can
move across locations without any need to pay a fixed cost of moving. Consequently, the estimating
equation in (33) predicts that the share of workers located in a state in any given period depends
exclusively on that period’s values of after-tax labor earnings and real government spending. In a
more general model with fixed costs of mobility, the population share in a location in a period t
would depend on the corresponding share in every location in period t − 1. Furthermore, in this
general model, a permanent change in any of the economic determinants of workers’ locations will
have a different impact on the short and long run. While building a fully dynamic model of worker
location is beyond the scope of this paper, we present in Appendix D.8 simulation results that
explore how close our estimates are to capturing the long-run impact of after-tax real earnings and
real government spending on the number of workers living in each state.25 Our simulation shows
that, given the large amount of persistence in all the regressors entering (33), our estimates of
{(a0,n , a1,n )}N
                n=1 are closer to the true long-run than to the short-run impact of changes in these
regressors on the number of workers living in each state. Consistent with this finding, re-estimating
εW and αW under the assumption that each period in our model corresponds to a half-decade yields
only modestly larger estimates for εW and very similar estimates of αW .




  25
     For general equilibrium models of labor mobility that allow for migration costs, see Artuç et al. (2010) and
Caliendo et al. (2015).


                                                         28
6.2.2     Estimation of Firms’ Location Preferences and Value of Public Goods

    Combining the pricing equation in (23), the definition of productivity in (25), the firm-location
equation in (26), and the definition of profits in (A.10), our model yields the following expression
for the share of firms in state n:

                 ln Mnt = b0 ln ((1 − t̄n ) M Pnt ) + b1 ln cnt + b2 ln R̃nt + ψtM + ξnM + νnt
                                                                                            M
                                                                                               ,                      (40)

where b0 ≡ (εF / (σ − 1)) / (1 + χF αF εF ), b1 ≡ −εF / (1 + χF αF εF ), and b2 ≡ −αF b1 ; ψtM is a time
effect, and ξnM + νnt
                   M accounts for state effects and deviations from state and year effects in log
                                              1−β β γ 1−γ 26
productivity, ln znt . Unit costs are cnt = (wnt rnt ) Pnt . M Pnt is the market potential of state
n in year t,
                                                                                        1−σ
                                            X                  τn0 nt   σ          σ
                                 M Pnt =           En0 t                                        ,                     (41)
                                                               Pn0 t σ − t̃n0 nt σ − 1
                                              n0

where En0 t ≡ Pn0 t Qn0 t denotes aggregate expenditures in state n0 . The market potential of state n
is a measure of the market size for a firm located in state n, once trade costs with other states are
taken into account. Details on how we construct measures of all the covariates entering (41) are in
Appendix D.2.1.
    Given values of the reduced-form parameters b0 , b1 , and b2 , the impact of government spending
on productivity is identified as αF = −b2 /b1 .27 The parameters εF and χF are however not
separately identified from the coefficients in (40) alone. We thus present estimates of the parameter
εF conditional on different values of χF .
    The problem of endogeneity in this case arises from the potential that unobserved productivity
           M may be positively correlated with local wages, and therefore with c . Since firms are
shocks in νnt                                                                   n
likely to locate in more productive places, such a shock might bias b1 toward a positive value. This
bias, in turn, may bias αF toward zero, and may even result in a negative value. We overcome this
problem by using a similar set of instruments as the ones we used to estimate the worker location
equation.
    Conditional on assumed values of χF and σ, we estimate parameters εF and αF using an optimal
two-step GMM estimator that uses the following moment conditions:

                                               M                 M 0
                                            E[νnt ∗ (Z M     M
                                                       nt , ξ , ψ ) ] = 0,                                            (42)

where Z M       T      B       ∗                                  M denotes a full set of state dummies,
        nt = (Z nt , Z nt , M Pnt ) is a vector of instruments, ξ
and ψ M denotes a full set of year dummies. The instrument vector Z Tnt is as defined in (37).
The instrument vector Z B
                        nt combines the instrument BtkTRnt defined in (38) with the following
Bartik-type instrument:
   26
      We define here the unit cost exclusive of the federal payroll tax, which is absorbed by the time effect. I.e.,
ψtM ≡ −εF / ((σ − 1) (1 + χF αF εF )) ln(σπ̄t )+b1 (1 − β) γ ln(1+tw           M   M
                                                                   f ed ) and ξn +νnt ≡ (1−αF )εF / (1 + χF αF εF ) ln znt .
   27
      One could try to identify the parameter vector σ using (40) and (41). However, the identification of σ from
these equations is very sensitive to the particular proxy that we adopt for the trade costs between any two regions n
and n0 , τn0 nt . Given that we do not have a precise measure of these trade costs, we fix σ to a standard value in the
international trade literature (see Section 6.1 for details).


                                                                 29
                                                 X Lkn,1974 Wkt − Wk,t−10
                                     BtkWnt =                             ,
                                                   Ln,1974    Wk,t−10
                                                  k

where Wkt denotes the average hourly wage in industry k and year t. The reason why we substitute
the instrumental variable BtkPnt used in the estimation of workers’ location preferences and public
goods for the instrumental variable BtkWnt is that the endogenous variable in this case is unit
                                                                                           ∗ is
costs, which depend on hourly wages rather than total earnings. Finally, the instrument M Pnt
an exogenous shifter of market potential, as defined in Appendix D.3.

                               Table 2: GMM Estimates of Firm Parameters

                                                                      εF                     αF
            Instruments       Restrictions on αF
                                                               χF = 0 χF = 1          χF = 0 χF = 1
                 Z Tnt        None                             2.45*** 2.84***          .06       .06
                                                                (.27)    (.62)         (.07)    (.07)
                 ZB
                  nt          None                             2.81*** 2.46***          -.05     -.05
                                                                (.36)    (.46)         (.08)    (.08)
              Z Tnt , Z B
                        nt    None                             2.44*** 2.63***          .03       .03
                                                                (.27)    (.46)         (.06)    (.06)
                                                Rn
              Z Tnt , Z B
                        nt    αF = 0.04 = Mean GDP n
                                                               2.43*** 2.7***
                                                                (.26)    (.32)
              Z Tnt , Z B
                        nt    αF = 0                           2.45*** 2.45***
                                                                (.26)    (.26)

Notes: This table shows the GMM estimates for structural parameters entering the firm mobility equation. The
data are at the state-year level. Each column uses information on 587 observations. The number of observations is
lower than in Table 1 due to missing data in variables required to construct the measures of market potential and unit
costs (see Appendix D.3 for details). Every specification includes state and year fixed effects. The instrument vectors
used to compute the estimates in each row are indicated under the heading “Instruments”. Similarly, restrictions
on αF are described under the heading “Restrictions on αF ”. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    As Table 2 shows, conditional on assuming that public goods enjoyed by firms are rival (i.e.,
χF = 1) and relying solely on the external tax instruments, Z Tnt , we obtain estimates of εF and αF
equal to 2.84 and 0.06, with standard errors 0.62 and 0.07, respectively. As in Table 1, the second
row estimates only use the Bartik-type instruments in the vector Z B
                                                                   nt , which yields an estimates
of εF equal to 2.46 (0.46) and of αF that, although negative, is not statistically different from
zero. The third row combines both types of instruments, which yields our baseline firm estimates
for εF and αF of 2.63 and 0.03, respectively. The final two rows present estimates in which we
calibrate αF and estimate εF subject to the calibrated value of αF . We use two different calibration
strategies for αF . First, similar to the calibration performed on αW above, we assume that αF is
equal to the cross-state average of tax revenue over GDP; i.e., αF = 0.04. As our baseline estimate
of αF is very close to this value, the impact of this calibration on our estimate of εF is minimal.
Second, we impose the extreme assumption that firms’ productivity is unaffected by the provision
of government services; i.e., αF = 0. In this case, we obtain an estimate of εF that is somewhat


                                                          30
smaller than the baseline estimate when public goods are assumed to be rival, χF = 1, and almost
the same as the baseline estimate when they are assumed to be are non-rival, χF = 0. Appendix
D.7 provides supplemental estimates and discussion.

6.3   Reduced-Form Elasticities
   The estimated coefficients from the third row of Table 1, which is our baseline, imply that the
change in employment in state n are consistent with the estimated relationship

               ln Lnt = 1.14 ∗ ln ỹnt + 0.22 ∗ ln R̃nt + 1.36 ∗ ln Ant + ψtL + ξnL + νnt
                                                                                       L
                                                                                          .           (43)

Similarly, the estimated coefficients from the first row of Table 2 imply that the change in the
number of firms in state n are consistent with the estimated relationship

        ln Mnt = 0.81 ∗ ln ((1 − t̄n ) M Pnt ) − 2.44 ∗ ln cnt + 0.07 ∗ ln R̃nt + ψtM + ξnM + νnt
                                                                                               M
                                                                                                  .   (44)

For these values of the parameter vector, workers are about five times more responsive to after-tax
real earnings than to government spending, while firms are about twelve times more responsive to
after-tax market potential than to government spending. We note that the assumed values of χW
and χF do not matter for these reduced form elasticities.

6.4   Over-Identification Checks
   This section shows that our model’s predictions for moments that are not targeted in our
calibration align well with the data.
   First, panel (a) of Figure 2 compares the model implications for the share of each state in
national GDP against the data in 2007. Model predictions and data line up almost perfectly, which
reflects that, in the data, state GDP is roughly proportional to state sales (which our calibration
matches), as our model predicts. Similarly, panel (b) shows that the model’s share of firms in each
state against the actual share in 2007 lines up closely as well, also reflecting the number of firms
and total sales are close to proportional in the model.
   Second, we verify the implications of the estimated model for the share of government revenue
in state GDP. Panel (c) compares the model-implied share of government revenue in GDP with its
empirical counterpart; there is a positive correlation between both, although the model tends to
over-predict the share of government revenue in GDP.
   Third, panels (d) to (f) compare, for each type of tax, the model-implied and the observed
share of revenue from this tax in total state tax revenue. There is a positive correlation between
the data and the model-implied shares, although the model tends to over-predict the importance
of corporate income taxes and under-predict the importance of individual income taxes. These
differences are due in part to the model assumption that all companies are C-corporations and,
therefore, pay corporate taxes.




                                                    31
                                                                                                Figure 2: Over-identifying Moments: Model vs. Data
                                                                        (a) State GDP Share                                                                                                                                                      (b) Firm Share
                                      .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .15
                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
  Model State GDP Share




                                                                                                                                                                Model Firm Share
                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TX
                                                                                                            NY TX                                                                                                                                                    NY

                                                                                           FL                                                                                                                                                                         FL
                                      .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                                                                 IL                                                                                                                                                              IL
                                                                           PA                                                                                                                                                                   PA
                                                                        OH
                                                                        NJ                                                                                                                                                             NJ OH
                                                                 MA
                                                                  MI                                                                                                                                                                   MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA GA
                                                                 VAGA                                                                                                                                                               VA
                                                                  NC                                                                                                                                                                  NC
                                                             MN
                                                              MDWA                                                                                                                                                          MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MD  WA
                                                           WIIN
                                                            CO
                                                           MOAZ                                                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AZCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO
                                                           TN
                                                           CT                                                                                                                                                         CT   TN
                                                        ALLA
                                                       KY                                                                                                                                                             KYLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SC
                                                      IASC
                                                        OR
                                                       OK
                                                      NV                                                                                                                                                           NVIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UTOK OR
                                                     UT
                                                     KS                                                                                                                                                             KS
                                                    AR
                                                    MS
                                                   NE                                                                                                                                                              AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MS
                                                 NH
                                                 ID
                                                 WV
                                                 RI
                                                 ME
                                                MT
                                                SD
                                                VT
                                                   NM
                                                  HI
                                                 DE                                                                                                                                                            HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SD INE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                               RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                              VT  D
                                                ND
                                                WY                                                                                                                                                            ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                              WY
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                            0                                    .05                                      .1                         .15                                                  0                                           .05                                  .1                  .15
                                                                        Actual State GDP Share in 2007                                                                                                                                           Actual Firm Share in 2007
                                            Note: Slope is .87 (.01). R-squared is .99.                                                                                                                   Note: Slope is 1.03 (.02). R-squared is .99.



                                                (c) State Tax Revenue as Share of GDP                                                                                                                                         (d) Sales Tax Revenue Share
                                      .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SD     WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NV
  Model Tax Revenue as Share of GDP




                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                Model Sales Tax Revenue Share
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8

                                                                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                                                      ID ME
                                                                                                                    VT             MN                                                                                                                                                                     FL
                                      .1




                                                                                                                           RI   NJ
                                                                                                                MD                    WV                                                                                                                                                             TN
                                                                                                             IA                          AR            HI
                                                                                                                VA        KYNYMA        MS
                                                                                                                           NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .6




                                                                                                                PA NE AZ NCKS WI
                                                                                                         ND     OH     SCCT
                                                                                                             MOOKGA IN                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                       UT                                                                                                                                     IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                   MT IL   ALOR     MI                                                                                                                                                             AZ
                                                                                                     CO                                                                                                                                                MD               SCIN
                                                                                           DE            FL                                                                                                                                          CT          PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RI           NDAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VA          CA NJ  UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AL                NM
                                      .05




                                                                                                          TN                                                                                                                                                WV   OHNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KS  ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VTMNOKMO       LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MA              WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GA
                                                                                            NV                                                                                                                                                       CO     IAME
                                                                                                       WA                                                                                                                                 NY         NC                               HI
                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                   NH
                                                                                WY     SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                           DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                           OR
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                            0                               .02                                     .04                       .06                                                         0                          .2                       .4                   .6           .8             1
                                            Actual Tax Revenue from Modeled Taxes as % of GDP in 2007                                                                                                                              Actual Sales Tax Revenue Share in 2007
                                            Note: Slope is 1.93 (.14). R-squared is .81.                                                                                                                  Note: Slope is .89 (.05). R-squared is .89.



                                                          (e) Income Tax Revenue Share                                                                                                                                (f) Corporate Tax Revenue Share
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                                Model Corporate Tax Revenue Share
  Model Income Tax Revenue Share




                                                                                                                                                OR
                                                                                                                                       MT
                                      .6




                                                                                                                                 DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NH
                                                                                      HI
                                                                                                                  NC CO
                                                                                                   ME GA                  NY
                                                                                               ID UT MO                   VA
                                      .4




                                                                                              OK
                                                                                       AR VT SC      WI
                                                                                           KY   KS MNCA
                                                                                                NE
                                                                                      MI   WV                            MA
                                                                          NM                     NJ
                                                                        ND                      RI IA
                                                                                              ALOH      MD
                                                                        MS               LA               CT
                                                                                AZ
                                                                                           IN IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                    .5




                                                                                              PA                                                                                                                                     DE
                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IA    PA TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OH ALINMT MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FLMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NEWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CT   NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NY NJ WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VTME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MO     AZKSND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GANC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VA    OK CAKY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT      IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SC MS

                                                              NH                                                                                                                                                              MI
                                      0




                                             FL TN
                                             NV
                                             WA
                                             TX
                                             WY
                                             SD                                                                                                                                                            NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                           WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           WY          SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                            0                      .2                       .4                      .6            .8                 1                                                    0                                          .2                              .4                   .6
                                                             Actual Income Tax Revenue Share in 2007                                                                                                                        Actual Corporate Tax Revenue Share in 2007
                                            Note: Slope is .74 (.04). R-squared is .89.                                                                                                                   Note: Slope is 1.68 (.23). R-squared is .53.




Notes: This figure compares 2007 data with model predictions for non-targeted moments. Panel (a) shows state
GDP shares, panel (b) plots state firm shares, and panel (c) displays state tax revenue as a share of state GDP.
Panels (d)-(f) plot general sales, individual income, and corporate income tax revenue as a share of total tax revenue,
respectively.


                                                                                                                                                           32
7        Counterfactuals
     In this section, we quantify the aggregate impact of changes in U.S. state taxes. We parametrize
the fundamentals of each state as described in Section 6, and, unless otherwise indicated, use the
parameter estimates reported in the third row of Tables 1 and 2.

Aggregate Outcomes              For each counterfactual change in taxes that we consider, we compute our
model’s predicted changes in worker welfare expressed as equivalent changes in private consumption.
Specifically, by combining (7) and (8), worker welfare in a counterfactual equilibrium relative to
its actual value may be written as an employment-weighted average of the changes in each state’s
appeal,
                                                                       !    1
                                                       X                   εW

                                               vb =         Ln vbnεW            ,                                    (45)
                                                        n

where Ln is the fraction of U.S. workers living in state n in the initial equilibrium, and vbn is
the value of state n’s appeal in the counterfactual equilibrium relative to its initial value. Any
combination of changes in private consumption and provision of public goods across states leading
to a change in welfare equal to v̂ can be chosen as an equivalent welfare metric. In particular, the
welfare change vb is equivalent to a particular 100(ĉ − 1) percent increase in private consumption
in every state, keeping labor supply and the consumption of public goods constant. In most of our
                                                                                    1
parametrizations, where αW,n does not vary by state, ĉ = vb 1−αW . We report the percent welfare
increase in terms of this private consumption equivalent measure in the tables below.28
     We also report model-predicted changes in aggregate real GDP and in the real private con-
sumption of workers and capital-owners. Equations (A.12) to (A.14) in Appendix B.2 report the
expressions used to construct these variables.

G-Constant Counterfactuals                 For every counterfactual change in taxes we analyze, we report
results both using the full general equilibrium equations of our model and using a “G-constant”
version of our model in which we artificially keep government spending constant in every state
(Gˆn = 1 for all n). These “G-constant” counterfactuals generate changes in welfare that are
exclusively due to the impact that different distributions of state taxes have on allocative efficiency.
To implement these “G-constant” counterfactuals, we keep government spending constant in every
state and drop the budget constraint of each state government as a restriction that must be satisfied
in the counterfactual equilibrium. An interpretation of these counterfactuals is that they implement
both a change in state taxes and a transfer of revenue from the federal government to the states.


    28
     As shown in Appendix E.1, this is also the consumption equivalent welfare change under any monotone transfor-
mation of the workers’ indirect utility. Hence, the computation of the consumption equivalent welfare metric ĉ does
not rely on the assumption that the indirect utility of an individual l located in a state n is linear in vn ln ; it would
also be a valid
              consumption equivalent metric if we had assumed instead that the welfare of individual l located in
n is W vn ln , for any monotone transformation W (·). See Shourideh and Hosseini (2018) for derivations of similar
properties under alternative extreme-value distributions of the idiosyncratic shocks. When αW,n varies by state, the
                                       P                   1
                                           Ln ĉ(1−αW,n )εW W = vb.
                                                             ε
relative change ĉ is chosen such that     n



                                                            33
7.1    General Equilibrium Impact of the North Carolina Income Tax Cuts
    To illustrate some of the key forces at work, we start by studying the impact of a tax reform
affecting one single state in isolation. We focus on North Carolina, which over the past decade has
substantially reduced the level and progressivity of its individual income tax schedule (Washington
Post, 2017). In 2007, North Carolina had a progressive tax schedule with a top rate of 8.25%.
In contrast, the individual income tax rate in 2016 was a flat rate of 5.5%. We use our model to
compute the general equilibrium impact of a change in the state tax parameters (ayN C,state , byN C,state )
that mimics the change in taxes that North Carolina experienced between 2007 and 2016. Figure
A.3 in Appendix E.3 shows the actual and estimated tax schedules before and after the reform.
    Consider first the effects that the North Carolina tax changes would have if government spending
were to be kept constant in every state. From (32), the reduction in the income tax rate in North
Carolina is analogous to an increase in the amenity level in this state. Attracted by this change
in amenities, workers migrate to North Carolina and, as a result, the North Carolina workforce
increases by 0.3%. This increase in labor supply decreases the equilibrium nominal wage before
taxes. The larger workforce and lower nominal wages make North Carolina more attractive for
firms, both through a decrease in production costs and through a bigger market size; as a result,
the number of firms increases by 0.11%. Combined, the inflow of workers and firms increases real
GDP by 0.13%.
    However, once we take into account the impact of the North Carolina tax changes on government
spending, our model predictions are reversed. According to our model, the tax reform leads to a
1.8% percent decrease in government spending in North Carolina. This decrease in government
spending reduces amenities and firm productivity in North Carolina. This negative effect partially
offsets the direct positive effect of the lower tax rates. Overall, North Carolina’s employment is
fairly stable and its total number of firms and state GDP shrink.
    The data shows that the tax revenue coming from corporate, individual, and general sales taxes

                              Table 3: The North Carolina Income Tax Cuts

                                                               Government Spending
                       Change in
                                                              Constant     Variable
                       Employment                               0.31          0.02
                       (Pre-Tax) Nominal Wage                  -0.17         -0.06
                       Firms                                    0.11         -0.06
                       Real GDP                                 0.13         -0.08
                       Real Government Spending                 0.00         -1.77
                       Consumption of K                         0.02         -0.02
                       Consumption of L                         0.55          0.33

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in several outcome variables associated with the 2014-2016 individ-
ual income tax cuts in North Carolina. Counterfactual income tax parameters, ayN C,2016 and byN C,2016 , are estimated
as explained in Appendix F.1. Counterfactual predictions are based on the general equilibrium conditions described
in Section 4.7. Parameters are calibrated as in Section 6.1. Worker and firm parameters are set equal to the estimates
from the third row of Tables 1 and 2, respectively.


                                                         34
did actually decrease in North Carolina between 2007 and 2015 by 11.4 percent, exceeding the
average tax revenue decline (of 4.9 percent) among other states in the same U.S. Census division.
Relative to these states, employment changes were similar, establishment growth was lower, and
GDP growth was higher in North Carolina. Because several other fundamentals may have changed
simultaneously to the implementation of the tax cuts and because our model is aimed to capture
long-run effects of changes in taxes, we do not expect our model predictions to quantitatively
match the observed changes in economic activity experienced by North Carolina in the years that
immediately followed the implementation of the tax changes.

7.2     Tax Harmonization
    Various countries have harmonized regional tax policies over the last few decades, and some
recent proposals in the U.S. have advocated for increased tax coordination across states.29 We now
ask how dispersion in state taxes impacts aggregate outcomes in the U.S.. Table 4 presents our
model predictions for the impact of replacing the actual distribution of state taxes in 2007 with
counterfactual tax distributions that feature less dispersion across states. The first row considers a
counterfactual scenario in which all sales, corporate, and individual income tax rates are replaced
by their mean values across all U.S. states. In the second row, we perform a more limited har-
monization: we eliminate dispersion in tax rates across states located in the same Census region,
but allow for differences in taxes across these broad geographic regions. The results presented in
the last row correspond to an even more limited tax harmonization: we homogenize tax rates only
within each of the nine Census divisions.
    We find worker welfare gains from tax harmonization, and the welfare gains are larger the larger
the geographical area on which we impose tax harmonization. However, our results also show that,
conditional on holding government spending constant, most of the gains of a hypothetical nation-

                                         Table 4: Tax Harmonization

                                 Welfare            U.S. GDP                CK                    CL
       Case
                             G Con G Var          G Con G Var         G Con G Var          G Con G Var
       Within All U.S.        0.61     1.17        0.03   -0.16        0.26    0.12         -0.05    0.62
       Within Regions         0.57     1.06        0.02   -0.11        0.28    0.17         -0.07    0.49
       Within Divisions       0.37     1.08        0.01   -0.02        0.20    0.19          0.05    0.45

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare in terms of private consumption equivalent units, U.S.
GDP, consumption of capital owners, and consumption of workers associated with tax harmonization to the national,
region, and division means. Counterfactual predictions are based on the general equilibrium conditions described in
Section 4.7. Parameters are calibrated as in Section 6.1. Worker and firm parameters are set equal to the estimates
from the third row of Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

  29
      Canada adopted a Harmonized Sales Tax in 1997. In 2000, Australia replaced state-level sales taxes as well
as other regional duties through state cooperation. Most recently, India harmonized regional taxes by introducing
a Goods and Services Tax nationwide in 2017. In the U.S., Alden and Strauss (2014) and Wilson (2015) suggest
that tax collaboration in the spirit of a WTO-like agreement across states may improve overall welfare. Other U.S.
institutions, such as the Streamlined Sales Tax Governing Board, facilitate tax policy coordination across states.


                                                        35
wide tax harmonization are due to the harmonization of taxes across states that are geographically
close to each other. Simply harmonizing tax rates across states within the same Census division
generates 61 percent of the welfare gains when states’ government spending is held constant, and
almost all the gains when we account for how spending would change in reaction to the change in
tax rates. Furthermore, conditional on harmonizing tax rates within Census divisions or regions,
the gains from further doing so for the entire country are negligible. Therefore, our results suggest
that the main distortive effects of the overall U.S. tax dispersion are due to dispersion in tax rates
across states that are geographically close to each other.30

         Figure 3: U.S. Census Regions and Divisions and the Dispersion of Tax Payments
         (a) U.S. Census Regions and Divisions                                            (b) Changes in Dispersion of Tax Payments




                                                                            .6     .55
                                                                  Welfare Change (%)
                                                                     .45     .5
                                                  Region
                                                                            .4

                                                  Division
                                                                            .35




                                                                                         -.074              -.07              -.066           -.062              -.058
                                                                                                 Change in Dispersion of Tax Payments Per Worker Across States

                                                                                                                 Mean               Benchmark
                                                                                                                 Region             αW=αF=0.04
                                                                                                                 Division           αW=αF=0




Notes: Panel (a) shows U.S. Census regions and divisions. The Census splits the U.S. territory into four regions
(Northeast, Midwest, South, and West), each of which contains two or more divisions. Panel (b) plots the change in
welfare in terms of private consumption equivalent units against the change in dispersion of tax liabilities per worker
associated with tax harmonization to the national, region, and division means under constant government spending.



    We can link these results to the theoretical analysis in Section 5. As shown in Proposition
1, given any distribution of spending in public services across states, a necessary condition for
efficiency in a simpler version of our model is equalization of tax payments per capita across states.
Therefore, if the forces highlighted in the proposition operate in the more general model on which
we base our counterfactual predictions, we should observe a greater reduction in dispersion in tax
payments when we harmonize taxes nationally than when we do so only at the Census region or
Census division level. Figure 3 verifies that this result applies: we see a larger reduction in the
dispersion of per capita tax payments across states in those cases in which our model predicts larger
welfare gains.
    A comparison of the first two columns of Table 4 shows that the welfare effects of tax harmo-
nization are magnified through the general equilibrium response of government spending to the tax
   30
     We find welfare gains from tax harmonization of about 1% in consumption-equivalent terms. To put this
magnitude in perspective, Albouy (2009) reports welfare losses from heterogeneous geographic burden of federal
taxation equivalent to 0.23 percent of income whereas Altig et al. (2001) find welfare gains equivalent to 4.5 percent
of GDP when simulating several margins of fundamental federal tax reform in a dynamic model.


                                                             36
changes. To guide our understanding of where these additional gains come from, we return to a
simpler version of our model analogous to that analyzed in Proposition 1.31 As shown in Appendix
E.2, to a first-order approximation around an initial equilibrium, in the simpler model, the change
in the welfare of workers associated with a change in income or sales taxes is:
                                                                                                                                                                  
                            X                                                    X                          αW − Gn /GDPn                                      Gn
                 d ln v =                Ln d ln GDPn +                                        Ln                                                  d ln                  .             (46)
                            n                                                         n
                                                                                                             1 − Gn /GDPn                                     GDPn

The first term reflects that, keeping government spending constant, the effects of tax changes on
welfare are captured, to a first-order approximation, by a population-weighted sum of the changes
in value added in each state.32 The second term reflects the impact of changes in government
spending, and it predicts that an increase in government spending as a share of GDP in a state n
has a positive effect on worker welfare as long as the share of government spending in that state’s
GDP in the initial equilibrium is less than the weight of government spending in preferences, αW .
    The second term in (46) shows why workers’ welfare gains from tax harmonization are magnified
through the response of government spending. According to our benchmark estimation, the ratio
of public spending to GDP is below αW in every state. When taxes are harmonized, taxes and
government spending increase in states with an initially low public spending share of GDP. In these
states, the numerator of the gradient of welfare improvement from higher spending, αW −Gn /GDPn ,
is relatively large. At the same time, taxes and spending shrink in states with a relatively high

                      Figure 4: Changes in Spending and Gradient of Welfare Gain

                                                                                                            WY                                SD
                                       1




                                                                                                                                          NH




                                                                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                                                   WA        NV
                             Log Growth in G/GDP
                                             .5




                                                                                                                        FL
                                                                                 MT                                DE                    CO
                                                                                                MI                AL          TN
                                                                                                                                ILOR
                                                                                                                  LA
                                                                                                                  UT
                                                                                          ND                                        GA
                                                                                                                                    MO
                                 0




                                                                                                          OK AZ
                                                                    MS NM                                    MD
                                                                                                                             VA
                                                    HI                                                NY SC IN
                                                                                                      CT
                                                                                                      KS
                                                                                                     NC PA
                                                               AR                  KY           WI        MA OH NE
                                                   WV                             ID
                                                               ME                                                             IA
                                                                                           NJ        RI
                                                                       MN                       CA
                                       -.5




                                                         .09                .1                      .11                            .12         .13
                                                                                                 αW-Tax Share

                                                                            Unweighted                                  Population Weighted



Notes: This figure plots the growth in government spending as a share of state GDP against the difference between
                                                                                                                                                                              Gn
the weight of public services in worker utility and government spending as a share of GDP (i.e., αW −                                                                        GDPn
                                                                                                                                                                                  )   for the
full tax harmonization counterfactual under variable government spending.


   31
      Specifically, we consider an special case with no trade costs (τin = 1 for all i, n), perfect substitutability across
varieties (σ → ∞), homogeneous firms (εF → ∞), constant labor supply (hn constant), and identical preferences for
government spending across states (αW,n = αW ).
   32
      However, as discussed in Section 5, for large changes in tax rates such as those that we implement, and keeping
government spending constant, changes in value added are not sufficient to assess the overall changes in welfare.


                                                                                                     37
initial spending share of GDP, where this gradient is smaller. Moreover, in the initial allocation,
population shares are larger in states with lower spending and taxes and, consequently, most of the
U.S. population is concentrated in states that benefit the most from the changes in public spending
implied by tax harmonization. These forces can be seen in Figure 4. Government spending increases
where the gains of raising spending are larger, and the best linear fit of the relationship between
the changes in government spending predicted in the counterfactual and the welfare gradient with
respect to these changes is steeper when states are weighted by their initial population shares.
    The remaining columns of Table 4 indicate the impact of tax harmonization on aggregate U.S.
GDP and real consumption of workers and capital owners. Columns 3 and 4 illustrate that welfare
and GDP may move in opposite directions, as implied by our discussion in Section 5. When holding
government spending in every state constant, predicted changes in GDP are negligible, and they
generally become negative when we allow government spending to vary. In the counterfactuals
that hold government spending constant, we also predict negligible changes in the real private
consumption of workers, implying that the predicted welfare gains are due to a reallocation of
workers to states with higher compensating differentials. However, the private consumption gains
of workers are considerable when government spending changes.
    Figure 5 shows that states experiencing higher GDP growth are concentrated in the West and
South, while the Northeast is the main loser from tax harmonization. However, there is considerable
variation in the effects on state GDP, even within Census regions. Some of the biggest winners,
such as Texas, Florida, Nevada and New Hampshire, are states from Figure 4 that experience large
increases in government spending as a share of GDP, which is partly driving these gains.

                 Figure 5: Tax Harmonization and State-level Changes in Real GDP




                                                                              Region
                                                                              Division
                                                                          Change in State GDP (%)
                                                                              <-3.0
                                                                               -3.0 - 0.0
                                                                               0.0 - 3.0
                                                                               3.0 - 5.0
                                                                              >5.0




Notes: This map shows the change in real state GDP associated with tax harmonization to the U.S. mean under
variable government spending.


Alternative Distributions of Fundamentals                As the discussion in Section 5 suggests, the
effect of eliminating dispersion in state taxes while keeping government spending constant depends
on the correlation between the initial state tax rates and the state fundamentals (i.e., amenities
and productivities). This mechanism is also present in the more general model that we use in our


                                                    38
counterfactual analysis. The dependence of the results on the correlation between initial taxes and
fundamentals is important, as it implies that the effects of eliminating tax dispersion across regions
of a country may be both qualitatively and quantitatively different in other countries.
    Table 5 shows the results from eliminating tax dispersion in scenarios where wages, income,
and trade flows across states are the same as those observed in the initial equilibrium, but state
employment shares are reassigned across states so as to maximize or minimize their correlation with
the initial state taxes.33 As we increase the cross-state correlation between initial worker tax rates
and employment shares, the welfare effect of eliminating tax dispersion while keeping the provision
of public goods in every state constant increases. This relationship is consistent with Proposition
2 in Section 5. Table 5 also shows that this finding is robust to whether we harmonize taxes only
within Census divisions, only within Census regions, or across all states in the country.

   Table 5: Spending Constant Counterfactual under Alternative Distribution of Fundamentals

                            RankCorr(Tn , Ln ) = 1            Actual Data            RankCorr(Tn , Ln ) = −1
   Case
                            Welfare       GDP               Welfare   GDP             Welfare       GDP
   Within All U.S.            1.07         -0.09             0.61     0.03             -1.37         0.20
   Within Regions             0.94         -0.07             0.57     0.02             -1.30         0.18
   Within Divisions           0.93         -0.04             0.37     0.01             -1.18         0.16

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare in terms of private consumption equivalent units and U.S.
GDP associated with tax harmonization to the national, region, and division means under alternative distribution of
fundamentals. Counterfactual predictions are based on the general equilibrium conditions described in Section 4.7.
Parameters are calibrated as in Section 6.1. Worker and firm parameters are set equal to the estimates from the third
row of Tables 1 and 2, respectively.



7.3     Eliminating the State and Local Tax Deduction
    When filing a federal income tax return, taxpayers can lower their taxable income by deducting
their state and local tax payments. The State and Local Tax deduction (SALT) is one of the
largest tax expenditures in the U.S. tax code. Many tax reform plans, such as the 2005 President’s
Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, have proposed eliminating it, and the 2017 tax reform (also
known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act) substantially limited it.
    The SALT deductions has the largest impact on taxpayers living in places with high state taxes.
As a result, eliminating SALT deductions increases cross-state dispersion in taxes. To study the
effects of SALT deductions within our model, we re-estimate the income tax schedule parameters
{ayn , byn }N
            n=1 under the assumption that state tax liabilities are not deductible for federal income tax
purposes. The resulting effective tax rates by state and income group are listed in Appendix Table
A.18, and their distribution is illustrated in Appendix Figure A.4. The elimination of the SALT

   33
     As discussed in Section 6.1, state fundamentals impact the system of equations that we use to compute the effect
of counterfactual changes in taxes through a composite that we measure using information on the observed number
of workers, wages, income, and trade flows across states in an initial equilibrium. Thus, changing the initial value of
the state fundamentals in our system of equations is equivalent to changing the initial value of the variables used to
recover those state fundaments.


                                                          39
deduction has two effects. First, the average effective income tax rates faced by workers increases
in all states except in those with zero income tax rates. Second, the tax schedule is more dispersed
across locations – the standard deviation in average effective tax rates nearly doubles from 1.1 to
2.1 percentage points. To isolate the effect of the second channel, we recalibrate the income tax
schedule parameters {ayn , byn }N
                                n=1 so that their mean value across states is kept constant at their
initial level: only the dispersion in ayn and byn changes in the counterfactual scenario.
    Table 6 reports the results. Eliminating the SALT deduction while keeping state government
spending constant reduces welfare, consumption, and real GDP. As discussed in Section 5, this
result is a consequence of the increase in the dispersion of tax payments per worker resulting
from the elimination of SALT. The effects of eliminating SALT are heterogeneous across states.
Panel (a) of Figure 6 shows the spatial distribution of predicted changes in real GDP and Panel
(b) shows the change in each state’s real GDP against the initial income tax rate. States that
experience the largest declines in real GDP tend to have high state taxes and high shares of high-
income taxpayers, with states in the Northeast like New York and Massachusetts being among
the hardest hit, and Southeastern states such as Mississippi, Florida, and Tennessee enjoying the
largest gains. The distribution of predicted impacts also reflects the importance of spatial linkages.
For example, Mississippi enjoys the largest gains in real GDP despite having positive state income
taxes, reflecting the concentration of gains in nearby states. Similarly, the figure shows that among
states with no state income tax, Florida and Tennessee enjoy larger gains than states like Nevada
and New Hampshire, which are near states with high income tax rates.

                         Table 6: Eliminating the State and Local Tax Deduction

                                   Welfare              U.S. GDP                   CK                   CL
   Case
                                G Con G Var           G Con G Var           G Con G Var           G Con G Var
   Benchmark                    -0.75   -0.89         -0.33   -0.37          -0.32    -0.36       -1.56    -1.60
           Rn
   αW,n = GDP n
                , αF = 0        -0.84   -0.86         -0.33   -0.34          -0.33    -0.33       -1.56    -1.56
   αW = αF = .04                -0.78   -0.84         -0.33   -0.38          -0.32    -0.37       -1.56    -1.61
   Mean-constant ayn , byn      -0.84   -0.88         -0.05   -0.07          -0.04    -0.06       -0.76    -0.78

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare in terms of private consumption equivalent units, U.S.
GDP, consumption of capital owners, and consumption of workers associated with the elimination of the State and
Local Tax (SALT) deduction. Counterfactual income tax parameters for rows 1-3, ayn and byn , are reported in Table
A.18. In row 4, ayn and byn are recalibrated so that their mean across states is unchanged. Counterfactual predictions
are based on the general equilibrium conditions described in Section 4.7. Parameters are calibrated as in Section 6.1.
In rows 1 and 4, worker and firm parameters are set equal to the estimates from the third row of Tables 1 and 2,
respectively. In row 2, they are set equal to the estimates from the fourth row of Table 1 and the fifth row of Table 2,
respectively. In row 3, they are set equal to the estimates from the fifth row of Table 1 and the fourth row of Table
2, respectively.




                                                          40
                  Figure 6: Eliminating the State and Local Tax (SALT) Deduction
            (a) Change in Real State GDP (%)                              (b) Changes in Real State GDP and State Income Tax Rates

                                                                                                                                                                                    Slope = -.29 (.08)




                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                   MS




                                                                            Change in Real State GDP (%)
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                   AR

                                                                                                            FL                                    MT
                                                                                                                 TN                      SC                    AL
                                                                                                                                                                UT
                                                                                                                                                                     WV
                                                                                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                            TX                            DE
                                                                                                                                           LA   ID
                                                                                                                                             MO




                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                      ND AZ
                                                                                                                      NM                          GA
                                                                                                                                                  MI
                                                                                                                                                                          KY
                                                                                                            NV                     CA
                                                                                                                                          IL
                                                    Region                                                                                 OH                        IN                            OR
                                                                                                            WA                                       PA         IA
                                                    Division                                                SD                                     OK                          WI
                                                Change in State GDP (%)                                                                                   KS     HI VA
                                                    <-1.0                                                                                               CO       ME




                                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                             NH                               RI
                                                     -1.0 - 0.0                                                                     NJ        NE
                                                                                                            WY                                         CT MD
                                                    0.0 - 0.3                                                                                                             MN
                                                     0.3 - 1.0                                                                VT                                     NY                   MA
                                                    >1.0




                                                                                                       -2
                                                                                                            0         1                       2                                 3                  4
                                                                                                                          State Income Tax Rate (%)


Notes: Panel (a) displays the changes in real state GDP associated with the elimination of the State and Local
Tax (SALT) deduction under variable government spending. Panel (b) plots changes in real state GDP against state
income tax rates. Counterfactual income tax parameters, ayn and byn , are reported in Table A.18. Counterfactual
predictions are based on the general equilibrium conditions described in Section 4.7. Parameters are calibrated as
in Section 6.1. Worker and firm parameters are set equal to the estimates from the third row of Tables 1 and 2,
respectively.


7.4     Rolling Back Taxes
    U.S. state taxes have changed substantially over the last thirty years. Tables A.2 and A.19 in
Appendix A report the sales, income, and corporate tax rates for each state in 2007 and in 1980.
As the first two columns in Table 7 illustrate, states moved away from individual income taxes
towards sales and sales-apportioned corporate taxes, with a slight decrease in dispersion.34 We
compute the impact of replacing the 2007 state tax distribution with the distribution of tax rates
in 1980. The results thus indicate how different the equilibrium in 2007 would have been if, over
the 1980-2007 period, every fundamental of the economy had changed as it did, but state taxes had
remained at the initial levels.
    Table 7 shows the model predictions for different outcomes. In each of the first three rows, we
illustrate the impact of bringing only one type of tax to its 1980 level; and the last row reports
results for the case in which all taxes are simultaneously rolled back to 1980. Given that U.S. state
taxes have increased on average between 1980 and 2007, our model predicts that, if the public
provision of public goods had remained constant, the observed tax increases would have reduced
worker welfare. However, following the same logic discussed in the previous section, the 1980-2007
tax increases were associated with an increase in public spending that, overall, caused aggregate
welfare to increase by 3.15 percent. Given that both its rate and base increase over time, the changes
in sales taxes account for the the bulk of the welfare gain. The final columns of the table show that
the bulk of the consumption gains under variable government spending accrued to workers instead

   34
      For sales and corporate taxes, these columns report the raw data. For income taxes, we show the changes in the
average income tax rate; i.e. tyn (w̄n ), where w̄n denotes the average wage of state n.


                                                                     41
of capital owners.

                                        Table 7: Rolling Back Taxes

                 80-07   Chg.         Welfare             U.S. GDP                CK                   CL
                Mean       CV     G Con G Var          G Con G Var          G Con G Var          G Con G Var
 Sales           1.36     -0.05    1.47    -2.05        -0.01   -0.69        1.41    0.69        -1.35    -1.77
 Income         -0.48     -0.10   -0.54    -0.29         0.01   0.04         0.03    0.06        -0.35    -0.27
 Corporate       1.58     -0.04    0.06    -0.66         0.03   -0.12        0.36    0.21         0.00    -0.36
 All                               0.97    -3.15         0.03   -0.80        1.81    0.92        -1.69    -2.41

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare in terms of private consumption equivalent units,
U.S. GDP, consumption of capital owners, and consumption of workers associated with rolling back taxes to 1980.
Columns 1 and 2 report the level change in the mean and in the coefficient of variation of general sales, effective
individual income tax rates, and corporate income tax rates between 1980 and 2007, respectively. Counterfactual tax
rates are reported in Table A.19. Counterfactual income tax parameters are reported in Table A.20. Counterfactual
predictions are based on the general equilibrium conditions described in Section 4.7. Parameters are calibrated as
in Section 6.1. Worker and firm parameters are set equal to the estimates from the third row of Tables 1 and 2,
respectively.


7.5     Alternative Parametrizations
    We now inspect how the results of our counterfactuals depend on the parameter estimates
described in Section 6.2. Each row of Table 8 considers a different parametrization. The first
row considers the benchmark case; the second and third rows consider the cases where we use
estimates that only rely on the external-tax instruments Z Tnt and Z B
                                                                     nt , respectively; the fourth row
considers the case in which we assume that states’ ratio of public spending to GDP reflects workers’
preferences for public goods and that these do not affect firms’ productivity (i.e., αW,n = Rn /GDPn
and αF = 0); the fifth row considers the case where we assume that the weight of public goods in
workers’ preferences and firms’ productivity is equal to the U.S. ratio of public spending in GDP,
i.e., αW,n = αF = 0.04; and the last row considers the case where we assume that public spending
has no impact on amenities and productivity, i.e., αW,n = αF = 0. The columns show the change
in worker welfare in the different counterfactuals that we have previously discussed.
    The alternative parametrizations differ based on the parameters that govern the value of public
goods. The second row uses a slightly higher value of public goods, and the remaining rows take
lower values. The results are very similar to the benchmark when public spending is held constant.
However, in rows three through six, the lower valuation for public goods reduces the magnification
effect that arises through the endogenous adjustment in public spending. When studying the impact
of rolling back taxes to their 1980 levels, assuming a parametrization that eliminates workers’ and
firms’ valuation for public goods naturally implies that the tax increases observed between 1980 and
2007 must have been detrimental for welfare. Finally, the effects of eliminating SALT deductions
are similar across the different parametrizations.




                                                        42
                     Table 8: Welfare Change Under Alternative Parametrizations

                                        Harmonization           Eliminate SALT              Roll Back
         Case
                                       G Con    G Var           G Con     G Var          G Con    G Var
         Benchmark                      0.61     1.17            -0.75    -0.89           0.97     -3.15
         Z Tnt Estimates                0.61     1.82            -0.72    -0.97           0.96     -6.08
         ZB nt Estimates                0.61     0.84            -0.87    -0.94           0.98     -1.03
                   Rn
         αW,n = GDP   n
                        , αF = 0        0.59     0.39            -0.81    -0.83           0.94      0.44
         αW = αF = .04                  0.60     0.78            -0.78    -0.84           0.97     -1.04
         αW = αF = 0                    0.61     0.61            -0.75    -0.75           0.97      0.97

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare in terms of private consumption equivalent units
associated with tax harmonization to the national mean, the elimination of the State and Local Tax (SALT) deduction,
and rolling back taxes to 1980 under alternative parametrizations. Counterfactual predictions are based on the general
equilibrium conditions described in Section 4.7. Parameters are calibrated as in Section 6.1 (χW = χF = 0). Row
1 reports benchmark counterfactual changes from Tables 4, 6, and 7. In row 2, worker and firm parameters are set
equal to the estimates from the first row of Tables 1 and 2, respectively. In row 3, worker and firm parameters are set
equal to the estimates from the second row of Tables 1 and 2, respectively. We set αF = 0 in this parameterization.
In row 4, they are set equal to the estimates from the fourth row of Table 1 and the fifth row of Table 2, respectively.
In row 5, they are set equal to the estimates from the fifth row of Table 1 and the fourth row of Table 2, respectively.
In row 6, they are set equal to the estimates from the sixth row of Table 1 and the fifth row of Table 2, respectively.


7.6    Robustness
    We now explore the robustness of our results to alternative modeling assumptions and decisions
we made when constructing the data. We also explore further the impact that labor and firm
mobility elasticities have on our results. We compare our the results to our benchmark numbers,
which are reported in the first row of Table 9.
    The second row in Table 9 shows the results when, as discussed in Section 4.4, we assume free
entry of homogeneous firms instead of mobility of a fixed mass of ex-ante heterogeneous firms. In
this case, we find larger gains from tax harmonization when government spending is kept constant,
as well as larger losses from eliminating the SALT deduction. Formally, the key impact of allowing
for free entry is to modify the composite elasticities entering the system of equilibrium conditions.35
We can inspect how these elasticities magnify the welfare changes by considering similar arguments
to those used in Section 7.2. Figure A.5 in Appendix E.6 reproduces Figure 3b for the benchmark
and for the free entry case. Under free entry, the reduction in the dispersion of tax payments
from each harmonization counterfactual is larger than in the benchmark, and so are the aggregate
welfare gains.
    The third row in Table 9 shows results under an alternative definition of corporate taxes.
Contrary to the baseline assumption in our model, some firms (S-corporations, partnerships, and
   35
      See the composite elasticities (A.30)-(A.32) entering in the system of equilibrium conditions (A.24)-(A.28) in
Appendix B.3. The coefficient χF E entering in that system is equal to one in the free entry case and zero in the
benchmark model. At the U.S. level, the case with free entry leads to a negligible change in the number of firms.
This property follows from the fact that, under free entry and constant markups, the number of firms in each state is
proportional to the number of workers in each state. Hence, aggregate firm entry is limited by the aggregate supply
of workers in the U.S..


                                                          43
sole proprietorships) do not pay corporate taxes; only personal income taxes are paid by their owners
when profits are distributed. To account for this fact, we scale down the statutory corporate tax
rate used in our benchmark analysis by the share of establishments registered as C-corporations
in each state in 2010 relative to the total number of establishments in that state. As a result,
we obtain less dispersion in the initial tax distribution, implying somewhat smaller gains from tax
harmonization.
    Our benchmark analysis ignores the existence of local taxes. To account for them, in the fourth
row we compute adjusted tax rates that account for average local tax rates within each state, as
reported in Appendix Figure A.1.36 Allowing for state and local taxes increases the initial dispersion
and, therefore, the magnitude of the tax harmonization, also increasing the welfare gains.
    The following four rows implement our counterfactuals under either higher or lower values of
the labor and firm mobility elasticities εW or εF . We choose a high value of εW and εF equal
to 5, which is above the upper bound of existing parameter estimates reviewed in Appendix D.9.
For their low values, we choose numbers for εW and εF equal to 0.01 plus their lower theoretical
bounds of 1 and σ − 1, respectively. We find that increasing or reducing εF and εW relative to

                                    Table 9: Welfare Change Robustness

                                             Harmonization           Eliminate SALT              Roll Back
   Case
                                            G Con    G Var           G Con     G Var          G Con    G Var
   Benchmark                                 0.61     1.17            -0.75    -0.89           0.97     -3.15
   Free Entry                                0.85     1.19            -1.02    -1.29           1.62     -2.45
   Alternate Def. of Corp. Taxes             0.58     0.71            -0.75    -0.90           0.71      1.29
   State and Local Taxes                     0.95     0.71            -0.59    -0.71           2.50     -4.73
   High εW                                   0.58     1.16            -1.04    -1.19           0.99     -3.08
   Low εW                                    0.63     1.18            -0.62    -0.75           0.95     -3.17
   High εF                                   0.64     1.17            -0.75    -0.89           0.99     -3.16
   Low εF                                    0.62     1.17            -0.75    -0.89           0.98     -3.15
   No Worker Heterogeneity                   0.67     1.06            -0.42    -0.54           0.94     -3.18
   No Int. Margin Labor Supply               0.52     1.08            -1.29    -1.36           1.00     -3.13

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in welfare in terms of private consumption equivalent units associ-
ated with tax harmonization to the national mean, the elimination of the State and Local Tax (SALT) deduction, and
rolling back taxes to 1980 under alternative modeling and data construction assumptions. Counterfactual predictions
are based on the general equilibrium conditions described in Section 4.7. Row 1 reports benchmark counterfactual
changes from tables 4, 6, and 7. Row 2 allows for free entry of firms, i.e., χF E = 1. In row 3, state corporate tax
rates are adjusted for the state share of C-corporations. In row 4, state tax rates are adjusted to account for local
taxation. In rows 5-6, εW is 5 and 1.01, respectively. In rows 7-8, εF is 5 and 3.01, respectively. In row 9, worker
parameters are set equal to the estimates from the third row of Table A.8. In row 10, worker parameters are set
equal to the estimates from the third row of Table A.9.


   36
     We scale our baseline income, sales, and corporate tax rates by the ratio of state plus local to state tax revenue.
While property taxes are a minimal source of tax revenue for states, they are key for local entities; therefore, we also
include consolidated local and property taxes in this version of the model, and model them as a tax on the return of
the fixed factor in each state. In this counterfactual, we interpret the budget constraint of each state government as
the consolidated budget constraint of that state government and all local governments located in the same state.


                                                          44
the benchmark (while keeping all other parameters constant) does not have a strong impact on the
welfare predictions. Finally, the last two rows shut down the channels of skill dispersion within each
state (ζn → ∞) and intensive margin of labor supply (fixing the number of hours hn to be constant
at the initial value). The welfare effects are quite similar to those predicted by the baseline model
in both cases.


8    Conclusion
    In this paper, we quantify the effects of dispersion in U.S. state tax rates on aggregate real income
and worker welfare in the U.S. economy. We develop a spatial general equilibrium framework that
incorporates salient features of the U.S. state tax system. Implementing counterfactuals in our
framework requires simultaneously using a mapping from changes in fundamentals to changes in
outcomes that is standard in existing trade and economic geography models, as well as a mapping
from changes in taxes to equivalent changes in fundamentals that is specific to our environment.
    We estimate the key model parameters that determine how workers and firms reallocate in
response to changes in state taxes using the over 350 changes in state tax rates implemented
between 1980 and 2010. Using the estimated model, we compute the effects on worker welfare
and aggregate real income of replacing the current U.S. state tax distribution with counterfactual
distributions with different levels of regional tax dispersion.
    We find that tax dispersion leads to aggregate losses. Keeping the government spending of every
state constant, eliminating tax dispersion would increase worker welfare, measured in private con-
sumption equivalent terms, by 0.6 percent. Through the endogenous responses of state spending to
the tax changes, these gains increase to 1.2 percent. Our results suggest that regional coordination
of tax policies could achieve most of the gains from harmonization across all U.S. states. We also
evaluate past and proposed policies. We find that the changes in the U.S. state tax distribution that
have taken place over the last thirty years have increased worker welfare. Additionally, we conclude
that the elimination of State and Local Tax deduction would generate welfare losses through an
increase in the dispersion of state tax rates.
    The framework and estimation approach we introduce could be combined with data from Eu-
ropean countries to inform ongoing debates concerning cross-country tax harmonization within
the European Union, or with data from other countries featuring large tax dispersion across sub-
national entities (e.g., Switzerland) to study the impact of tax dispersion in those contexts. It could
also be used to study other related questions, such as how the state tax structure affects states’
responses to state- or aggregate-level shocks (e.g., productivity shocks), what the advantages and
disadvantages of corporate-, sales-, or income-based tax systems are, or to characterize the optimal
distribution of state taxes.

References
Adão, R., M. Kolesár, and E. Morales (2018). Shift-share designs: Theory and inference. Technical report.
Albouy, D. (2009). The Unequal Geographic Burden of Federal Taxation. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 117 (4), 635–667.

                                                    45
Alden, E. and R. Strauss (2014). Curtailing the Subsidy War Within the United States. Technical report,
  Council on Foreign Relations.
Allen, T. and C. Arkolakis (2014). Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 129 (3), 1085–1139.
Allen, T., C. Arkolakis, and Y. Takahashi (2014). Universal Gravity. Technical Report 20787, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Altig, D., A. J. Auerbach, L. J. Kotlikoff, K. A. Smetters, and J. Walliser (2001). Simulating Fundamental
  Tax Reform in the United States. American Economic Review , 574–595.
Anderson, J. E. and E. van Wincoop (2003). Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle.
  American Economic Review 93 (1), 170–192.
Artuç, E., S. Chaudhuri, and J. McLaren (2010). Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural
  Empirical Approach. American Economic Review 100 (3), 1008–1045.
Baldwin, R., R. Forslid, and P. Martin (2005). Economic Geography and Public Policy. Princeton University
  Press.
Ballard, C. L., D. Fullerton, J. B. Shoven, and J. Whalley (1985). A General Equilibrium Model for Tax
  Policy Evaluation. University of Chicago Press.
Bartik, T. J. (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? W.E. Upjohn
  Institute for Employment Research.
Behrens, K., G. Mion, Y. Murata, and J. Südekum (2017). Spatial Frictions. Journal of Urban Economics 97,
  40–70.
Black, S. E. (1999). Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 114 (2), 577–599.
Borusyak, K., P. Hull, and X. Jaravel (2018). Quasi-experimental shift-share research designs. Technical
  report.
Bound, J. and H. J. Holzer (2000). Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor Market Outcomes
  During the 1980s. Journal of Labor Economics 18 (1), 20–54.
Bradbury, K. L., C. J. Mayer, and K. E. Case (2001). Property Tax Limits, Local Fiscal Behavior, and Prop-
  erty Values: Evidence from Massachusetts under Proposition 2 1/2. Journal of Public Economics 80 (2),
  287–311.
Brandt, L., T. Tombe, and X. Zhu (2013). Factor Market Distortions Across Time, Space and Sectors in
  China. Review of Economic Dynamics 16 (1), 39–58.
Bryan, G. and M. Morten (2018). The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Internal Migration: Evidence from
  Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy. Forthcoming.
Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2015). Trade and Labor Market Dynamics: General Equilibrium
  Analysis of the China Trade Shock. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper 21149.
Caliendo, L., F. Parro, E. Rossi-Hansberg, and P.-D. Sarte (2018). The Impact of Regional and Sectoral
  Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy. Review of Economic Studies. Forthcoming.
Cellini, S. R., F. Ferreira, and J. Rothstein (2010). The Value of School Facility Investments: Evidence from
  a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1), 215–261.
Chay, K. and M. Greenstone (2005). Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market. Journal
  of Political Economy 113 (2), 376–424.
Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011). Are Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities
  Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive Margins. American Economic Review
  Papers and Proceedings 101 (3), 471–475.



                                                     46
Chirinko, R. S. and D. J. Wilson (2008). State Investment Tax Incentives: A Zero-Sum Game? Journal of
  Public Economics 92 (12), 2362–2384.

Cooper, M., J. McClelland, J. Pearce, R. Prisinzano, J. Sullivan, D. Yagan, O. Zidar, and E. Zwick (2016).
  Business in the united states: Who owns it, and how much tax do they pay? Tax Policy and the
  Economy 30 (1), 91–128.

Couture, V., G. Duranton, and M. A. Turner (2018). Speed. Review of Economics and Statistics. Forth-
  coming.
Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2008). Global Rebalancing with Gravity: Measuring the Burden of
  Adjustment. Technical Report 3, International Monetary Fund.
Desmet, K. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2013). Urban Accounting and Welfare. American Economic Re-
  view 103 (6), 2296–2327.
Devereux, M. P. and R. Griffith (1998). Taxes and the Location of Production: Evidence from a Panel of
  U.S. Multinationals. Journal of Public Economics 68 (3), 335–367.

Diamond, R. (2016). The Determinants and Welfare Implications of U.S. Workers’ Diverging Location
  Choices by Skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review 106 (3), 479–524.
Dixit, A. K. and J. E. Stiglitz (1977). Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity. American
  Economic Review 67 (3), 297–308.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, Geography, and Trade. Econometrica 70 (5), 1741–1779.
Fernald, J. G. (1999). Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity.
  American Economic Review 89 (3), 619–638.
Flatters, F., V. Henderson, and P. Mieszkowski (1974). Public Goods, Efficiency, and Regional Fiscal
  Equalization. Journal of Public Economics 3 (2), 99–112.
Giroud, X. and J. Rauh (2015). State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from
  Establishment-Level Data. Technical report, NBER Working Paper No. 21534.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (2018). Bartik instruments: What, when, why, and how.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24408.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2013). The Agricultural Productivity Gap. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 129 (2), 939–993.
Goolsbee, A. and E. L. Maydew (2000). Coveting Thy Neighbor’s Manufacturing: The Dilemma of State
  Income Apportionment. Journal of Public Economics 75 (1), 125–143.
Hansen, L. P. (1982). Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators. Economet-
  rica 50 (4), 1029–1054.
Haughwout, A. F. (2002). Public Infrastructure Investments, Productivity and Welfare in Fixed Geographic
  Areas. Journal of Public Economics 83 (3), 405–428.
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2014). Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook. Handbook of
  International Economics, Vol. 4 .
Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2017). Optimal Tax Progressivity: An Analytical Frame-
  work. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1693–1754.
Helpman, E. (1998). The Size of Regions: Transport and Housing as Factors in Agglomeration. In D. Pines,
  E. Sadka, and I. Zilcha (Eds.), Topics in Public Economics, pp. 33–54. Cambridge University Press
  Cambridge.
Helpman, E. and D. Pines (1980). Optimal Public Investment and Dispersion Policy in a System of Open
  Cities. American Economic Review 70 (3), 507–514.



                                                   47
Hines, J. R. (1996). Altered States: Taxes and the Location of Foreign Direct Investment in America.
  American Economic Review 86 (5), 1076–94.

Holmes, T. J. (1998). The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from State
  Borders. Journal of Political Economy 106 (4), 667–705.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1403–1448.
Hsieh, C.-T. and E. Moretti (2018). Why Do Cities Matter? Local Growth and Aggregate Growth. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. Forthcoming.
Keen, M. and K. A. Konrad (2013). The Theory of International Tax Competition and Coordination. In
  Handbook of Public Economics Volume 5, pp. 257–328. Elsevier.
Kline, P. and E. Moretti (2014). Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies and the Big Push:
  100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1),
  275–331.
Krugman, P. (1980). Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade. American Eco-
  nomic Review 70 (5), 950–959.
Krugman, P. (1991). Increasing Returns and Economic Geography. Journal of Political Economy 99 (3),
  483–499.
Lagakos, D. and M. E. Waugh (2013). Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity Differences.
  American Economic Review 103 (2), 948–80.
Martin, P. and C. A. Rogers (1995). Industrial Location and Public Infrastructure. Journal of International
 Economics 39 (3), 335–351.
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Produc-
 tivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Mendoza, E. G. and L. L. Tesar (1998). The International Ramifications of Tax Reforms: Supply-Side
 Economics in a Global Economy. American Economic Review 88 (1), 226–245.
Moretti, E. and D. Wilson (2017). The Effect of State Taxes on the Geographical Location of Top Earners:
 Evidence from Star Scientists. American Economic Review 107 (7), 1858–1903.
Nechyba, T. (1996). Fiscal Federalism and Local Public Finance: A Computable General Equilibrium (CGE)
  Framework. International Tax and Public Finance 3, 215–231.
Notowidigdo, M. J. (2013). The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks. Technical report, Northwestern
  University.
Oates, W. E. (1999). An Essay on Fiscal Federalism. Journal of Economic Literature 37 (3), 1120–1149.
Ossa, R. (2018). A Quantitative Analysis of Subsidy Competition in the U.S. Technical Report 20975,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
PERAB (2010). The Report on Tax Reform Options: Simplification, Compliance, and Corporate Taxation.
  Technical report, The President’s Economic Recovery Advisory Board.
Poterba, J. M. (1994). State Responses to Fiscal Crisis: The Effects of Budgetary Institutions and Politics.
  Journal of Political Economy 102, 799–821.
Ramondo, N., A. Rodrı́guez-Clare, and M. Saborı́o-Rodrı́guez (2016). Trade, Domestic Frictions, and Scale
  Effects. American Economic Review 106 (10), 3159–3184.
Redding, S. (2015). Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare. Journal of International Economics 101,
  148–167.
Redding, S. J. and E. A. Rossi-Hansberg (2017). Quantitative Spatial Economics. Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics 9 (1), 21–58.



                                                    48
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2008). Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Heterogeneous
  Establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (4), 707–720.

Saiz, A. (2010). The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3),
  1253–1296.
Shourideh, A. and R. Hosseini (2018). Inequality, Redistribution, and Optimal Trade Policy: A Public
  Finance Approach. Technical report, Carnegie Mellon University.
Shoven, J. B. and J. Whalley (1972). A General Equilibrium Calculation of the Effects of Differential
  Taxation of Income from Capital in the U.S. Journal of Public Economics 1 (3–4), 281 – 321.
Suárez Serrato, J. C. and P. Wingender (2016). Estimating the Incidence of Government Spending. Technical
  report, Duke University and the International Monetary Fund.
Suárez Serrato, J. C. and O. Zidar (2016, September). Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local
  Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms. American Economic Review 106 (9), 2582–2624.
Tabuchi, T. and J.-F. Thisse (2002). Taste Heterogeneity, Labor Mobility and Economic Geography. Journal
  of Development Economics 69 (1), 155–177.
Tiebout, C. M. (1956). A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy 64 (5), 416–424.
Washington Post (2017, December 3). What Happened when North Carolina Cut Taxes like the GOP Plans
 to for the Country.
Wildasin, D. E. (1980). Locational Efficiency in a Federal System. Regional Science and Urban Eco-
 nomics 10 (4), 453–471.
Wilson, D. (2015). Competing for Jobs: Local Taxes and Incentives. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
 Economic Letter .
Wilson, D. J. (2009). Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate Effects of R&D
 Tax Credits. The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (2), 431–436.




                                                   49
          Online Appendix to “State Taxes and Spatial
                                                  Misallocation”

A      Appendix to Section 3

                               .4
                               .3   Figure A.1: Dispersion in State and Local Tax Rates in 2007
                     Density
                               .2
                               .1
                               0




                                    0                            5                           10
                                                    State + Local Tax Rates in 2007
                                              Sales                  Individual Income
                                              Corporate              Sales Apportioned Corporate




                                              Table A.1: Federal Tax Rates in 2007

                                          Type                       Federal Tax Rate
                                          Income Tax tyf ed                11.7
                                          Corporate Tax tcorp
                                                            f ed            18
                                          Payroll Tax tw
                                                       f ed                 7.3

Notes: This table shows federal tax rates in 2007 for individual income, corporate, and payroll taxes. The income
tax rate is the average effective federal tax rate from NBER’s TAXSIM across all states in 2007. The TAXSIM data
we use provides the effective federal tax rate on individual income after accounting for deductions. The corporate tax
rate is the average effective corporate tax rate: we divide total tax liability (including tax credits) by net business
income less deficit, using data from IRS Statistics of Income on corporation income tax returns. Finally, for payroll tax
rates, we use data from the Congressional Budget Office on federal tax rates for all households in 2007. This payroll
rate is similar to the employer portion of the sum of Old-Age, Survivors, and Disabilty Insurance and Medicare’s
Hospital Insurance Program.




                                                                1
                                          Table A.2: State Tax Rates in 2007


                                 State        tyn         tcn        tcorp
                                                                      n            txn
                                 AL          3.1           4          6.5         2.2
                                 AZ          2.2          5.6          7          4.2
                                 AR          3.7           6          6.5         3.2
                                 CA           4           7.2         8.8         4.4
                                 CO          3.3          2.9         4.6         1.5
                                 CT            4           6          7.5         3.8
                                 DE          3.5           0          8.7         2.9
                                 FL            0           6          5.5         2.7
                                 GA            4           4           6          5.4
                                 HI          4.5           4          6.4         2.1
                                 ID          4.5           6          7.6         3.8
                                 IL          2.3          6.3         4.8         4.8
                                 IN          3.1           6          8.5         5.1
                                 IA          4.2           5          12          12
                                 KS          4.1          5.3         7.3         2.5
                                 KY          4.1           6           7          3.5
                                 LA          3.1           4           8           8
                                 ME          4.6           5          8.9         8.9
                                 MD          3.5           6           7          3.5
                                 MA          4.5           5          9.5         4.7
                                 MI          3.1           6          1.9         1.8
                                 MN          4.8          6.5         9.8         7.6
                                 MS          2.8           7           5          1.7
                                 MO          3.5          4.2         6.3         2.1
                                 MT          3.7           0          6.8         2.3
                                 NE          3.9          5.5         7.8         7.8
                                 NV            0          6.5          0           0
                                 NH           .2           0          8.5         4.3
                                 NJ          4.2           7           9          4.5
                                 NM          2.9           5          7.6         2.5
                                 NY          4.8           4          7.5         7.5
                                 NC            5          4.3         6.9         3.4
                                 ND          2.1           5           7          2.3
                                 OH          3.5          5.5         8.5         5.1
                                 OK          3.5          4.5          6           2
                                 OR            6           0          6.6         6.6
                                 PA          2.9           6          10           7
                                 RI          3.6           7           9           3
                                 SC          3.6           6           5           5
                                 SD            0           4           0           0
                                 TN           .3           7          6.5         3.2
                                 TX            0          6.3          0           0
                                 UT            4          4.7          5          2.5
                                 VT          3.4           6          8.5         4.3
                                 VA          4.1           5           6           3
                                 WA            0          6.5          0           0
                                 WV          4.2           6          8.7         4.4
                                 WI          4.5           5          7.9         6.3
                                 WY            0           4           0           0


Notes: This table shows state tax rates in 2007 for individual income (tyn ), general sales (tcn ), corporate (tcorp
                                                                                                                n    ), and
sales-apportioned corporate (txn ) taxes, which is the product of the statutory corporate tax rate and the state’s sales
apportionment weight. See Section 3.1 for details.




                                                                2
                    Table A.3: State Income Tax Parameters and Effective Tax Rates in 2007

                                           State tax rates if AGI   is        Overall tax rates if AGI is
        State   an,state    bn,state
                                       25K       50K     100K       200K    25K     50K      100K     200K
        AL       1.025       0.005     2.0       2.4      3.1         3.4   14.8    18.1      22.9     25.2
        AK       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        AZ       1.078       0.008     0.2       1.0      2.2         2.7   13.4    17.0      22.2     24.7
        AR       1.092       0.011     1.2       2.1      3.6         4.3   14.1    17.9      23.3     25.9
        CA       1.102       0.011     0.3       1.3      2.7         3.5   13.4    17.2      22.7     25.3
        CO       1.066       0.008     1.3       2.0      3.2         3.7   14.2    17.8      23.0     25.5
        CT       1.087       0.010     0.9       1.8      3.2         3.9   13.9    17.7      23.0     25.6
        DE       1.067       0.008     1.0       1.7      2.9         3.4   14.0    17.6      22.8     25.2
        FL       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        GA       1.132       0.014     0.8       2.1      4.0         5.0   13.8    17.9      23.7     26.4
        HI       1.136       0.015     1.2       2.5      4.5         5.5   14.1    18.2      24.1     26.8
        ID       1.166       0.017     0.5       2.1      4.4         5.5   13.6    17.9      24.0     26.8
        IL       1.019       0.004     1.4       1.8      2.3         2.5   14.3    17.6      22.3     24.6
        IN       1.019       0.004     2.2       2.6      3.2         3.5   15.0    18.3      23.1     25.3
        IA       1.122       0.014     1.2       2.5      4.3         5.2   14.2    18.2      23.9     26.6
        KS       1.066       0.009     1.6       2.4      3.6         4.2   14.5    18.1      23.3     25.8
        KY       1.070       0.009     1.9       2.7      4.0         4.6   14.7    18.4      23.6     26.1
        LA       1.082       0.010     1.0       1.9      3.2         3.8   14.0    17.7      23.0     25.5
        ME       1.131       0.015     1.2       2.5      4.5         5.5   14.1    18.2      24.0     26.8
        MD       1.055       0.007     1.5       2.2      3.2         3.7   14.4    17.9      23.0     25.4
        MA       1.055       0.008     2.4       3.1      4.2         4.8   15.1    18.7      23.8     26.2
        MI       1.049       0.007     1.5       2.1      3.1         3.5   14.4    17.9      22.9     25.3
        MN       1.108       0.013     1.4       2.5      4.2         5.1   14.3    18.2      23.8     26.5
        MS       1.010       0.003     1.4       1.6      1.9         2.1   14.3    17.5      22.1     24.3
        MO       1.065       0.008     1.3       2.0      3.1         3.7   14.2    17.8      23.0     25.4
        MT       1.093       0.011     1.1       2.1      3.6         4.3   14.1    17.9      23.3     25.9
        NE       1.109       0.012     0.8       1.9      3.6         4.4   13.8    17.7      23.3     25.9
        NV       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        NH       1.000       0.000     0.1       0.1      0.1         0.1   13.2    16.3      20.7     22.8
        NJ       1.054       0.007     0.8       1.4      2.3         2.8   13.8    17.3      22.4     24.8
        NM       1.183       0.017     -0.8      0.8      3.1         4.3   12.5    16.8      23.0     25.9
        NY       1.099       0.012     1.3       2.4      4.0         4.7   14.3    18.1      23.6     26.2
        NC       1.055       0.009     2.5       3.2      4.4         5.0   15.2    18.8      23.9     26.4
        ND       1.052       0.006     0.5       1.0      1.8         2.2   13.5    17.0      22.0     24.4
        OH       1.061       0.008     1.2       1.9      2.9         3.4   14.1    17.7      22.8     25.2
        OK       1.146       0.016     0.7       2.1      4.2         5.2   13.7    17.9      23.8     26.6
        OR       1.107       0.014     2.7       4.0      5.8         6.7   15.4    19.4      25.0     27.7
        PA       1.046       0.007     1.5       2.1      3.0         3.5   14.4    17.9      22.9     25.3
        RI       1.095       0.011     0.8       1.7      3.2         3.9   13.8    17.6      23.0     25.6
        SC       1.071       0.009     1.1       1.9      3.0         3.6   14.1    17.7      22.9     25.4
        SD       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        TN       1.001       0.000     0.1       0.1      0.2         0.2   13.2    16.3      20.7     22.8
        TX       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        UT       1.087       0.011     1.4       2.3      3.8         4.5   14.3    18.1      23.5     26.0
        VT       1.177       0.017     -0.5      1.1      3.4         4.6   12.8    17.1      23.2     26.1
        VA       1.076       0.010     1.6       2.4      3.7         4.4   14.4    18.1      23.4     25.9
        WA       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        WV       1.062       0.009     1.9       2.7      3.9         4.4   14.8    18.4      23.5     26.0
        WI       1.086       0.011     1.8       2.8      4.2         4.9   14.6    18.4      23.8     26.4
        WY       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7


Notes: This table shows state income tax parameters in 2007 as well as effective tax rates for different levels of
Adjusted Gross Income (AGI). Tax rates reported in columns 4-7 are state-only, while tax rates in columns 8-11
combine federal and state taxation. Federal taxation includes individual income taxes and the employee portion of
payroll (FICA) taxes.



                                                        3
A.1                                                         Supplemental Stylized Facts on State Taxes

                                                                                                                     Figure A.2: Supplemental Stylized Facts on State Taxes

                                               (a) State Tax Revenue and Government Spending                                                                                                                                         (b) Firm and Worker Tax Rates
  Log State Government Direct Expenditure in 2007




                                                                                                                                                   Slope= .96 (.02)
                                                  27




                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                                          Corporate Keep Rate in 2007 in 2007 (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NV WA      TX                 WY          SD
                                                  26




                                                                                                                                                         CA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                                              NY


                                                                                                                                         TX
                                                  25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                96
                                                                                                                                        FL
                                                                                                                                  PA                                                                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                                               OH                                                                                                                              IL
                                                                                                                                  IL
                                                                                                                              MI NJ                                                                                                                                                          SC    UT           MS
                                                                                                                         GAMANC                                                                                                                                                                            FL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                94
                                                                                                                          VA
                                                                                                                         WA                                                                                                                                     VA                 GA           OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HIMO
                                                  24




                                                                                                                      MD
                                                                                                        LA           WI MN
                                                                                                                     AZ
                                                                                                                     IN                                                                                                                                                            AR                   TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OR    AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MT
                                                                                                    SC MO
                                                                                                    ALKY TN                                                                                                                                      MD                            KY NC             AZ          ND
                                                                                                                    CT                                                                                                     CT              NY              KS
                                                                                               MS OROKCO                                                                                                                                                                                ID                    NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WI                                      LA
                                                                                            NM IA AR
                                                                                              UT KS                                                                                                                                                                       INOH VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WV                                         DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CA
                                                  23




                                                                                              NV                                                                                                                                NJ                       RI                      ME
                                                                              WVHI
                                                                          AK                                                                                                                                                              MA                                                                                           AK
                                                                          MENE                                                                                                                                                   MN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                90
                                                                      DE ID                                                                                                                                                                                         PA
                                                                NH RI
                                                                 MTVT
                                                               WY
                                                  22




                                                       SD    ND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IA



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Slope= .76 (.19)
                                                  21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                86
                                                       21                    22                       23                         24            25               26                                                    78                  80                              82                        84                86              88               90
                                                                                        Log State Tax Revenue in 2007                                                                                                      Effective Federal+State Individual Income Keep Rate in 2007 (%)



                                                               (c) Individual and Sales Tax Rates                                                                                                                               (d) Corporate and Sales Tax Rates
  Fed+State Individual Income Keep Rate in 2007 (%)
                                                  92




                                                                                                            SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                100


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NV TX                                                  WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SD

                                                                   MS                                       WY
                                                                                                                                                                          Corporate Keep Rate in 2007 (%)




                                                                   TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                98
                                                  90




                                                                             TX                                                                                                                                                                           MI
                                                                        WA                                                                              NH
                                                                                  FL
                                                                        NV                     NM
                                                                                               ND
                                                                                                                                                        MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                96




                                                                                  SC   AZ                   AL                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                        AK                                                                                          IL
                                                  88




                                                                                                            LA                                                                                                                       MS                  SC                              UT
                                                                                  ID
                                                                                  WV
                                                                                  AR                UT                                                                                                                                                   FL
                                                                                  VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                94




                                                                                               IA    OK                                                                                                                                                                            VA        OK      GA
                                                                                  KY                                                                                                                                                                                                              MO HI
                                                                                               ME         MO                                                                                                                         TN                  AR                                          AL                                                OR
                                                              CA                  IN   NE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MT
                                                                                       OH                                                               DE                                                                                               MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KY          AZ            ND             NC
                                                                   RI                                          HI                                                                                                                                                             KS
                                                                             IL PA                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ID                        NM                NY
                                                                                                          NC GA                                                                                                                                                          NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                92
                                                  86




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WI                LA
                                                                                  MI
                                                                                               WI                                                                                                                                                        VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IN          OH                                                                                    NH
                                                                                            KS VA                                                                                                                               CA NJ                    WV                                                                                                DE
                                                                                  MD                                                                                                                                               RI                                              ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA                                                                      AK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                90




                                                                   NJ                                                                                                                                                                                    PA
                                                                        MN
                                                                                                                                                        OR
                                                  84




                                                                                               MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                88




                                                                                                            NY                                                                                                                                                                     IA
                                                                                  CT



                                                                                                                                                   Slope= -.3 (.19)                                                                                                                                                                  Slope= -.08 (.3)
                                                  82




                                                                                                                                                                                                                86




                                                       92                      94                           96                         98              100                                                            92                                 94                                         96                      98                         100
                                                                                            Sales Keep Rate in 2007 (%)                                                                                                                                             Sales Keep Rate in 2007 (%)



Notes: Panel (a) plots state government direct expenditure against model-based tax revenue in 2007. Data are
drawn from Census Government Finances. Panel (b) plots the statutory state corporate keep rate, as measured
by 1 − tcorp
        n    , against the combined federal and state effective individual income keep rate, which is estimated using
NBER’s tax simulator TAXSIM. For each state, we compute average federal and state tax liabilities and divide their
sum by average Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) in that state. Then, we account for the impact of sales taxes on
individuals’ purchasing power by dividing the raw keep rate by 1 + tcn . Panel (c) shows the correlation between
the combined federal and state individual income keep rate and the statutory state sales keep rate, as measured by
1 − tcn . We estimate the former using NBER’s tax simulator TAXSIM. For each state, we compute average federal and
state tax liabilities and divide their sum by average Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) in that state. Panel (d) plots the
statutory state corporate keep rate against the statutory state sales keep rate. In panels (b), (c), and (d), the vertical
and horizontal grey lines denote population-weighted averages of the variables on the x- and y-axis, respectively.
Observations are weighted by state population.




                                                                                                                                                                      4
A.2      Bilateral Trade Shares and State Corporate Taxation
    According to our model, using (A.3), (A.4), and (A.5) and aggregating across firms, inter-state trade flows take
the form:
                                                 σ
                                ln Xni = β1 ln          + β2 ln τni + ψi + ψn + εin ,
                                               σ − t̃ni
where ψi and ψn are respectively origin and destination fixed effects. As shown in (A.3), t̃ni is a function of the
matrix of trade flows and corporate taxes and therefore we instrument for this term using corporate taxes in the
destination only.

                                  Table A.4: Bilateral Trade Shares and Trade-Dispersion Cost

                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)       (7)       (8)
                                     OLS         OLS         OLS         OLS          2SLS         2SLS      2SLS      2SLS

             σ
       ln   σ−t̃
                                    -4.265*      -3.414     -2.250    -2.948**     -9.513***        -3.993    -2.631   -2.590*
                                    (2.204)     (2.111)    (2.154)     (1.289)      (2.660)        (2.448)   (2.491)   (1.390)

       Observations                 10,512      10,512      10,512       10,272      10,512        10,512    10,512    10,272
       R-squared                     0.457       0.474      0.474         0.826      0.456         0.474     0.474     0.826
       Year FE                        No          Yes        Yes           Yes         No           Yes       Yes       Yes
       Dest GDP Control               No          No         Yes           Yes         No            No       Yes       Yes
       Distance Control               No          No          No           Yes         No            No        No       Yes


Notes: The panel consists of the 48 contiguous states in 1993, 1997, 2002, 2007, and 2012. Each observation is
an origin-destination-year triplet. In all specifications, the dependent variable is log bilateral trade share, which is
defined as sin = Pxin       , where xin denotes sales from state n to state i. All models allow for origin and destination
                      i xin
state fixed effects. Observations are weighted by destination state population. Columns 1-4 show the association
             σ
between ln σ−   t̃
                   and bilateral trade share, allowing for year fixed effects (Column 2), and controlling for destination
                                                                                                 σ
state GDP (Column 3) and distance between state pairs (Column 4). In Column 5, ln σ−               t̃
                                                                                                      is instrumented with
              x
destination t . In Column 6, this specification is augmented with year fixed effects. Columns 7 and 8 also control
for destination state GDP and distance between state pairs, respectively. Robust standard errors are in parentheses
and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




B      Appendix to Section 4
B.1      Firm Maximization
    We characterize here the problem in (20) for a firm j located in i whose productivity is z . When a firm j
located in state i sets its price pjni in state n, the quantity exported to state n is qni
                                                                                        j
                                                                                           = Qn (pjni /Pn )−σ . The first-order
condition of profits (20) with respect the quantity sold to n is:

                                                  ∂πij              ∂ π̃ j ∂ t̄j
                                                    j
                                                       = (1 − t̄ji ) ji − ji π̃ij = 0,                                           (A.1)
                                                  ∂qni              ∂qni   ∂qni
               PN
where π̃ij ≡       n=1   xjni − (τni ci /z)qni
                                            j
                                               are pre-tax profits, and where:

                                             ∂ π̃ij   σ − 1 1/σ 1−1/σ  j −1/σ            τni
                                                j
                                                    =      E n Pn        qni          − ci     ,
                                             ∂qni       σ                                   z
                                                                               !
                                             ∂ t̄ji   σ−1 x X x j                pjni
                                                j
                                                    =        tn −    tn0 sn0 i        .
                                             ∂qni       σ
                                                                  n0
                                                                                 xji




                                                                     5
Combining the last two expressions with (A.1) yields:

                                                               1            σ τni
                                             pjni =                               ci ,                                (A.2)
                                                      1 − t̃jni π̃ij /xji σ − 1 z
                                                                         


where
                                                                             x j
                                                             txn −
                                                                     P
                                                                         n0 tn0 sn0 i
                                                   t̃jni ≡                               .                            (A.3)
                                                                     1 − t̄i
Expressing pre-tax profits as

                                                         N
                                                                         
                                                         X        τni ci
                                                π̃ij ≡
                                                     xjni 1 −               ,
                                                 n=1
                                                                   z pjni

introducing this expression in (A.2) and using that i sjni t̃jni = 0 yields π̃ij = xji /σ. This implies that
                                                   P

                                                               σ        σ τni
                                                  pjni =           j
                                                                              .                                       (A.4)
                                                             σ − t̃ni σ − 1 z

Finally, note that export shares are independent of productivity, zij :
                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                      σ−1
                                                                                             σ−t̃ni
                                                     1−σ                         En
                                             En pjni                                          τni
                                sjni =   PN            j
                                                         1−σ        =                                j
                                                                                                            1−σ .    (A.5)
                                          n0 =1 En pn0 i
                                                  0                       PN                      σ−t̃ 0
                                                                                                      n i
                                                                                n0 =1   En0        τn0 i



Equations (A.3) and (A.5) for n = 1, .., N define a system for t̃jni and sjni whose solution is independent of the
                                                                               

firm’s productivity z. Therefore, t̃jni = t̃ni and sjni = sni for all firms j located in state i.


B.2     Additional State-Level Variables
    In this section, we let χF E be an indicator variable that equals 1 when we assume free entry of homogeneous
firms and zero when we assume free mobility of heterogeneous firms.


Factor Payments From the Cobb-Douglas technologies and CES demand, in addition to the free-entry con-
dition when χF E = 1, it follows that payments to intermediate inputs, labor and fixed factors in state i can be
expressed as fractions of sales Xi :
                                                                
                                                         1 − t̄i             σ−1
                                      Pi Ii = 1 + χF E             (1 − γi )        Xi ,                   (A.6)
                                                         σ−1                    σ
                                                                
                                                         1 − t̄i                σ−1
                                     wi LEi =   1 + χF E           (1 − βi ) γi      Xi ,                  (A.7)
                                                         σ−1                      σ
                                                                
                                                         1 − t̄i         σ−1
                                      ri Hi = 1 + χF E             βi γi       Xi .                        (A.8)
                                                         σ−1              σ

In each of these expressions, the term multiplied by χF E reflects the resources devoted to pay for entry costs. In the
second equation, LE  i are the total efficiency units of labor demanded in state i, in equilibrium these efficiency units
equal Li hi Ei [z], where hi are the hours worked by a worker with productivity z in state i in (13).
    Aggregate pre-tax profits Π̃i are:

                                                                         Xi
                                                             Π̃i =          ,                                         (A.9)
                                                                         σ

After-tax profits, gross of entry costs when χF E = 1, are:
                                                                            Xi
                                                         Πi = 1 − tn            .                                    (A.10)
                                                                             σ




                                                                     6
Expenditure and Sales Shares The share of aggregate expenditures in state n on goods produced in state
i is
                                                    FE                                       1−σ
                                           1+ 1−χ
                                                                 
                                                ε   F
                                                         (1−σ)         σ        σ τni ci 1
                                λni = Mi                                                            .             (A.11)
                                                                     σ − t̃ni σ − 1 zi0 Pn

Under free entry (χF E = 1), the congestion effect from entry on productivity described in Section 4.4 is absent.
We construct the sales shares sni , which are necessary to compute the corporate tax rate ti in (22) and the pricing
distortion t̃ni in (24), using the identity sni = λni Pn Qn /Xi , where Pn Qn is the aggregate expenditure on final goods
in state n.


Real GDP Adding up (A.7), (A.8), and (A.9), in the case with ex-ante heterogeneous firms, real GDP in state
n is
                                    1 + γn (σ − 1) 1 − (1 − βn ) tw           w
                                                                                               
                           GDPn                                   f ed / 1 + tf ed                  Xn
                                  =                                                                    .          (A.12)
                             Pn                          σ                                          Pn
                                     real   P
Aggregate real GDP is defined as GDP      = n (GDPn /Pn ).


Consumption The aggregate personal consumption expenditure in state n is Pn Cn = Pn CnW + Pn CnK , where
CnW is the aggregate real consumption of workers and CnK is the consumption of capital owners. Taking into account
the taxes paid to each level of government, these aggregates are:

                                1 − Tny (wn hn z)
                                                          
                Pn CnW = En                       wn h n z   Ln                                             (A.13)
                                     1 + tcn
                                                                            
                            1 − χF E Π̃ + R − T corp − tyn + tyn,f ed 1 − tyn    1 − χF E Π + R
                                                                                              
                     K
                 Pn Cn =                                                                          ωn ,      (A.14)
                                                                1 + tcn

where tyn and tyn,f ed are the top average state and federal personal income tax rates, Π = i Πi , Π̃ = i Π̃i and
                                                                                              P              P

R = i ri Hi are national after-tax profits, pre-tax profits and returns to land and structures, respectively, and T corp
     P

are the national corporate tax payments.


State Tax Revenue By Type of Tax State government revenue from corporate, sales, and income taxes,
is, respectively,


                             corp
                                          X
                            Rn    = txn        snn0 Π̃n0 + tln Π̃n ,                                              (A.15)
                                          n0
                                                                                                
                               y
                              Rn = E [tyn (wn hn z) wn hn z] Ln + tyn ωn             1 − χF E Π + R ,             (A.16)
                               c
                              Rn = tcn Pn Cn .                                                                    (A.17)

The base for corporate tax revenues are the pre-tax profits from every state, defined in (A.9), adjusted by the proper
apportionment weights. Equation (A.16) shows that the base for state income taxes is the income of both workers and
capital-owners who reside in n net of federal income taxes. Income tax revenue from workers results from aggregating
tax payments over the distribution of individual productivity. Capital owners are at the highest rate, tyn . Under
free entry, profits after corporate taxes equal the entry costs and therefore there are no dividends; in that case,
capital owners only obtain income from land. The base for the sales tax in (A.17) is the total personal consumption
expenditure of workers and capital owners defined in the previous section.


Trade Imbalances Three reasons give rise to differences between aggregate expenditures Pn Qn and sales Xn
of state n, and therefore create trade imbalances. First, differences in the ownership rates ωn lead to differences
between the gross domestic product of state n, GDPn , and the gross income of residents of state n, GSIn . Second,
differences in ownership rates ωn and in sales-apportioned corporate taxes txn across states create differences between


                                                                     7
                                                                corp
the corporate tax revenue raised by state n’s government (Rn         ) and the corporate taxes paid by residents of state
        corp
n (T Pn ). Third, there may be differences between taxes paid by residents of state n to the federal government
(Tn,f ed ) and the expenditures made by the federal government in state n in either transfers to the state government
in n (Tnf ed→st ) or purchases of the final good produced in state n (Gn,f ed ). As a result, the trade imbalance in state
n, defined as difference between expenditures and sales in that state, can be written as follows:1
                                                                                                         
                                                      corp
                 Pn Qn − Xn = (GSIn − GDPn ) + (Rn         − T Pncorp ) + Pn Gn,f ed + Tnf ed→st − Tn,f ed .       (A.18)

             P                P
Letting R = n rn Hn and Π̃ = n Π̃n be the pre-tax returns to the national portfolio of fixed factors and firms, we
can rewrite some of the components of (A.18) as follows:2
                                                                        
                           GSIn − GDPn = 1 − χF E ωn Π̃ − Π̃n + ωn R − rn Hn ,                              (A.19)
                                                                 
                                      corp   1 x P n Qn
                                    Rn     =      tn        + tln Xn ,                                      (A.20)
                                             σ        Xn
                                                X
                                  T Pncorp = bn      t̄n0 − tcorp
                                                                  
                                                             f ed   Π̃n0 .                                  (A.21)
                                                      n0


Replacing (A.19) to (A.21) into (A.18), and using (A.8) and (A.9) to express land payments and pre-tax profits as
function of sales, after some manipulations we obtain:

                                                                       Pn Gn,f ed + Tnf ed→st − Tn,f ed
                                                                                                         
                   P n Qn     1
                          =            (σ − 1) (1 − βn γn ) + tln +
                    Xn      σ − txn                                                  Π̃n
                                                                                             
                              1  FE                                        ωn
                          +         χ (1 − βn γn (1 − t̄n )) +                                                (A.22)
                            σ − txn                            Π̃n / Π + R + tcorp − χ F E Π̃
                                                                              f ed


     Expression (A.22) is used in the calibration to back out the ownership shares {ωn } from observed data on trade
imbalances. To implement it, we assume that transfers from the federal government to the state government in n are
entirely financed with federal taxes paid by residents of state n. Then, the ownership shares can be expressed as a
function of other parameters and observables as follows:
                                                                                                        
               Π̃n                    x     Pn Q n                             l    FE
 ωn =                         (σ − tn )            − (σ − 1) (1 − βn γn ) − tn − χ (1 − βn γn (1 − t̄n )) . (A.23)
      Π + R + tcorp                          Xn
               f ed − χ
                        F E Π̃




B.3     General Equilibrium Conditions
    We note that, using the definition of import shares in (A.11), imposing expression (17) for final good prices in
every state is equivalent to imposing that expenditures shares in every state add up to 1.
                                                    X
                                                           λin = 1 for all i.                                      (A.24)
                                                     n

Additionally, by definition, aggregate sales by firms located in state i are:
                                                             X
                                                     Xi =         λni Pn Qn .                                      (A.25)
                                                              n




    1
      To reach this relationship, first impose goods market clearing (18) to obtain Pn Qn                           =
Pn (Cn + Gn,f ed + Gn + In ).     Then, note that personal-consumption expenditures can be written as
                        y     c
Pn Cn = GSIn − (Rn        + Rn  + T Pncorp ) − Tn,f ed , where the terms between parentheses are tax payments
made by residents of state n to state governments and Tn,f ed are taxes paid to the federal govern-
ment.    Combining these two expressions and using the state’s government budget constraint (28) gives
                                                         corp
Pn Qn = (GDPn + Pn In ) + (GSIn − GDPn ) + (Rn                − T Pncorp ) + Pn Gn,f ed + Tnf ed→st − Tn,f ed . Adding
and subtracting GDPn and noting that by definition GDPn = Xn − Pn In gives (A.18).
    2
      Equations (A.19) and (A.21) hold by definition. For (A.20), combine (A.15) with (A.25) and (A.9).


                                                                  8
This is equivalent to imposing that sales shares from every state add up to 1:
                                                                 X
                                                                        sin = 1 for all n.                                                           (A.26)
                                                                   i


After several manipulations of the equilibrium conditions (available upon request), these shares can be expressed as
functions of employment shares, wages, aggregate variables, and parameters as follows:
                                           w 1−κ1                                       w σ−1
                                                n                                             i
                            λin = Ain                       (Ln hn En [z])1−κ2n                          (Li hi Ei [z])−κ3i ,                        (A.27)
                                            π̄                                             π̄
                                        P i Qi
                            sin   = λin        ,                                                                                                     (A.28)
                                         Xn
where Ain is given by
                                                                                                  (σ−1)α χ −1         σ−1
                                                                                        1−γ
                                                           1−α1                                          F F   χF E −1
                                  zA            Z i uA                      Zn uA
                                                                                   1−α                σ−1
                                                                  W,i                     W,n
                    Ain     = Θn  nA                i                          n                                                       ,           (A.29)
                                  τin              v                          v

where znA , τin
              A
                , uA
        
                   n are defined in (30) to (32) in the text, where Zn summarizes the impact of hours worked and
skill heterogeneity,
                                                                                1/εW +αW,n χW                                          1+1/η
                              ζn                                   ζn                                     (1−bn )(1−αW,n ) −αh hn
              Zn =                                                      zL,n                             hn                   e 1+1/η            ,
                   ζn − (1 − bn ) (1 − αW,n )                    ζn − 1

and where Θn is a state-specific constant,
                                                                         
                                                        1−χF E
                                    1−(σ−1)                     +αF χF       +γ (−(σ−1)+((σ−1)αF χF −1)χF E )
                Θn ≡ 1 +      tw
                               f ed
                                                          εF


                                                                                                   χF E (αF − σ−1
                                                                                                               1                     σ−1
                                                                                                                  ) σ−1
                                                                                     
                                        βγ ((σ−1)−[(σ−1)αF χF −1]χF E )
                                                                                                  fE,n
                        
                            1−β                                                                                         σ
                    ∗           Hn                                                                                    FE
                                                                                                                                            .
                             β                                                                             1   − 1−χ        −αF χF
                                                                                         ((1 − β) γ) σ−1           ε
                                                                                                                   F



The parameters {κ1 , κ2n , κ3 } in (A.27) and (A.28) are given by:

                                            1 − χF E
                                                    
                κ1 = (σ − 1) 1 + αF χF +               − ((σ − 1) αF χF − 1) χF E ,                                                                  (A.30)
                                               εF
                               1 − χF E
                                                                                   
                                                         1 + εW χW αW,n
               κ2n = (σ − 1)            + αF χF + γβ −                    (1 − γn )
                                  εF                      εW (1 − αW,n )
                                                                                                  
                      FE                             1 + ε W χW αW,n    1−γ
                   −χ      γβ ((σ − 1) αF χF − 1) −                             ((σ − 1) αF χF − 1) ,                                                (A.31)
                                                            εW        1 − αW,n
                             1 + εW χW αW,i
               κ3i = (σ − 1)                 .                                                                                                       (A.32)
                              εW (1 − αW,i )

As in the previous sections of this appendix, we let χF E be an indicator variable that equals 1 when we assume free
entry of homogeneous firms and zero when we assume free mobility of heterogeneous firms.
     Equations (A.24) to (A.29), together with (8) and (A.22), give the solution for import shares {λin }, export shares
{sin }, employment shares {Ln }, wages relative to average profits {wn /π̄}, government sizes {Pn Gn }, relative trade
imbalances {Pn Qn /Xn }, and utility v. The endogenous variables not included in this system can be recovered using
the remaining equilibrium equations of the model.


B.4     Uniqueness in a Special Case
    Consider a special case of baseline the model with a fixed mass of ex-ante heterogeneous firms (i.e. χF E = 0) in
which there is no dispersion in sales-apportioned corporate taxes across states (txn = tx for all n), no cross-ownership
of assets across states, and same preference for government spending across states (αW,n = αW ). In this case, the
adjusted amenities and productivities uA       A
                                        n and zn defined in (32) and (30) become exogenous functions of fundamentals




                                                                                9
and own-state taxes. It is then possible to show that Conditions 1 to 3 and 4’ of Allen et al. (2014) are satisfied
(proof available upon request) and that, applying their Corollary 2, a sufficient uniqueness condition for the system
of equations in {Ln , wn /π, v} in (A.24) to (A.26) is

                                                                     σ − (1 − κ3 )
                                                                                              > 1,                                         (A.33)
                                                            σ (1 − κ2 ) − (1 − κ3 ) (1 − κ1 )
                                                                        κ1 − κ2
                                                                                              > 1,                                         (A.34)
                                                            σ (1 − κ2 ) − (1 − κ3 ) (1 − κ1 )

where κ1 to κ3 are defined in (A.30) to (A.32).


B.5      General Equilibrium in Relative Changes
      To perform counterfactuals, we solve for the changes in model outcomes as function of changes in taxes. Consider
                                                                                                     N
computing the effect of moving from the current distribution of state taxes, tyn , tcn , txn , tln n=1 to a new distribution
                                                                                      
       0        0        0      0
{(tyn ) , (tcn ) , (txn ) , tln }N
                               
                                  n=1 . As we discussed in Section 4.8, implementing counterfactuals in our framework requires
simultaneously accounting for a mapping from changes in adjusted fundamentals to changes in outcomes and for a
mapping from changes in taxes and in general-equilibrium outcomes to changes in adjusted fundamentals. The first
mapping is given by (A.35) to (A.42) below, and the second is given by (A.43) to (A.45).
      Defining x̂ = x0 /x as the counterfactual value of x relative to its initialnvalue, we have that
                                                                                                     o the changes in import
shares, export shares, number of workers, and wage per efficiency unit λ̂in , ŝin , L̂n , wˆn , as well as the welfare
change of workers v̂ must be such that conditions (A.24) and (A.26) hold:
                                                                  X
                                                                         λin λˆin = 1 for all i,                                           (A.35)
                                                                   n
                                                                   X
                                                                         sin sˆin = 1 for all n,                                           (A.36)
                                                                    i


where, using (A.27) and (A.28),
                                                      1−κ1 
                                                                     1−κ2n  ŵ σ−1          −κ3i
                                                  wˆn                             i
                                    λˆin = Aˆin               hˆn Lˆn                    ĥi L̂i       ,                                   (A.37)
                                                   π̄                           π̄
                                                 ˆ 
                                                 Pi Qi X̂i
                                    sˆin = λˆin             ,                                                                              (A.38)
                                                  Xi    Xˆn

where using (A.29),
                                                                                                   (σ−1)α χ −1         σ−1
                                                                                           1−γn
                                                            !     1                   !                    F F   χF E −1
                                zˆA              Ẑi uˆA                   Zˆn uˆA
                                                                1−αW,i                    1−αW,n          σ−1

                       Âin   = n                      i                         n
                                                                                                                                 ,         (A.39)
                                                                                                                         
                                 τˆin                v̂                        v̂
                                                                                                                         
                                   A



where the impact of changes in hours worked and the skill distribution within each state is captured by
                                                       y    y 0
                                                                  !1−αW,n 
                                1−(byn )0
                                                  −
                                                         ( )
                                                      bn − bn
                                                                                  by −(by )
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                  1−αW,n
                                                                                                             ζn − (1 − byn ) (1 − αW,n )
               Zˆn =       hˆn                e        1+1/η                     hnn n                                                     (A.40)
                                                                                                            ζn − 1 − (byn )0 (1 − αW,n )
                                                                                                                             


and where, from (13), the change in the number of hours worked is
                                                                                                1
                                                                              1 − (byn )0
                                                                                            1+1/η
                                                                  hˆn =                               .                                    (A.41)
                                                                               1 − byn

Additionally, labor shares must add up to 1 :
                                                                          X
                                                                               Ln Lˆn = 1.                                                 (A.42)




                                                                                  10
    From (30) to (32), the changes in the adjusted fundamentals are

                                 σ − t̃in
                       τˆin
                         A
                            =            0 ,                                                                                                 (A.43)
                                σ − t̃in
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                        1 −     1−χF E
                                                0                       FE                 0 
                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                       σ−1        εF
                                                                                                                         +αF χF
                                   1 − (t̄n ) / σ − 1 + χ        1 − (t̄n )                                                              αF
                       zˆnA =                                                                                                         Gˆn ,   (A.44)
                                     (1 − t̄n ) / (σ − 1 + χF E (1 − t̄n ))
                                                                 !1−αW
                                  1 − Tn0 wn znL wˆn 1 + tcn
                                                                          αW,n
                       uˆA
                         n =                                   0            Gˆn   .                                                           (A.45)
                                    1 − Tn (wn zn ) 1 + (tn )
                                                   L        c



where
                                   1 − Tn0 wn znL wˆn
                                                                         c                    − by 0 −by
                                                                ˆyn 1 + tn wˆn −(byn ) wn z L (( n ) n ) .
                                                                                       0 
                                                             = a                             n                                   (A.46)
                                     1 − Tn (wn znL )              1 + (tcn )0
                                                        oN
The variables PnXˆQ
                  n
                         n
                           , Gˆn , Tn0 , (t̄n )0 , t̃in 0       entering in (A.43) to (A.45) can be expressed as function of the
                       n                                   n=1
                  y c x l N                                                                        0
original taxes tn , tn , tn , tn n=1 , the new tax distribution {(tyn )0 , (tcn )0 , (txn )0 , tln }N  n=1 , and the new export shares
{sˆin sin }N
           n,i=1nusing (9),   (22),   (24),    (A.22),    and (28).  Hence,    these equations, together with (A.35) to (A.42), give the
                                     o
solution for λ̂in , ŝin , L̂n , wˆn and v̂. The new government sizes and trade deficits also depend on the new values
of Π̃ and Π + R; these variables can be expressed as a function of initial conditions and changes in the endogenous
variables.



C       Appendix to Section 5
Proof of Proposition 1 Under the assumptions in the proposition, the efficient allocations follow from
optimization of the following Lagrangian:
                                                   L       X                   K         
                                     X              Cn                               Cn
                          L=v−          λ1n v − Un     , Gn   −    λ2n vnK − UnK          , Gn
                                      n
                                                    Ln          n
                                                                                     Kn
                                                                                        !
                                      X L X K X                X      X
                            − λ3        Cn +     Cn +     Gn +   In −     Fn (Ln , In )
                                       n                   n                 n          n               n
                                    X           
                            − λ4           Ln − 1 .                                                                                           (A.47)

The efficient allocations result from maximizing the welfare of workers v given arbitrary levels of welfare of capital
owners, vnK . The first term in square brackets in the first line is the spatial mobility constraint, where Un (c, g) is
the direct utility function defined in (2) under the assumption of no disutility from labor, and where UnK (c, g) is the
utility of each capital owner in n. The second line shows the goods feasibility constraint, where
                                                           "                β n             1−βn #γn                   1−γn
                                                                1       Hn              Ln                          In
                             Fn (Ln , In ) =         zn0
                                                               γn       βn            1 − βn                      1 − γn
is the production technology. The last line of (A.47) is national labor market clearing. Except for the existence of
intermediates, the arbitrary many regions, and the immobile capital owners, (A.47) is the same optimization problem
considered in Flatters et al. (1974) and Wildasin (1980). Letting Unc ≡ ∂Un (c, g) /∂c and FnL ≡ ∂Fn /∂Ln , taking
the first order condition over Ln and Cn we obtain

                                                                                               CnL    UL
                                                       [Ln ]             λ3 FnL = λ4 +             λ1n nc ,
                                                                                               Ln     Ln
                                                                               L
                                                     h i                      Unc
                                                      CnL               λ1n       = λ3 .
                                                                              Ln

Combining these two conditions we obtain FnL − CnL /Ln = λ4 /λ3 . Under tw    f ed = 0 the market allocation gives
wn = FnL . Absent compensating differentials, mobility of workers implies that CnL /Ln is constant across locations,



                                                                                 11
which gives part i) of the proposition. More generally, we have that wn − CnL /Ln , which equals tax payments in the
decentralized equilibrium, is equalized across locations, which gives part ii).


Proof of Proposition 2 Consider a tax structure with only state sales and income taxes. Assume no trade
costs (τin = 1 for all i, n), perfect substitutability across varieties (σ → ∞), homogeneous firms (εF → ∞), and
constant labor supply (ζn → ∞ and hn constant). Because goods are perfect substitutes (σ → ∞) and there are
no trade costs (τin = 1) the production cost cn must be equalized across regions, and normalized to 1. This must
also be the price of the final good produced everywhere. Because firms are homogeneous (εF → ∞), it follows from
(27) that the summary statistic of the productivity distribution in n equals the common component of productivity,
z̃n = zn0 . Using (A.6), total production in region n is
                                                        1/γn          β n             1−βn
                                                  zn0
                                              
                                                                   Hn              Ln
                                                                                                    .                (A.48)
                                                  γn               βn            1 − βn

From (4), state-specific appeal is:
                                                                 αW,n
                                                             Gn
                                      vn = u n                            ((1 − Tn ) wn )1−αW,n .                    (A.49)
                                                            Lχ
                                                             n
                                                              W



From (A.7), labor demand in state n is given by the condition that labor costs equal the marginal product of labor,
wn = M P Ln , given by
                                                  M P Ln = Zn,0 L−β
                                                                 n
                                                                   n
                                                                     ,                                        (A.50)
                                        1/γ
where Zn,0 = (1 − βn )βn βn−βn zn0 /γn     n
                                             Hnβn . Labor supply in n follows from (7). Equating local labor demand
                                       

and local labor supply gives the solution for employment in n,
                                                                                              1
                                              (Zn (1 − Tn ))1−αW n
                                                                            
                                                                                                    (   )
                                                                                 1/εW +αW,n χW + 1−αW,n βn
                              L∗n (v) =                                                                              (A.51)
                                                       v
                               1
where Zn = Zn,0 (un GαW 1−αW
                     n )     . National labor-market clearing then gives the solution for worker welfare v as the
                     PN
value where H (v) ≡ n=1 L∗n (v) = 1. H ∗ (v) is decreasing in v so that there can only be a unique solution for v.
             ∗

Assume now that αW,n = αW for all n. Then, letting

                                                             1 − αW
                                          ζ=                                   > 0,
                                                    1/εW + αW χW + (1 − αW ) β

the solution for worker welfare is:
                                                                                       ! 1−αW
                                                            X                             ζ
                                                                                   ζ
                                                  v=              (Zn (1 − Tn ))                .                    (A.52)
                                                             n

Let v 0 be welfare under a distribution of taxes where every tax rate is brought to the mean of the initial distribution,
Tn0 = N −1 Tn for all n. Then, v 0 > v if and only if
            P


                             E[Znζ ](E[1 − Tn ])ζ > cov[Znζ , (1 − Tn )ζ ] + E[Znζ ]E[(1 − Tn )]ζ                    (A.53)

where E and cov denote the sample mean and covariance. This expression can be rearranged to reach
                                           h           i
                           E [1 − Tn ]ζ − E (1 − Tn )ζ              h                 i
                                                       > cv Znζ corr Znζ , (1 − Tn )ζ                              (A.54)
                                              ζ
                                 sd (1 − Tn )

where cv and sd denote the coefficient of variation and the standard deviation. Therefore, v 0 > v if corr[Znζ , (1 − Tn )]ζ
is low enough, and v 0 > v if corr[Znζ , (1 − Tn )]ζ is large enough. Part i) follows from the fact that ζ = 1/β when
εW → ∞ and χW = 0 . Part ii) follows from the example in the body of the text.




                                                                        12
D      Appendix to Section 6
D.1      Model-implied Fundamentals
    This section shows the composite term Ain , is related to measures of local amenities and market access. We
recover measures of the composite terms Ain from observed data and estimated parameters using equation (A.27).
Then, we relate the composite terms Ain to its determinants in the model. We focus on testing the predictions
                                                                                                          A
of equation (A.29) for the relationship between Ain and observable exogenous determinants of trade costs τin and
                              A       A
amenities in states i and n, ui and un by estimating regressions of the form

                                                            A
                                       ln Ain = b0 + b1 ln τin + b2 u A       A
                                                                      i + b3 un + ein ,

                                                          A
where we use distance as our proxy for trade costs τin       and data on measures of temperature and air quality in a
                          A        A
state as our proxy for ui and un . Table A.5 reports the results of these regressions. We find three main results:
First, there is a negative relation between distance between states and the composite term Ain . Second, there is a
positive relation between Ain and observable covariates that increase state i’s exogenous amenity level uA     i (and vice
versa). Column 2 shows that states with a higher minimum temperature, and with lower maximum temperatures
and precipitation have higher values of Ain . We also find that states with a lower number of toxic sites have higher
values of Ain , but this relation, as well as the relations with measures of air quality, are not statistically significant.
Finally, there is a negative relation between Ain and observable covariates that increase state n exogenous amenity
level uA
       n (and vice versa). Column 3 shows that destination states with more amenable weather (higher minimum
temperature, lower maximum temperatures, and less precipitation) have lower values of Ain . These relationships are
consistent with (A.29). The only relation that contradicts the prediction of the model is that of particulate matter
in destination states, which may reflect other factors like the level of economic activity. Overall, these results provide
evidence that the model-implied fundamentals have sensible empirical foundations.




                                                             13
                     Table A.5: Regressions of ln(Ain ) on Own-State and Other-State Amenities


                                                           (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)
                 Log Distance in Miles                 -1.467***     -1.296***   -1.506***    -1.298***
                                                        (0.292)        (0.170)    (0.313)       (0.174)
                 Min Temp (Origin)                                    1.422***                 1.418***
                                                                       (0.481)                  (0.483)
                 Max Temp (Origin)                                    -0.988**                 -0.985**
                                                                       (0.379)                  (0.380)
                 Precipitation (Origin)                                -0.003*                  -0.003*
                                                                       (0.002)                  (0.002)
                 Toxic Site (Origin)                                    -0.269                   -0.268
                                                                       (0.538)                  (0.539)
                 Particulate Matter (Origin)                             0.354                    0.352
                                                                       (0.285)                  (0.286)
                 Ozone Days (Origin)                                     0.069                    0.070
                                                                       (0.059)                  (0.060)
                 Min Temp (Destination)                                          -0.203***    -0.096***
                                                                                  (0.014)       (0.031)
                 Max Temp (Destination)                                          0.070***        -0.010
                                                                                  (0.006)       (0.018)
                 Precipitation (Destination)                                     0.001***     0.001***
                                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)
                 Toxic Site (Destination)                                        0.075***       0.044**
                                                                                  (0.015)       (0.021)
                 Particulate Matter (Destination)                                -0.103***     -0.061**
                                                                                  (0.028)       (0.024)
                 Ozone Days (Destination)                                        0.035***     0.034***
                                                                                  (0.005)       (0.007)
                 Observations                             2122         2099         2114          2091


Notes: The table reports results of a regression of the form: ln Ain = b0 + b1 ln distancein + b2 uA       A
                                                                                                   i + b3 un + ein , where
                                                                       A         A
Ain is constructed from the data using equation (A.27), and where ui and un are measures of amenities in origin
and destination states. We estimate these regressions using a cross-section of data, where data on amenities comes
from Couture et al. (2018). Amenity data are population-weighted averages at the state level. All models allow for
clustered standard errors by the origin state and the destination state. Standard errors are in parentheses and ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


D.2     Appendix to Section 6.2
D.2.1     Construction of Covariates in Worker and Firm Mobility Equation
We first describe how we construct the variable znL wnt entering the covariate ỹnt in (34) and, through (A.46), the
system of equilibrium equations in changes used for counterfactuals. In the model, the hourly wage of a worker l
in state n is wnh (l) = znl wn , where wn is the wage per efficiency unit. Given the assumption that distribution of
efficiency units within each state is Pareto with parameters znL , ζn , average hourly income per worker in state n is
                                                                     

En wnh (l) = znL ζnζn−1 wn . Assuming that the shape of the Pareto distribution ζn is constant over time, we obtain
          

                                                                    ζn − 1
                                              znL wnt = En wnt
                                                           h
                                                               (l)          ,                                      (A.55)
                                                                       ζn
          h     
where En wnt  (l) is empirically measured as the average hourly wage across individuals living in state n in year t.
Using again the assumption that the distribution of efficiency units across workers within a state is Pareto, the shape
parameter ζn can be estimated using information on the average and variance of the distribution of hourly wages




                                                            14
across workers living in state n:
                                                                       2
                                                            En wnt (l)
                                                 ζn − 2 ζn =            .                                           (A.56)
                                                             Vn wnt (l)
For each state n and period t, we construct AS   nt using the information on the estimated ζn and estimated progressivity
parameter bynt . See Appendix F.1 for detailed information about the construction of income tax schedule parameters.
     To construct measures of after-tax real earnings ỹnt , market potential M Pnt , real government services R̃nt , and
unit costs cnt , we need data on prices. We use the consumer price index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. This
is the same price data that is used in the estimation of the labor equation to construct measures of real government
spending and real wages.
     Constructing unit costs also requires data on the price of structures rnt , which is is not available at an annual
frequency. To avoid this shortcoming in the data, we construct an annual series of unit costs by setting the local price of
                                                                                                        1−βn βn γn 1−γn 3
structures to equal the local price index, resulting in the following measure of unit costs: cnt = (wnt      Pnt ) Pnt .
                                                           N,N
     To construct measures of {t̄nt }N  n=1 and {t̃n0 nt }n=1,n0 =1 (which enters the market potential M Pnt ), we need
information on the share of total sales generated in state n that accrue to state n0 . Annual data on trade flows
across U.S. states does not exist. To overcome this data limitation, we set export shares in any period t equal to the
average of the recorded export shares for the years 1993 and 1997, i.e., sint = 0.5 × (sin,1993 + sin,1997 ) . We also use
the same information on export shares to construct a proxy for the term {τn0 nt }N,N    n=1,n0 =1 entering the expression for
                                                 ζ
{M Pnt }Nn=1 . Specifically, we set τ 0
                                     n nt = dist n0 n , where ζ = 0.8/(σ − 1) and 0.8 is the point estimate of the elasticity
of cross-state export shares with respect to distance, controlling for year, exporter and importer fixed effects.
     We also need information on total state expenditures {Pnt Qnt }N                                      N
                                                                           n=1 to a measure for {M Pnt }n=1 . Since expen-
ditures are not observed in every year, we follow the predictions of the model and construct a proxy for Pnt Qnt for
every state nas a function of state n’s GDP by combining (A.7), (A.12), and (A.22) to obtain

                                         (σ − 1) (1 − βn γn ) + ant + tln       σ
                             Pnt Qnt =                                                   GDPnt ,                      (A.57)
                                                     σ − txn              γn (σ − 1) + 1

where ant ≡ bn (Π + R + tcorp
                           f ed Π̃)(Π̃n )
                                         −1
                                            . State GDP is observed in every year, but ant is not. Hence, to compute a
yearly measure of Pnt Qnt , we set its value to that observed in the calibration: ant = an,2007 for all t.4


D.3      Construction of Instrument for Market Potential
                                   ∗
    We define the instrument M Pnt   as a variable that has a similar structure to market potential M Pnt in (41) but
that differs from it in that we substitute the components Ent , Pnt , and t̃n0 nt that might potentially be correlated
                                                                                    ∗    ∗
      M
with νnt  with functions of exogenous covariates that we respectively denote as Ent   , Pnt , and t̃∗n0 nt :
                                                                                                 1−σ
                                        ∗
                                               X                      τn0 nt    σ           σ
                                     M Pnt =            En∗ 0 t                                          .            (A.58)
                                                                      Pn∗0 t σ − t̃∗n0 nt σ − 1
                                               n0 6=n

                                                                              ∗     ∗
To implement this expression, we need to construct measures of the variables Ent , Pnt , and t̃∗n0 nt . We construct Ent
                                                                                                                      ∗

using (A.57) with lagged GDP instead of period t0 s GDP:

                              ∗      (σ − 1) (1 − βn γn ) + ant + tln       σ
                             Ent =                                                   GDPn,t−1
                                                 σ − txn              γn (σ − 1) + 1
         ∗
We set Pn,t = 1 + tcn,t . We construct t̃∗n0 nt using the expression for t̃ni in (24) evaluated at hypothetical export shares
defined as relative inverse log distances:


    3
      Projecting the decadal data on rental prices rnt on wages and local price indices, wnt and Pnt , and using the
projection estimates in combination with annual data on wnt and Pnt to compute predicted rental prices, r̂nt , and
                               1−βn βn γn 1−γn
predicted unit costs, cnt = (wnt    r̂nt ) Pnt , produces similar estimates of the structural parameters εF and αF .
    4
      Using an alternate definition of Pnt Qnt , i.e., Pnt Qnt = constant*GDPnt where the constant is an OLS estimate
of the derivative of total expenditures with respect to GDP in those years in which we observe both components,
yields very similar results.


                                                                        15
                           ln(distin )−1                                                      1
              s∗int = P                 −1 + 1
                                                 ∀t, i 6= n    and      s∗iit = P                             ∀t.
                        i6=n ln(distin )                                           i6=n   ln(distin )−1 + 1


D.4     Robustness Checks: Labor Supply
    This section presents a series of robustness checks that address a number of potential concerns about our in-
strument choice and labor supply specification. Table A.6 presents GMM estimates for structural parameters when
government spending is measured using actual, as opposed to model-based, tax revenue. Table A.7 reports estimates
from a specification in which we use a wage Bartik instrument instead of a payroll Bartik instrument. In Table A.8
we estimate structural parameters in the case of no unobserved worker heterogeneity. In Table A.9 we ignore the
intensive margin of labor supply.
    First, Table A.6 reports GMM estimates for structural parameters of the labor supply equation when government
spending R̃nt is measured using actual, as opposed to model-based, tax revenue.
    Second, Table A.7 reports GMM estimates that differ from the baseline ones in Section 6.2 in that Z B
                                                                                                        nt contains
a wage Bartik instrument instead of a payroll Bartik instrument:
                                                     X Lkn,1974 wkt − wk,t−10
                                        BtkWnt =                              ,
                                                       Ln,1974     wk,t−10
                                                      k

where w denotes real hourly wages.
    Third, we consider a specification in which we do not account for unobserved worker heterogeneity. Specifically,
Table A.8 shows GMM estimates from the following model:

                                  ln Lnt = a0,n ln ỹnt + b0,n ln R̃nt + ψtL + ξnL + νnt
                                                                                      L
                                                                                         ,

where the shape parameter of the distribution of efficiency units, ζn, is set to 1 and, as a consequence, the hourly
wage adjusted for efficiency units is equal to the raw wage observed in the Current Population Survey (CPS).
    Finally, Table A.9 reports worker parameter estimates from a specification in which we do not account for the
intensive margin of labor supply. This implies that real after-tax earnings are defined as:

                                                      aynt    1             y
                                                                      z 1−bnt
                                           ỹnt ≡                hnt wnt       .
                                                    1 + tcnt Pnt




                                                              16
                   Table A.6: GMM Estimates of Worker Parameters: Tax Revenue Robustness

                                                                      εW                  αW
                Instruments     Restrictions on αW,n
                                                              χW = 0 χW = 1        χW = 0 χW = 1
                    Z Tnt       αW,n = αW                     1.23***    1.96**      .3**     .3**
                                                                (.33)      (.96)    (.12)    (.12)
                    ZB
                     nt         αW,n = αW                     1.81***    3.54**     .27**    .27**
                                                                (.48)     (1.78)    (.12)    (.12)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt   αW,n = αW                     1.26*** 1.81***       .24**    .24**
                                                                (.28)      (.69)    (.11)    (.11)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt   αW,n =    Rn
                                         GDPn
                                                               .72***     1.4***
                                                                (.23)      (.33)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt
                                                  Rn
                                αW = 0.04 = Mean GDP n
                                                               1.1***    1.15***
                                                                (.31)      (.34)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt   αW = 0                        1.03*** 1.03***
                                                                 (.3)       (.3)

Notes: This table shows the GMM estimates for structural parameters entering the labor mobility equation (33).
The data are at the state-year level. Each column has 712 observations. Every specification includes state and
year fixed effects. Observations are weighted using state population. The instrument vectors used to compute the
estimates in each row are indicated under the heading “Instruments”. Similarly, restrictions on αW,n are described
under the heading “Restrictions on αW,n ”. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.


             Table A.7: GMM Estimates of Worker Parameters: Labor Market Bartik IV Robustness

                                                                      εW                  αW
                Instruments     Restrictions on αW,n
                                                              χW = 0 χW = 1        χW = 0 χW = 1
                    Z Tnt       αW,n = αW                     1.42***    2.1***    .23***    .23***
                                                                (.36)       (.8)    (.07)     (.07)
                    ZB
                     nt         αW,n = αW                       .86*       1.05     .21*      .21*
                                                                (.47)      (.65)    (.13)     (.13)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt   αW,n = αW                     1.17*** 1.47***      .18***    .18***
                                                                (.31)       (.5)    (.07)     (.07)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt   αW,n =    Rn
                                         GDPn
                                                                .47*      1.3***
                                                                (.25)      (.33)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt
                                                  Rn
                                αW = 0.04 = Mean GDP n
                                                               .99***    1.03***
                                                                 (.3)      (.32)
                 Z Tnt , Z B
                           nt   αW = 0                        .83***     .83***
                                                                (.27)      (.27)

Notes: This table shows the GMM estimates for structural parameters entering the labor mobility equation (33).
The data are at the state-year level. Each column has 712 observations. Every specification includes state and
year fixed effects. Observations are weighted using state population. The instrument vectors used to compute the
estimates in each row are indicated under the heading “Instruments”. Similarly, restrictions on αW,n are described
under the heading “Restrictions on αW,n ”. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                         17
            Table A.8: GMM Estimates of Worker Parameters: No Unobserved Worker Heterogeneity

                                                                       εW                  αW
                Instruments      Restrictions on αW,n
                                                               χW = 0 χW = 1        χW = 0 χW = 1
                     Z Tnt       αW,n = αW                     1.42*** 2.09***      .23***    .23***
                                                                 (.36)     (.79)     (.07)     (.07)
                     ZB
                      nt         αW,n = αW                     1.79***    2.25**     .11*      .11*
                                                                 (.63)     (.93)     (.06)     (.06)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt   αW,n = αW                     1.35*** 1.72***      .16***    .16***
                                                                  (.3)     (.52)     (.06)     (.06)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt   αW,n =    Rn
                                          GDPn
                                                                .74***    1.48***
                                                                 (.23)     (.33)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt
                                                   Rn
                                 αW = 0.04 = Mean GDP n
                                                               1.19*** 1.25***
                                                                 (.32)     (.35)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt   αW = 0                        1.04*** 1.04***
                                                                  (.3)      (.3)

Notes: This table shows the GMM estimates for structural parameters entering the labor mobility equation (33)
when ln AS            z
          n = 0 and wn = wn
                            CP S
                                 , i.e., there is no unobserved worker heterogeneity. The data are at the state-year
level. Each column has 712 observations. Every specification includes state and year fixed effects. Observations are
weighted using state population. The instrument vectors used to compute the estimates in each row are indicated
under the heading “Instruments”. Similarly, restrictions on αW,n are described under the heading “Restrictions on
αW,n ”. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


             Table A.9: GMM Estimates of Worker Parameters: No Intensive Margin of Labor Supply

                                                                       εW                  αW
                Instruments      Restrictions on αW,n
                                                               χW = 0 χW = 1        χW = 0 χW = 1
                     Z Tnt       αW,n = αW                     1.48*** 2.24***      .23***    .23***
                                                                 (.37)     (.86)     (.06)     (.06)
                     ZB
                      nt         αW,n = αW                     1.81***     2.3**     .12*      .12*
                                                                 (.64)     (.95)     (.06)     (.06)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt   αW,n = αW                     1.39***    1.8***    .16***    .16***
                                                                 (.31)     (.54)     (.06)     (.06)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt   αW,n =    Rn
                                          GDPn
                                                                 .8***    1.39***
                                                                 (.25)     (.29)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt
                                                   Rn
                                 αW = 0.04 = Mean GDP n
                                                                1.2***    1.26***
                                                                 (.32)     (.36)
                  Z Tnt , Z B
                            nt   αW = 0                        1.03*** 1.03***
                                                                  (.3)      (.3)

Notes: This table shows the GMM estimates for structural parameters entering the labor mobility equation (33)
when η → 0, i.e., the labor supply has no intensive margin responses. The data are at the state-year level. Each
column has 712 observations. Every specification includes state and year fixed effects. Observations are weighted
using state population. The instrument vectors used to compute the estimates in each row are indicated under the
heading “Instruments”. Similarly, restrictions on αW,n are described under the heading “Restrictions on αW,n ”.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          18
D.5      Robustness Checks: Firm Mobility
    Table A.10 presents a robustness check for the firm mobility equation. Using the baseline model in Section 6.2,
we measure government spending R̃nt using model-based, as opposed to actual, tax revenue.

                     Table A.10: GMM Estimates of Firm Parameters: Tax Revenue Robustness

                                                                           εF                    αF
                  Instruments      Restrictions on αF
                                                                 χF = 0         χF = 1    χF = 0 χF = 1
                       Z Tnt       None                          2.5***         2.15***    -.06*    -.06*
                                                                  (.28)           (.27)    (.04)    (.04)
                       ZB
                        nt         None                          2.74***        2.66***     -.01     -.01
                                                                  (.32)           (.33)    (.03)    (.03)
                    Z Tnt , Z B
                              nt   None                          2.46***         2.3***     -.03     -.03
                                                                  (.26)           (.27)    (.03)    (.03)
                    Z Tnt , Z B
                              nt
                                                     Rn
                                   αF = 0.04 = Mean GDP n
                                                                 2.29***        2.53***
                                                                  (.25)           (.31)
                    Z Tnt , Z B
                              nt   αF = 0                        2.45***        2.45***
                                                                  (.26)           (.26)

Notes: This table shows GMM estimates for structural parameters entering the firm mobility equation (40). Data
are at the state-year level. Each column has 587 observations, which is lower than the worker estimation due to data
requirements for constructing a measure of the market potential and unit costs terms (see Appendix D.3 for details).
Every specification includes state and year fixed effects. The instrument vectors used to compute the estimates
in each row are indicated under the heading “Instruments”. Similarly, restrictions on αF are described under the
heading “Restrictions on αF ”. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



D.6      Supplemental: 2SLS Estimates of Worker Parameters
     This section presents both Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) estimates for the
auxiliary parameters a0 and a1 in (33). To implement a 2SLS estimator, we consider the simplified case in which
there is no unobserved worker heterogeneity (i.e., the case in which ln AS                     z
                                                                          n = 0 and thus wn = wn
                                                                                                     CP S
                                                                                                          ). Appendix Table
A.8 shows that the estimates in this case are nearly identical to the baseline estimates. When computing this 2SLS
estimator, we use the two instrument vectors described in Section 6.2, Z Tnt and Z B nt , first separately and then jointly.
     Table A.11 provides the estimates of the first-stage regression corresponding to the 2SLS estimation of a0 and a1 .
Column (1) shows the estimates of a regression of after-tax real wages on the instrument vector Z Tnt and state and year
fixed effects. Column (4) does the same for real government services R̃nt . The coefficients on external taxes indicate
that being “close” to high sales tax (and high sales-apportioned corporate tax) states tends to be associated with
lower after-tax real wages. Real government services tend to be lower when the state is “close” to high income tax
states. Columns (2) and (5) show the results using the Bartik instruments Z B   nt . Initial state-industry specific shares
weighted national industry-specific payroll changes and initial state-type of tax specific shares weighted national tax
revenue shocks tend to be associated with higher state earnings and government service provision. The first stage
for earnings is a bit underpowered in the Bartik IV specification, whereas the state tax revenue first stage is fairly
strong. Columns (3) and (6) show the first stage results when both sets of instruments are included. The F-statistics
of joint significance of the instruments conditional on state and year fixed effects are 8.6 in column (3) and 13.4 in
column (6). Additionally, the Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic is 9.9 and the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic is 7.8.
     As mentioned in the main text, our model predicts that OLS estimates of a0 and a1 are asymptotically biased
due to the dependence of after-tax real earnings and government spending on unobserved amenities or government
                                        L
efficiency accounted for in the term νnt  . Specifically, our model predicts that amenities in a state are negatively
correlated with its after-tax real earnings and positively correlated with its real government spending. Intuitively,
higher amenities in a state attract workers, shift out the labor supply curve, and lower wages. This increase in the
number of workers also raises the tax revenue and thus increases government spending. Our model thus predicts
that the OLS estimate of a0 is biased downwards, and the OLS estimate of a1 is biased upwards. Therefore, if our


                                                            19
                                 Table A.11: First Stage of Labor-Supply Equation

                                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)
                                            ln ỹnt                             ln R̃nt
                                 Z Tnt      ZB
                                             nt       Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                nt     Z Tnt     ZB
                                                                                  nt       Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                     nt

                 t∗x
                  nt             -0.39                  -0.40          0.80                  0.36
                                (0.25)                 (0.25)         (0.74)                (0.70)
                 t∗c
                  nt           3.28***                3.19***          0.13                   0.37
                                (0.55)                 (0.55)         (1.93)                (1.77)
                 t∗y
                  nt              0.48                  0.53         -8.11***              -6.40***
                                (0.45)                 (0.46)         (1.40)                (1.37)
                 BtkPnt                    0.06**     0.06**                      0.01       -0.01
                                           (0.03)      (0.02)                    (0.07)     (0.07)
                 BtkT Rnt                   -0.03       -0.01                   1.05***    0.90***
                                           (0.04)      (0.04)                    (0.19)     (0.20)
                 R-squared      0.946      0.944       0.947          0.992      0.992       0.993
                 F-stat         12.1         3.4         8.6          12.6        15.3       13.4

Notes: This table shows first-stage estimates for the labor mobility equation (33) when ln AS              z
                                                                                             n = 0 and wn = wn
                                                                                                                CP S
                                                                                                                     ,
i.e., there is no unobserved worker heterogeneity. The dependent variables are after-tax real earnings and real
government expenditures in columns 1-3 and 4-6, respectively. Data are at the state-year level. Every specification
includes state and year fixed effects. Each column has 712 observations. F-statistics refer to specifications that do
not control for state and year dummies. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

instrument vectors were to be valid, we should should obtain 2SLS estimates of a0 and a1 that are, respectively,
higher and lower than their OLS counterparts.
     Table A.12 presents OLS and 2SLS estimates of a0 and a1 . Column (1) shows the OLS estimates. Columns
(2)-(4) show the 2SLS estimates. Compared to the 2SLS estimates, the OLS estimates imply a lower elasticity of
labor supply with respect to after-tax real earnings and a larger one with respect to real government spending. This
difference between the OLS and the 2SLS estimates is consistent with our model’s predictions. In addition, the 2SLS
estimates that rely on different instrument vectors are quite similar. The implications of these reduced-form estimates
of a0 and a1 for our structural parameters are shown at the bottom of the table.




                                                           20
                        Table A.12: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Local Labor Supply Parameters

                                                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                          OLS         2SLS        2SLS         2SLS
                                                                      Z Tnt        ZB
                                                                                    nt       Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                       nt

                          ln ỹnt                       0.28***     1.36***      1.58***      1.35***
                                                         (0.06)      (0.34)       (0.61)       (0.30)
                          ln R̃nt                       0.44***     0.32***       0.20*        0.23**
                                                         (0.03)      (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.10)
                          Structural Parameters
                          εW for χW = 0                  .72***     1.67***      1.79***      1.59***
                                                          (.07)      (.39)        (.63)        (.34)
                          εW for χW = 1                 1.28***     2.45***      2.25**       2.07***
                                                          (.17)       (.9)        (.93)        (.61)
                          αW                            0.60***     0.19***       0.11*       0.15***
                                                          (.06)      (.06)        (.06)        (.05)

Notes: This table shows TSLS estimates for the labor mobility equation (33) when ln AS               z
                                                                                         n = 0 and wn = wn
                                                                                                           CP S
                                                                                                                , i.e.,
there is no unobserved worker heterogeneity. The data are at the state-year level. Each column has 712 observations.
The Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic is 9.9 and the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic is 7.8 for the 2SLS specification
in column (4). Every specification includes state and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses
and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


D.7      Supplemental: 2SLS Estimates of Firm Parameters
      This section presents both OLS and 2SLS estimates of the auxiliary parameters b0 , b1 , and b2 in equation (40).
When computing 2SLS estimates, we instrument for after-tax market potential, unit costs, and real government
                                                                                      ∗x ∗y
services using either the instrument vector of external tax rates Z Tnt = (t∗c                          ∗
                                                                                nt , tnt , tnt ) and M Pnt , the vector of Bartik
                 B                                   ∗
instruments Z nt ≡ (BtkPnt , BtkTRnt ) and M Pnt , or all of these instruments combined.
      As mentioned in the main text, our model predicts that OLS estimates of b0 , b1 , and b2 are asymptotically
biased due to the dependence of after-tax market potential, costs, and government spending in state n and year t on
unobserved productivity or government efficiency in the same state and year, which are accounted for in the term
  M
νnt .
      Table A.13 provides the estimates of the first-stage regression corresponding to the 2SLS estimation of b0 , b1 ,
and b2 . The table shows how after-tax market potential, unit costs, and real government spending relate to the
instruments. Column (1) shows the estimates of a regression of after-tax market potential on the instrument vector
Z Tnt , the leave-out market potential term, and state and year fixed effects. Column (2) replaces with Z B               nt , and
column (3) uses both instrument vectors. These three columns show that the leave-out market potential term is
highly correlated with after-tax market potential. Columns (4)-(6) show similar specifications for unit costs, which
tend to be lower when the state is close to high sales tax and low market potential neighbors. Columns (7)-(9) show
similar results for real tax revenues, which tend to be high when leave-out market potential is high and when the
that state’s main tax revenue source is high nationally.
      To increase power and mimic the variation used to estimate εF in those cases in which we calibrate the value of
αF , Table A.14 reports first-stage estimates for the combinations of after-tax market potential, unit costs, and real
government spending used to identify εF in these cases. Specifically, in the case in which we assume that αF = 0.04,
we can write the right hand side of equation (40) as b0 × RHSnt , where RHSnt ≡ ln((1 − t̄nt )M Pnt ) − (σ − 1) ln cnt +
0.05(σ − 1) ln R̃nt , and σ is calibrated to equal 4. Similarly, in the case in which we assume that αF = 0, we can write
the right-hand side of equation (40) as b0 × RHSnt , where RHSnt ≡ ln((1 − t̄nt )M Pnt ) − (σ − 1) ln cnt . Columns
(1)-(3) and (4)-(6) report the first stage estimates for RHSnt for these two possible calibrations of the parameter αF ,
respectively. The composite term tends to be positively correlated with nearby state tax rates and leave-out market
potential.



                                                               21
                                       Table A.13: First Stage of Firm-Location Equation

                 (1)           (2)            (3)                (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)               (8)          (9)
                        ln((1 − t̄nt )M Pnt )                                   ln cnt                                             ln R̃nt
                Z Tnt          ZB
                                nt           Z Tnt , Z B
                                                       nt       Z Tnt            ZB
                                                                                  nt         Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                       nt         Z Tnt             ZB
                                                                                                                                     nt      Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                                                                       nt

t∗x
 nt           2.30**                            2.34**          0.31                           0.30              -1.02                        -1.10*
               (0.96)                           (0.96)         (0.22)                         (0.22)            (0.64)                        (0.63)
t∗y
 nt           3.39**                            3.26**          0.17                           0.21              -1.24                         -0.94
               (1.59)                           (1.62)         (0.41)                         (0.42)            (1.52)                        (1.45)
t∗c
 nt             0.60                             0.60         -1.32***                       -1.31***             1.79                          1.85
               (1.97)                           (1.98)         (0.46)                         (0.46)            (1.65)                        (1.65)
ln M P!n,t    2.72***        2.48***           2.72***        0.26***         0.28***        0.26***           0.90***           0.93***     0.91***
               (0.40)         (0.40)            (0.40)         (0.08)          (0.08)         (0.08)            (0.26)            (0.26)      (0.26)
BtkWnt                          0.01             0.01                           0.00           0.00                                0.00        0.00
                              (0.01)            (0.01)                         (0.00)         (0.00)                              (0.01)      (0.01)
BtkT Rnt                       -0.10             -0.09                          0.03           0.03                                0.19         0.20
                              (0.18)            (0.17)                         (0.06)         (0.06)                              (0.16)      (0.15)

R-squared      0.996          0.996             0.996           0.993           0.993            0.993           0.995             0.995       0.995
F-stat          12.6          13.5               8.7             7.7             4.6              5.1             4.7               4.7         3.3

Notes: This table shows first stage estimates for the firm mobility equation (40). The dependent variables are
after-tax market potential in columns 1-3, unit cost in columns 4-6, and real government expenditures in columns
7-9. The data are at the state-year level. Every specification includes state and year fixed effects. Each row has
587 observations. Observations are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                       Table A.14: First Stage of Firm-Location Equation

                                       (1)          (2)         (3)                       (4)         (5)        (6)
                                               RHS with αF = .04                                 RHS with αF = 0
                                       Z Tnt            ZB
                                                         nt         Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                              nt         Z Tnt           ZB
                                                                                                          nt              Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                                                    nt

                 t∗x
                  nt                  1.25**                            1.31**         1.37***                            1.44***
                                      (0.57)                            (0.57)          (0.53)                             (0.53)
                 t∗y
                  nt                  2.74**                            2.52**         2.88***                             2.63**
                                      (1.11)                            (1.12)          (1.08)                             (1.08)
                 t∗c
                  nt                 4.79***                           4.76***         4.57***                            4.53***
                                      (1.52)                            (1.53)          (1.41)                             (1.43)
                 ln M P!n,t          2.06***         1.76***           2.06***         1.95***          1.65***           1.95***
                                      (0.29)          (0.32)            (0.29)          (0.27)           (0.30)            (0.27)
                 BtkWnt                                 0.00              0.01                            0.00              0.01
                                                      (0.01)            (0.01)                           (0.01)            (0.01)
                 BtkT Rnt                              -0.16             -0.15                            -0.19             -0.17
                                                      (0.16)            (0.15)                           (0.15)            (0.14)

                 R-squared            0.996             0.995           0.996            0.995           0.995              0.995
                 F-stat               16.2               11.2            11.1            17.3             11.5               12

Notes: This table shows first stage estimates for the firm mobility equation (40). The dependent variables are two
versions of the variable RHS = ln((1 − t̄nt )M Pnt ) − (σ − 1) ln cnt + αF (σ − 1) ln R̃nt . Columns 1-3 show estimates for
the sum of after-tax market potential, (σ − 1) = 3 times unit costs, and αF × (σ − 1) = .04 × 3 times real government
expenditures (which results in common coefficients in the model). Similiarly, columns 4-6 correspond to columns 1-3
with αF = 0, so the sum is just of after-tax market potential and 3 times unit costs. Observations are weighted by
state population. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


     Table A.15 presents OLS and 2SLS estimates of b0 , b1 , and b2 . Columns (1)-(3) present OLS estimates and
(4)-(12) present 2SLS estimates. Column (1) shows that higher after-tax market potential and real government



                                                                         22
services tend to attract firms and that higher costs are unattractive. Recall that (εF , αF ) are over-identified, but
that the ratio of −b2 /b1 identifies αF . Intuitively, firm location is 0.42/0.14 = 3 times as responsive to unit costs
as to real government spending, and αF = 1/3 = .34 reflects the inverse of this relative responsiveness. Columns
(2) and (3) show the OLS estimate of b0 in the cases in which we either assume that αF is equal to the cross-state
average Rn /GDPn or we set it to 0; the resulting estimate of b0 is similar to that in column (1). Our model predicts
that these OLS estimates are asymptotically biased estimates of the parameters b0 , b1 , and b2 , the reason being that
after-tax market potential, production costs and real government services are likely correlated with unobserved state
productivity and government efficiency.
     Column (4) in Table A.15 shows that the 2SLS estimates are larger than the OLS estimates for the coefficients
on after-tax market potential and real government services and smaller than the corresponding OLS estimate for
the coefficient on unit costs. The coefficient on real government services is estimated imprecisely: this shows that
the identification of the structural parameters εF and αF in our GMM estimation approach comes mainly from the
auxiliary parameters b0 and b1 . Furthermore, as columns (5) and (6) illustrate, conditional on calibrated values of
αF , the 2SLS estimate of parameter εF is estimated with a high degree of precision. Specifically, columns (11)-(12)
show an estimate of 0.7 for the 2SLS estimate of the parameter b0 . Given that b0 ≡ (εF / (σ − 1)) / (1 + χF αF εF ),
an estimate of 0.7 for b0 implies that ε̂F = ((σ − 1)(b̂0 ))/(1 − χF αF (σ − 1)) = (3 × .7)/(1 − .7 × .04 × 3) = 2.29. This
estimate of ε̂F = 2.29 is precise. Similarly, the 2SLS estimate of ε̂F under the assumption that αF = 0 is also precisely
estimated. Moreover, the estimates in columns (11) and (12) are not affected by weak instrument problems. The
Cragg-Donald Wald F-statistic is 16.7 and the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic is 11.1 for the 2SLS specification in
column (11) and 17.6 and 12.0, respectively, for the specification in column (12).




                                                            23
                                                      Table A.15: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of Firm-Location Parameters

                                  (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)           (11)           (12)
                                  OLS         OLS         OLS         2SLS        2SLS        2SLS       2SLS       2SLS       2SLS         2SLS           2SLS           2SLS
                                                                      Z Tnt       Z Tnt       Z Tnt      ZB
                                                                                                          nt        ZB
                                                                                                                     nt         ZB
                                                                                                                                 nt       Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                                                                    nt   Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                                                                                   nt   Z Tnt , Z B
                                                                                                                                                                                  nt



     ln(1 − t̄nt )M Pnt         0.34***                             0.78***                              0.25                             0.71***
                                  (0.04)                             (0.14)                             (0.82)                             (0.13)
     ln cnt                     -0.42***                            -3.00***                              4.80                            -2.64***
                                  (0.11)                             (0.72)                             (7.64)                             (0.71)
     ln R̃nt                     0.14***                              0.01                               -0.91                              0.13
                                  (0.04)                             (0.26)                             (1.82)                             (0.22)
     RHS with αF = .04                      0.39***                              0.69***                          0.62***                                0.68***
                                             (0.03)                               (0.07)                           (0.08)                                 (0.07)
     RHS with αF = 0                                    0.40***                             0.72***                           0.65***                                   0.70***
                                                         (0.03)                              (0.07)                            (0.09)                                    (0.08)
     Structural Parameters
     εF for χF = 0              1.03***                             2.33***                               .75                              2.12***
                                  (.11)                              (.41)                              (2.46)                              (.38)
     εF for χF = 1              1.59***                             2.34***                               .88                              2.28***
24




                                  (.26)                              (.33)                              (3.58)                              (.29)
     αF                          0.34**                               0.00                               0.19                                .05
                                  (.17)                              (.09)                               (.35)                              (.09)

     Notes: This table shows OLS and 2SLS estimates. The dependent variable in each column is log of the number of establishments ln Mnt . The data are at the
     state-year level. Each column has 587 observations. The dependent variables are after-tax market potential, unit cost, and real government expenditures. RHS is
     ln((1 − t̄nt )M Pnt ) − (σ − 1) ln cnt + αF (σ − 1) ln R̃nt . Every specification includes state and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and ***
     p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
D.8      Supplemental: Dynamic Panel Data Elasticities
     The model described in Section 4 is a static model, and thus assumes that workers and firms can move across
locations freely, without any need to pay a fixed costs of moving. Consequently, the equilibrium equations used to
estimate the structural elasticities of labor and firm mobility with respect to changes in taxes, economic variables and
public spending (i.e. (33) and (40) in the main text) predict that the share of workers and firms located in each state
in any given year t depends exclusively on the period t values of different covariates. In a more general model with
fixed costs of mobility, the population or firm share in a location in a period t will depend on the corresponding share
in every location in period t − 1. Furthermore, in this general model, a permanent change in any of the economic
determinants of workers’ and firms’ locations in a period t will have a different impact on the short run (i.e. in the
same period t) and on the long run (i.e., infinite periods ahead).
     In this Appendix section, we explore how the static panel data elasticities that we estimate following the procedure
in Section 6.2 compare to the short-run and long-run elasticities generated by a dynamic panel data model with
multiple locations. Specifically, for a set of locations i = 1, . . . , 50 and time periods t = 1, . . . , 1000, we simulate the
following statistical model:
                                                                             X
                                    lit = βρl lit−1 + (1 − β)ρl (N − 1)−1           lnt−1 + xit + εl,it                 (A.59)
                                                                             n6=i

                                   xit = α0,i + ρx xit−1 + εx,it                                                        (A.60)
                                  εl,it ∼ N(0, 1)      and independent across i and t,
                                  εx,it ∼ N(0, 1)      and independent across i and t,                                  (A.61)
                                  α0,i ∼ N(0, 1)       and independent across i,                                        (A.62)
                             (li0 , xi0 ) = (0, 0).                                                                     (A.63)

    According to (A.59), (log) population (or firms or workers) in a location i in a period t, lit , depends both on the
population in every state in period t − 1, {lit−1 }50
                                                   i=1 , and on the regressor xit . The coefficient on xit is assumed to
be equal to one. As reflected in (A.59), the parameter vector ρl indicates the degree to which the (log) population
in any location i is affected by the distribution of population across locations in period t − 1. Specifically, if ρl = 0,
then(A.59) is static and, thus, there is no serial correlation in population. The opposite is true if ρl is close to
one. Given a value of ρl , the parameter β indicates the degree to which population in a location i is affected by
past population in the same location i. If β = 1, equation (A.59) implies there is no migration across regions. The
opposite is true when β is equal to zero.
    Equation (A.60) indicates the time evolution of xit . Specifically, the parameter ρx modulates the degree of
persistence in xit . The variable xit plays the role of after-tax real wages or real government spending in the labor
mobility equation in (33), and the role of market potential, unit cost or real government spending in the firm mobility
equation in (40).
    For each combination of the following parameter values

                                                      ρl ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9},                                          (A.64)
                                                      ρx ∈ {0.5, 0.9},                                                  (A.65)
                                                      β ∈ {0.5, 0.9},                                                   (A.66)

we simulate 1000 different longitudinal datasets using (A.59) to (A.63).
     For each of the 1000 simulated datasets corresponding to a particular parameter vector (ρl , ρx , β), we form
an estimation sample by keeping the information on the simulated values of lit and xit for the last 25 periods we
simulate and for all the 50 locations in our simulated dataset. Our choice of the number of periods and locations in
the simulated estimation sample aims to replicate the dimensions of the sample that we use for estimation in Section
6.2. By keeping only the last 25 periods of the simulated dataset, we make sure that the observations that we keep
in our simulated estimation sample are unaffected by the initial conditions (li0 , xi0 ).
     For each of the 1000 generated estimation samples corresponding to a particular parameter vector (ρl , ρx , β), we


                                                                25
use Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) to estimate a static linear panel data model analogous to that in(33) and (40):

                                                 lit = γi + γt + γl xit + uit ,

where γi denotes a location i fixed effect, γt denotes a period t fixed effect, and uit is an unobserved residual.
    For each parameter vector (ρl , ρx , β) that we explore in our simulation, Table A.16 reports: (a) the mean and
standard deviation of the OLS estimates γ̂l that we obtain in our 1000 generated estimation samples; (b) the true
short-run and long-run impact on the dependent variable li for a permanent change in one unit in xi .

                                      Table A.16: Elasticity Simulation Estimates


                                             ρl = 0                                              ρl = 0.1
                                 ρx = 0.5              ρx = 0.9                        ρx = 0.5            ρx = 0.9
                            β = 0.5    β = 0.9    β = 0.5    β = 0.9              β = 0.5    β = 0.9   β = 0.5   β = 0.9
    γ̂¯l                      1            1            1            1             1.02       1.04      1.04      1.08
    s.d.(γ̂l )              (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.02)
    Long-Run Impact            1           1            1            1             1.05      1.10       1.05      1.10
    Short-Run Impact           1           1            1            1              1          1         1          1

                                            ρl = 0.5                                             ρl = 0.9
                                 ρx = 0.5              ρx = 0.9                        ρx = 0.5            ρx = 0.9
                            β = 0.5    β = 0.9    β = 0.5    β = 0.9              β = 0.5    β = 0.9   β = 0.5   β = 0.9
    γ̂¯l                     1.13        1.25         1.27          1.62           1.25       1.48      1.65      3.23
    s.d.(γ̂l )              (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.03)        (0.07)         (0.08)     (0.23)    (0.35)    (0.66)
    Long-Run Impact          1.34        1.82          1.34        1.82            1.95      5.31       1.95      5.31
    Short-Run Impact           1           1            1            1              1          1         1          1




    The results in Table A.16 illustrate that, no matter the value of the parameters ρl , ρx , and β, our estimates tend
to be between the short-run and the long-run impact parameters. Furthermore, the quantitative difference between
our point estimates and the true long-run impact increases in the value of the three parameters, reaching its maximum
when ρl = ρx = β = 0.9.
    The OLS estimate of the coefficient of each of the regressors entering either the labor mobility or the firm mobility
equations on their own respective lag is always close to 0.9. Therefore, the relevant value of ρx is close to 0.9. It is
reasonable to expect that the population of a state in a year t depends significantly more on the lag population of the
same state than on the lag population in other states, so the actual value of β is probably larger or equal than 0.5.
Similarly, the actual value of the parameter ρl is also likely larger or equal than 0.5, reflecting a significant amount of
persistence in each state’s population. Looking at the relevant cells of Table \ref{tab: simul}, one can conclude that,
given the value of ρx close to 0.9: (a) if either β or ρl are close to 0.5, then the estimate γ̂l will likely be very close
to the long-run impact of the regressor on the dependent variable; (b) only if both β and ρl are very close to 0.9, the
estimate γ̂l will likely be half-way between the short-run and the long-run impact of the regressor on the dependent
variable.




                                                              26
D.9     Comparison with Existing Estimates
     Researchers have previously estimated regressions similar to (33) and (40) using sources of variation different
from ours to identify the labor and firm mobility elasticities. Table A.17 compares our estimates of εW , αW , εF , and
αF to those that we would have constructed if we had used estimates of the elasticity of labor and firms with respect
to after-tax wages and public expenditure from six recent studies. The parameter that is most often estimated is the
elasticity of labor with respect to real wages; this previous literature implies estimates of εW with mean value of 1.81.
Our numbers of εW = 1.36 (χW = 0) and εW = 1.73 (χW = 1) reported in Table 1 are within the range of these
estimates. Our estimate of εF is between the firm-mobility parameters reported in Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016)
and Giroud and Rauh (2015).
     Concerning αW and αF , there is substantial evidence that public expenditures have amenity and productivity
value for workers and firms, respectively, which is consistent with αW > 0 and αF > 0. Some studies infer positive
amenity value for government spending from land rents,5 while others focus on the productivity effects of large
investment projects.6 However, very few papers estimate specifications similar to (33) and (40). The estimates of the
effects of variation in federal spending at the local level from Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016) imply αF = 0.10
and αW = 0.26.
     Of course, all these comparisons are imperfect due to differences in the source of variation, geography, and
time dimension; for example, all of these studies use smaller geographic units than states. Additionally, not all
specifications include the same covariates as in (33) and (40). These differences notwithstanding, our structural
parameters are close to those in the literature.




    5
      E.g., Bradbury et al. (2001) show that local areas in Massachusetts with lower increases in government spending
had lower house prices, and Cellini et al. (2010) show that public infrastructure spending on school facilities raised
local housing values in California. Their estimates imply a willingness to pay $1.50 or more for each dollar of capital
spending. Chay and Greenstone (2005) and Black (1999) also provide evidence of amenity value from government
regulations on air quality and from school quality, respectively.
    6
      Kline and Moretti (2014) find that infrastructure investments in by the Tennessee Valley Authority resulted in
large and direct productivity increases, yielding benefits that exceeded the costs of the program. Fernald (1999) also
provides evidence that road-building increases productivity, especially in vehicle-intensive industries. Haughwout
(2002) shows evidence from a large sample of U.S. cities that “public capital provides significant productivity and
consumption benefits” for both firms and workers.


                                                           27
                                                        Table A.17: Structural Parameters Implied by Similar Studies

                                                                                        Implied Values of             Source of Variation            Level of Variation
      Paper                                               Estimates
                                                                                   εW      αW     εF        αF             (Shock)
      Bound and Holzer (2000)                             a0 = 1.207              1.16                                     Bartik                      MSA (1980’s)
      Notowidigdo (2013)                                  a0 = 3.478              2.49                                     Bartik                    MSA (1980-2000)
                                                          a0 = 1.589              1.45
      Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016)                                                                       Bartik and Census Instrument   County Group (1980-2009)
                                               a0 = 2.9, a1 = 1.02, b1 = 0.2610   1.94     0.26          0.10
      Diamond (2016)                                     a0 = 3.1011              2.32                                     Bartik                    MSA (1980-2000)
                                                         a0 = 1.2812              1.23                                     Bartik
      Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016)                                                                                                          County Group (1980-2009)
                                                    a0 = 2.63, b0 = 3.3513        2.09            5.26                  Business Tax
      Giroud and Rauh (2015)                             b0 = 0.4014                              1.31                  Corporate Tax             Firm-Level (1977-2011)


     Notes: This table reports the values of our structural parameters implied by estimates of specifications similar to (33) and (40) found in the previous literature.
     Whenever needed, we assume the values used in our baseline parametrization of σ = 4, χW = 1, χF = 1, αF = 0.03, and αW = 0.16 in recovering structural
     parameters. When the effects are only reported separately for skilled and unskilled workers we use a share of skilled workers of 33% to average the effects.
28




         7
           For both college and non-college groups, we first construct a0 from Table 3 in Bound and Holzer (2000) by taking the ratio of the effects on Population and
     Total Hours. We then average the effect by the college share above.
         8
           This parameter comes from Table 3 in Notowidigdo (2013) and results from taking the ratio of columns (1) and (6). Note that these specifications also control
     for quadratic effects. We employ marginal effects around 0.
         9
           This number is directly reported in Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016) in Table 9.
        10
           The parameters a0 and a1 come from Table 10 in Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016) by manipulating the structural parameters as follows: a0 = 1/σ i
     and a0 = ψ i /σ i for each skill group. The parameter b1 comes from using the effect of spending on firm location and by noting that this effect is equal to
                                       ∂W i                                                                           ∂W i
     1 − (κGS
            i  + (1 − κGS                                                                                 i GS
                        i )/(1 − αi )) ∂F in Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016). The parameters α ,κi , and ∂F are reported in Tables 9 and 10 by skill group in
     Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2016). We then average these effects by the college share above.
        11
           Diamond (2016) reports the effect on wage on population by skill group in Table 3. We then average these effects by the college share above. Note that Diamond
     (2016) also controls for state of origin which leads to a larger effect of population on wages than in other similar papers, especially for the low skill population.
        12
           We construct a0 from Table 6, Panel (c) in Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) by taking the ratio of the effects on Population and Wages.
        13
           We construct a0 from Table 6, Panel (c) in Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) by taking the ratio of the effects on Population and Wages. b0 is reported in Table
     6, Panel (c).
        14
           Giroud and Rauh (2015) report an elasticity of number of establishment with respect to corporate taxes of 0.4.
E          Appendix to Section 7
E.1        Consumption-Equivalent Welfare Change
     The change in indirect utility v̂ in (45) follows from assuming that an individual l located in n receives utility
vn ln .
       Assume that, instead of vn ln , the indirect utility received by an individual l in n was W vn ln where W (·) is an
                                                                                                          

increasing function. We continue to assume that the ln are i.i.d normalized Fréchet, with CDF H (x) = Pr ln < x =
                                                                                                                        
    −ε
e−x . This monotone transformation does not impact the choice probabilities. As we show below, in this case the
expected indirect utility of a worker is
                                                                 Z
                                             V = E [W (v)] ≡ W (v) dH () ,                                       (A.67)
                                                                                    

where v is defined in (8) and the expectation is over the Fréchet draw . Therefore, in any counterfactual the relative
change in indirect utility is
                                                        E [W (vv̂)]
                                                   V̂ =              ,                                           (A.68)
                                                         E [W (v)]
implying that any change in private or public consumption that leads to a relative change v̂ is equivalent to the actual
welfare change experienced by workers under any monotone function W (·). For example, the counterfactual change
in welfare v̂ is equivalent to the change in welfare that would arise if the relative consumption of both the public and
the private goods were to change in every state by an amount equal to v̂ .
    To derive (A.67), by definition of V we have:
                                      XZ
                                             Pr vn0 n0 ≤ vn , ∀n0 6= n W (vn ) H 0 () d.
                                                                       
                                  V =                                                                            (A.69)
                                           n       


Since the shocks are i.i.d, we have Pr [vn0 n0 ≤ vn , ∀n0 6= n] =
                                                                                         Q
                                                                                             n0 6=n   H (cn /cn0 ). Using this expression, the defini-
tion of H (x) and the change of variable zn ≡ vn  we get:

                                          XZ                                                        −ε−1
                                                         Y              zn                        zn            1
                                    V =                         H                 W (zn ) ε                       dzn .                         (A.70)
                                           n           zn ∀n0           vn0                       vn           vn
                     Q
We also have that      ∀n0   H (zn /cn0 ) = H (zn /v) for v defined in (8). Using this property and the change of variable
Zn = zn /v we get
                                           XZ                                           −ε−1
                                                                                  Zn                v
                                     V =                    W (vZn ) ε               v                H (Zn ) dZn ,                             (A.71)
                                               n       Zn                         vn               vn

which, using the definition of H 0 (x), gives:
                                                         X  vn ε Z
                                               V =                                 W (vZn ) dH (Zn ) .                                          (A.72)
                                                            n
                                                                    v         Zn


                             (vn /v)ε = 1 gives (A.67).
                      P
Using the fact that      n



E.2        Derivation of Equation (46)
      It follows from (7) and (8) that, in any counterfactual, the first-order approximation to the change in v is:
                                                                              X
                                                                d ln v =            Ln d ln vn .                                                (A.73)

In what follows, we consider a special case with no trade costs (τin = 1 for all i, n), perfect substitutability across
varieties (σ → ∞), homogeneous firms (εF → ∞), constant labor supply (hn constant), and identical preferences
for government spending across states (αW,n = αW ). In addition, we also consider a tax structure with only state
sales and income taxes. These assumptions are more general than the restrictions in Proposition 1, in that we do
not impose non-rival public goods and we allow for dispersion in preference draws, εW < ∞, and in individual
productivity draws, ζn < ∞. In addition, we assume that state income and sales taxes are the only taxes, and that


                                                                              29
income taxes are constant. As a result, the tax distribution is characterized by the keep rate 1 − Tn = (1 − tyn )/(1 + tcn )
of each state.
     Then, because we have assumed constant intensive margin of labor supply, we have:

                                                         CnL
                                                              
                                                                                Gn
                          d ln vn = (1 − αW ) d ln                 + αW d ln       + αW (1 − χW ) d ln Ln ,           (A.74)
                                                         Ln                     Ln

where CnL is the aggregate consumption of workers. Because firms make zero profits, (A.8) implies that the payments
to capital owners are a fraction β of the GDP of state n, GDPn . Therefore, the final consumption of capital owners
is CnK = (1 − Tn ) βGDPn . In addition, under our assumptions, government spending is Gn = Tn GDPn . Combining
these last two expressions with the fact that CnW + CnK + Gn = GDPn , aggregate consumption of workers can be
written: CnL = (1 − β) (GDPn − Gn ) . This las expression in turn implies:
                                                                   GDPn         Gn
                                                 CnL   d ln         Ln
                                                                          −    GDPn
                                                                                    d ln Gn
                                                                                         Ln
                                          d ln       =                         Gn
                                                                                              .                       (A.75)
                                                 Ln                   1−      GDPn


Combining (A.73), (A.74) and (A.75), assuming αW,n = αW and from the labor market clearing condition that
P
  Ln dLn = 0 gives (46).




                                                                    30
E.3       Appendix Figures to Section 7.1

Figure A.3: The North Carolina Income Tax Cuts: Actual and Estimated Income Tax Schedules Before and After
the Reform

                                                          (a) Actual Income Tax Rates


                                  6
                   Actual State Income Tax Rate (%)
                             2    0       4




                                                      0   50                 100              150             200
                                                                Adjusted Gross Income ($1000)

                                                               Baseline (2007)        Counterfactual (2016)




                                                          (b) Model Income Tax Rates
                                  6
                   Model State Income Tax Rate (%)
                       0           2
                                  -2        4




                                                      0   50                 100              150             200
                                                                Adjusted Gross Income ($1000)

                                                               Baseline (2007)        Counterfactual (2016)




Notes: This figure plots actual and model-based income tax rates in North Carolina before and after the 2014-2016
reform.




                                                                             31
E.4     Appendix to Section 7.3

                Figure A.4: Dispersion in Federal and State Income Taxes with and without SALT




                                 .4
                                 .3
                    Kernel Density
                                 .2
                                 .1
                                 0




                                      15     18               21          24           27
                                           Federal + State Effective Tax Rate (%)

                                                  With SALT           Without SALT


Notes: This figure shows dispersion in effective tax rates when State and Local Taxes (SALT) can or cannot be
deducted from federal income. Tax rates are computed using a sample of individual tax returns from the Statistics
of Income (SOI) Public Use Files and NBER’s tax simulator TAXSIM. Individual returns with negative Adjusted
Gross Income (AGI) are dropped and the remaining observations are winsorized by their effective federal and state
income tax rate at the 1st and 99th percentiles. The figure displays the kernel density of federal and state income
tax rates in 2007.




                                                          32
                Table A.18: Income Tax Parameters and Effective Rates with and without SALT

            With SALT        Without   SALT      Rates   with SALT if AGI is      Rates without SALT if AGI is
 State
           ayn       byn      ayn        byn    25K      50K    100K    200K      25K     50K    100K    200K
 AL       1.273    0.044     1.218     0.039    14.8     18.1    22.9    25.2     14.7    17.6    21.9   24.0
 AK       1.243    0.039     1.368     0.049    13.1     16.2    20.6    22.7     12.7    16.5    22.0   24.6
 AZ       1.336    0.047     1.537     0.061    13.4     17.0    22.2    24.7     12.0    16.8    23.5   26.6
 AR       1.352    0.049     1.437     0.053    14.1     17.9    23.3    25.9     12.2    16.4    22.3   25.1
 CA       1.365    0.049     1.522     0.060    13.4     17.2    22.7    25.3     12.7    17.4    24.0   27.1
 CO       1.322    0.047     1.372     0.053    14.2     17.8    23.0    25.5     15.6    19.6    25.3   27.9
 CT       1.346    0.049     1.425     0.056    13.9     17.7    23.0    25.6     15.2    19.4    25.5   28.3
 DE       1.323    0.047     1.487     0.058    14.0     17.6    22.8    25.2     12.7    17.2    23.6   26.6
 FL       1.243    0.039     1.209     0.035    13.1     16.2    20.6    22.7     12.7    15.5    19.5   21.5
 GA       1.400    0.053     1.859     0.079    13.8     17.9    23.7    26.4     10.6    16.8    25.5   29.5
 HI       1.405    0.053     1.676     0.072    14.1     18.2    24.1    26.8     13.7    19.2    26.9   30.5
 ID       1.440    0.055     1.648     0.068    13.6     17.9    24.0    26.8     12.1    17.5    24.9   28.4
 IL       1.266    0.042     1.250     0.043    14.3     17.6    22.3    24.6     15.5    18.7    23.4   25.6
 IN       1.266    0.043     1.332     0.049    15.0     18.3    23.1    25.3     15.5    19.3    24.6   27.2
 IA       1.388    0.052     1.493     0.061    14.2     18.2    23.9    26.6     14.5    19.1    25.6   28.7
 KS       1.322    0.047     1.238     0.043    14.5     18.1    23.3    25.8     17.0    20.3    24.9   27.1
 KY       1.327    0.048     1.382     0.053    14.7     18.4    23.6    26.1     14.9    18.9    24.6   27.3
 LA       1.341    0.048     1.794     0.075    14.0     17.7    23.0    25.5     10.4    16.4    24.7   28.5
 ME       1.400    0.053     1.507     0.062    14.1     18.2    24.0    26.8     15.1    19.8    26.4   29.5
 MD       1.308    0.046     1.272     0.046    14.4     17.9    23.0    25.4     17.0    20.5    25.4   27.8
 MA       1.308    0.047     1.212     0.044    15.1     18.7    23.8    26.2     18.8    22.0    26.5   28.7
 MI       1.302    0.046     1.468     0.057    14.4     17.9    22.9    25.3     13.3    17.8    24.0   27.0
 MN       1.372    0.051     1.392     0.056    14.3     18.2    23.8    26.5     16.6    20.8    26.6   29.4
 MS       1.255    0.041     1.052     0.022    14.3     17.5    22.1    24.3     13.9    15.6    18.2   19.4
 MO       1.321    0.047     1.384     0.052    14.2     17.8    23.0    25.4     13.9    17.9    23.6   26.3
 MT       1.354    0.049     1.440     0.054    14.1     17.9    23.3    25.9     12.5    16.7    22.7   25.6
 NE       1.373    0.051     1.380     0.054    13.8     17.7    23.3    25.9     16.0    20.0    25.8   28.5
 NV       1.243    0.039     1.371     0.049    13.1     16.2    20.6    22.7     12.7    16.5    22.0   24.6
 NH       1.244    0.039     1.076     0.028    13.2     16.3    20.7    22.8     17.2    19.3    22.4   23.9
 NJ       1.307    0.045     1.214     0.041    13.8     17.3    22.4    24.8     17.0    20.1    24.5   26.7
 NM       1.462    0.056     2.053     0.088    12.5     16.8    23.0    25.9      8.4    15.5    25.1   29.6
 NY       1.361    0.050     1.361     0.054    14.3     18.1    23.6    26.2     17.1    21.1    26.7   29.4
 NC       1.309    0.047     1.384     0.053    15.2     18.8    23.9    26.4     14.7    18.7    24.4   27.1
 ND       1.305    0.045     1.349     0.048    13.5     17.0    22.0    24.4     13.5    17.3    22.6   25.2
 OH       1.316    0.046     1.317     0.048    14.1     17.7    22.8    25.2     15.2    18.8    24.0   26.5
 OK       1.418    0.054     1.625     0.069    13.7     17.9    23.8    26.6     13.6    18.8    26.2   29.6
 OR       1.370    0.052     1.449     0.059    15.4     19.4    25.0    27.7     15.9    20.3    26.6   29.5
 PA       1.298    0.045     1.388     0.053    14.4     17.9    22.9    25.3     14.8    18.8    24.5   27.3
 RI       1.356    0.049     1.419     0.056    13.8     17.6    23.0    25.6     15.0    19.2    25.2   28.1
 SC       1.327    0.047     1.353     0.048    14.1     17.7    22.9    25.4     13.2    17.0    22.4   24.9
 SD       1.243    0.039     1.216     0.038    13.1     16.2    20.6    22.7     14.7    17.6    21.9   24.0
 TN       1.244    0.039     1.222     0.037    13.2     16.3    20.7    22.8     12.8    15.7    19.9   21.9
 TX       1.243    0.039     1.381     0.049    13.1     16.2    20.6    22.7     12.0    15.8    21.3   23.9
 UT       1.347    0.049     1.339     0.048    14.3     18.1    23.5    26.0     14.0    17.7    23.0   25.5
 VT       1.454    0.055     1.679     0.072    12.8     17.1    23.2    26.1     13.5    19.0    26.7   30.3
 VA       1.334    0.048     1.382     0.054    14.4     18.1    23.4    25.9     15.8    19.8    25.6   28.3
 WA       1.243    0.039     1.307     0.045    13.1     16.2    20.6    22.7     13.6    17.1    22.1   24.5
 WV       1.317    0.047     1.350     0.049    14.8     18.4    23.5    26.0     14.2    18.0    23.4   25.9
 WI       1.345    0.049     1.346     0.051    14.6     18.4    23.8    26.4     16.1    19.9    25.4   28.1
 WY       1.243    0.039     1.356     0.050    13.1     16.2    20.6    22.7     14.2    18.1    23.5   26.1


Notes: This table shows combined federal and state income tax parameters in 2007 with and without the deduction
of State and Local Taxes (SALT) from federal taxable income. The table also shows effective tax rates for different
levels of Adjusted Gross Income (AGI). Federal taxation includes individual income taxes and the employee portion
of payroll (FICA) taxes.



                                                         33
E.5     Appendix to Section 7.4

                                         Table A.19: State Tax Rates in 1980


                                 State        tyn         tcn        tcorp
                                                                      n            txn
                                 AL          2.4           4           5          1.7
                                 AZ          2.9           4          10          3.3
                                 AR          2.5           3           6           2
                                 CA          3.1          4.8         9.6         3.2
                                 CO          2.2           3           5          1.7
                                 CT           .4          7.5         10          3.3
                                 DE          4.9           0          8.7         2.9
                                 FL            0           4           5          2.5
                                 GA          2.8           3           6           2
                                 HI          4.8           4          6.4         2.1
                                 ID          3.2           3          6.5         2.2
                                 IL          2.2           4           4          1.3
                                 IN          1.6           4           3           1
                                 IA          3.1           3          10          10
                                 KS          2.1           3          6.8         2.3
                                 KY          3.1           5          5.8         1.9
                                 LA           .8           3           8          2.7
                                 ME          2.5           5          6.9         2.3
                                 MD          3.2           5           7          2.3
                                 MA          4.6           5          9.5         4.7
                                 MI          3.4           4          2.3          .8
                                 MN          5.7           4          12           4
                                 MS          1.2           5           4          1.3
                                 MO          1.9          3.1          5          1.7
                                 MT          3.2           0          6.8         2.3
                                 NE            2           3          4.7         1.6
                                 NV            0           3           0            0
                                 NH           .4           0           8          2.7
                                 NJ          1.9           5          7.5         2.5
                                 NM          1.6          3.8          5          1.7
                                 NY          5.1           4          10           5
                                 NC            4           3           6            2
                                 ND          1.5           3          8.5         2.8
                                 OH          1.5           4           8          2.7
                                 OK          2.2           2           4          1.3
                                 OR          4.7           0          7.5         2.5
                                 PA          2.2           6         10.5         3.5
                                 RI          2.8           6           8          2.7
                                 SC          3.5           4           6           2
                                 SD            0           5           0            0
                                 TN           .4          4.5          6           2
                                 TX            0           4           0            0
                                 UT            3           4           4          1.3
                                 VT          3.1           3          7.5         2.5
                                 VA          3.1           3           6           2
                                 WA            0          4.5          0           0
                                 WV          2.5           3           6           2
                                 WI          4.4           4          7.9          4
                                 WY            0           3           0            0


Notes: This table shows state tax rates in 1980 for individual income (tyn ), general sales (tcn ), corporate (tcorp
                                                                                                                n    ), and
sales-apportioned corporate (txn ) taxes, which is the product of the statutory corporate tax rate and the state’s sales
apportionment weight.


                                                            34
                   Table A.20: State Income Tax Parameters and Effective Tax Rates in 1980

                                           State tax rates if AGI   is        Overall tax rates if AGI is
        State   an,state    bn,state
                                       25K       50K     100K       200K    25K     50K      100K     200K
        AL       1.025       0.005     2.0       2.4      3.1         3.4   14.8    18.1      22.9     25.2
        AK       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        AZ       1.078       0.008     0.2       1.0      2.2         2.7   13.4    17.0      22.2     24.7
        AR       1.092       0.011     1.2       2.1      3.6         4.3   14.1    17.9      23.3     25.9
        CA       1.102       0.011     0.3       1.3      2.7         3.5   13.4    17.2      22.7     25.3
        CO       1.066       0.008     1.3       2.0      3.2         3.7   14.2    17.8      23.0     25.5
        CT       1.087       0.010     0.9       1.8      3.2         3.9   13.9    17.7      23.0     25.6
        DE       1.067       0.008     1.0       1.7      2.9         3.4   14.0    17.6      22.8     25.2
        FL       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        GA       1.132       0.014     0.8       2.1      4.0         5.0   13.8    17.9      23.7     26.4
        HI       1.136       0.015     1.2       2.5      4.5         5.5   14.1    18.2      24.1     26.8
        ID       1.166       0.017     0.5       2.1      4.4         5.5   13.6    17.9      24.0     26.8
        IL       1.019       0.004     1.4       1.8      2.3         2.5   14.3    17.6      22.3     24.6
        IN       1.019       0.004     2.2       2.6      3.2         3.5   15.0    18.3      23.1     25.3
        IA       1.122       0.014     1.2       2.5      4.3         5.2   14.2    18.2      23.9     26.6
        KS       1.066       0.009     1.6       2.4      3.6         4.2   14.5    18.1      23.3     25.8
        KY       1.070       0.009     1.9       2.7      4.0         4.6   14.7    18.4      23.6     26.1
        LA       1.082       0.010     1.0       1.9      3.2         3.8   14.0    17.7      23.0     25.5
        ME       1.131       0.015     1.2       2.5      4.5         5.5   14.1    18.2      24.0     26.8
        MD       1.055       0.007     1.5       2.2      3.2         3.7   14.4    17.9      23.0     25.4
        MA       1.055       0.008     2.4       3.1      4.2         4.8   15.1    18.7      23.8     26.2
        MI       1.049       0.007     1.5       2.1      3.1         3.5   14.4    17.9      22.9     25.3
        MN       1.108       0.013     1.4       2.5      4.2         5.1   14.3    18.2      23.8     26.5
        MS       1.010       0.003     1.4       1.6      1.9         2.1   14.3    17.5      22.1     24.3
        MO       1.065       0.008     1.3       2.0      3.1         3.7   14.2    17.8      23.0     25.4
        MT       1.093       0.011     1.1       2.1      3.6         4.3   14.1    17.9      23.3     25.9
        NE       1.109       0.012     0.8       1.9      3.6         4.4   13.8    17.7      23.3     25.9
        NV       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        NH       1.000       0.000     0.1       0.1      0.1         0.1   13.2    16.3      20.7     22.8
        NJ       1.054       0.007     0.8       1.4      2.3         2.8   13.8    17.3      22.4     24.8
        NM       1.183       0.017     -0.8      0.8      3.1         4.3   12.5    16.8      23.0     25.9
        NY       1.099       0.012     1.3       2.4      4.0         4.7   14.3    18.1      23.6     26.2
        NC       1.055       0.009     2.5       3.2      4.4         5.0   15.2    18.8      23.9     26.4
        ND       1.052       0.006     0.5       1.0      1.8         2.2   13.5    17.0      22.0     24.4
        OH       1.061       0.008     1.2       1.9      2.9         3.4   14.1    17.7      22.8     25.2
        OK       1.146       0.016     0.7       2.1      4.2         5.2   13.7    17.9      23.8     26.6
        OR       1.107       0.014     2.7       4.0      5.8         6.7   15.4    19.4      25.0     27.7
        PA       1.046       0.007     1.5       2.1      3.0         3.5   14.4    17.9      22.9     25.3
        RI       1.095       0.011     0.8       1.7      3.2         3.9   13.8    17.6      23.0     25.6
        SC       1.071       0.009     1.1       1.9      3.0         3.6   14.1    17.7      22.9     25.4
        SD       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        TN       1.001       0.000     0.1       0.1      0.2         0.2   13.2    16.3      20.7     22.8
        TX       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        UT       1.087       0.011     1.4       2.3      3.8         4.5   14.3    18.1      23.5     26.0
        VT       1.177       0.017     -0.5      1.1      3.4         4.6   12.8    17.1      23.2     26.1
        VA       1.076       0.010     1.6       2.4      3.7         4.4   14.4    18.1      23.4     25.9
        WA       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7
        WV       1.062       0.009     1.9       2.7      3.9         4.4   14.8    18.4      23.5     26.0
        WI       1.086       0.011     1.8       2.8      4.2         4.9   14.6    18.4      23.8     26.4
        WY       1.000       0.000     0.0       0.0      0.0         0.0   13.1    16.2      20.6     22.7


Notes: This table shows state income tax parameters in 1980 as well as effective tax rates for different levels of
Adjusted Gross Income (AGI). Tax rates reported in columns 4-7 are state-only, while tax rates in columns 8-11
combine federal and state taxation. Federal taxation includes individual income taxes and the employee portion of
payroll (FICA) taxes.



                                                       35
E.6     Appendix Figures to Section 7.6

                  Figure A.5: Welfare Change and Dispersion of Tax Payments Under Free Entry




                                .9       .8
                      Welfare Change (%)
                     .5     .6  .4.7




                                              -.085         -.08          -.075        -.07         -.065          -.06
                                                      Change in Dispersion of Tax Payments Per Worker Across States

                                                                      Mean                Benchmark
                                                                      Region              Free Entry
                                                                      Division


Notes: This figure plots the change in welfare against the change in dispersion of tax liabilities per worker associated
with tax harmonization to the national, region, and division means under free entry (χF E = 1).




                                                                                 36
F     Data Sources
    In this section we describe the data used in sections 3.1, 6, and 7.


F.1     Government Finances
    • State revenue from sales, income and corporate taxes taxes (Rnc , Rny , Rncorp ): Source: U.S. Census Bureau
      – Governments Division; Dataset: Historical State Tax Collections; Variables: corporate, individual, and
      general sales taxes, which are CorpNetIncomeTaxT41, IndividualIncomeTaxT40, TotalGenSalesTaxT09. We
      also collect information from the variable TotalTaxes, which include the three types we measure as well as
      fuels taxes, select sales taxes, and a few other miscellaneous and minor sources of tax revenue.

    • State direct expenditures: Source: U.S. Census Bureau – Governments Division; Dataset: State Government
      Finances; Variable: direct expenditures.

    • Effective state individual income tax rate tyn . Source: SOI Public Use Tax Files (PUFs). Dataset construction:
      we draw individual taxpayer data from SOI Public Use Tax Files (PUFs) and use NBER’s TAXSIM to simulate
      federal and state individual income tax liabilities under each year’s tax law. We drop observations with negative
      Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) and winsorize observations by their effective state and federal tax rate at the
      1st and 99th percentile. We compute tyn as the state-year ratio of average AGI over average state income tax
      liabilities.

    • State sales tax rate tcn : Source: Book of the States; Dataset: Table 7.10 State Excise Tax Rates; Variable:
      general sales and gross receipts tax (percent).

    • State corporate tax rate and apportionment data for txn and tln : Source: Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016).

    • Effective federal corporate tax rate tcorp
                                            f ed : Source: IRS, Statistics of Income; Dataset: Corporation Income Tax
      Returns (historical); Variable: effective corporate tax rate = total income tax/ net income (less Deficit); i.e.,
      the effective rate is row 83 divided by row 77.

    • Federal individual income tax rate tyf ed : Source: NBER TAXSIM; Dataset: Marginal and Average Tax Rates
      and Elasticities for the U.S., using a fixed 1984 (but in/deflated) sample of taxpayers; Variable: average
      effective federal tax rate on income, “fed avg”, by state and year.

    • Federal payroll tax rate twfed : Source: Congressional Budget Office; Dataset: Average Federal Tax Rates in
      2007; Variable: average payroll tax rates. See Table A.2 for the average in 2007 and additional details in the
      table notes.

    • Income tax schedule parameters ayn and byn . Source: SOI Public Use Tax Files (PUFs). Dataset construction:
      we draw individual taxpayer data from SOI Public Use Tax Files (PUFs). In order to abstract from changes in
      the income distribution over time, we choose 2007 as base year and deflate or inflate nominal variables using
      the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. Then, we use NBER’s TAXSIM to simulate state and
      federal individual income tax liabilities under each year’s tax law. We compute individual tyf ed and tyn,state by
      dividing federal and state income tax liabilities by Adjusted Gross Income, respectively. We drop observations
      with negative AGI and winsorize observations by their effective state and federal tax rate at the 1st and 99th
                                                                             y                                    y
                                                                          −b
      percentile. Then, we fit the following models: 1 − tyf ed = ayf ed y f ed and 1 − tyn,state = ayn,state y −bn,state . In
      order to estimate ayn,state and byn,state , we use OLS to estimate γ and λ in the regression ln(1 − tyi(n),state,t ) =
      γ − λ ln AGIi(n),t + εi(n),t for each state-year pair, where i(n) denotes taxpayer i residing in state n, and then
      compute ayn,state = eγ and byn,state = λ. In order to estimate ayf ed and byf ed , we pool states and follow a similar
                                                                 y
                                                              1−bf ed
      procedure. Finally, we compute ayn = ayf ed (ayn,state )          and byn = byn,state + byf ed − byn,state byf ed .




                                                            37
    • Income tax schedule parameters ayn and byn when state and local taxes are not deductible from federal taxable
       income. Source: SOI Public Use Tax Files (PUFs). Dataset construction: we draw individual taxpayer
       data from SOI Public Use Tax Files (PUFs) and set to 0 three variables associated with state and local tax
       deductions (i.e., data50, data51, data52 , which are state and local income taxes, sales taxes, and real estate
       deductions, respectively). In order to abstract from changes in the income distribution over time, we choose
       2007 as base year and deflate or inflate nominal variables using the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE)
       index. Then, we use NBER’s TAXSIM to simulate state and federal individual income tax liabilities under
       each year’s tax law. We compute individual tyf ed and tyn,state by dividing federal and state income tax liabilities
       by Adjusted Gross Income, respectively. We drop observations with negative AGI and winsorize observations
       by their effective state and federal tax rate at the 1st and 99th percentile. Because of the non-deductibility
                                                                                        y
       of state taxes, we fit the following model: 1 − tyf ed − tyn,state = ayn y −bn . We use OLS to estimate γ and λ in
       the regression ln(1 − tyi(n),f ed,t − tyi(n),state,t ) = γ − λ ln AGIi(n),t + εi(n),t for each state-year pair, where i(n)
       denotes taxpayer i residing in state n, and then compute ayn = eγ and byn = λ.
                                                                                                             StandLocal,j
                                                                                                            Rn
    • Ratio of state and local to state tax revenue for income, sales, and corporate taxes; i.e. State,j
                                                                                                Rn
                                                                                                         ∀j ∈
       {y, c, corp}, respectively. Source: U.S. Census Bureau – Governments Division; Dataset: State and Local
       Government Finances; Variable: State and Local Revenue; State Revenue (Note that sales taxes uses the
       general sales tax category)

    • We derive the following variables from the sources listed above (for Figure A.1):
                                                                              StandLocal,corp
                                                                   R
          – State and local corporate tax rate: tcorp,s+l
                                                 n        = tcorp
                                                             n    × n State,corp
                                                                     R
                                                                                                .
                                                                                  n
                                                               StandLocal,c
                                                         R
          – State and local sales tax rate tc,s+l
                                            n     = tcn × n State,c
                                                           R
                                                                              .
                                                                   n
                                                                 StandLocal,y
                                                                Rn
          – State and local income tax rate ty,s+l
                                             n     = tyn ×
                                                                  Rn
                                                                    State,y       .


F.2     Calibration (Section 6.1) and Over-Identification Checks (Section 6.4)
    Given the model elasticities and taxes, implementing the counterfactuals in equations (A.24)-(A.46) requires data
on sin , λin , Ln , Mn , wn znL , hn , Pn Qn , Xn . We describe here how each of these variables is constructed, alongside
   

other measures used at other states of the quantification.

    • Number of Workers Ln : Source: 2007 Economic Census of the United States; Dataset: EC0700A1 - All sectors:
       Geographic Area Series: Economy-Wide Key Statistics: 2007; Variable: Number of paid employees for pay
       period including March 12

    • Annual Hours worked hn : Source: IPUMS; Dataset: March Current Population Survey (CPS); Variable
       Construction: the number of weeks worked (wkswork1 ) is multiplied by the usual number of hours worked per
       week (uhrsworkly). Sample: our sample is restricted to civilian adults between the ages of 18 and 64. In order
       to be included in our sample, an individual had to be working at least 35 weeks in the calendar year and with
       a usual work week of at least 30 hours per week. We also drop individuals who report earning business or farm
       income.

    • State average Hourly Wages wnt
                                  h
                                     (i): Source: IPUMS; Dataset: March Current Population Survey (CPS);
       Variable Construction: annual wage income (incwage) is divided by annual hours worked. Sample: the sample
       for this variable is the same as the one we used to compute state-year average annual hours worked. Top-
       coded values for years prior to and including 1995 are multiplied by 1.5. These wages are used to construct
       the variable entering in the quantification znL wn using equation A.55 and the same steps described in Section
       D.2.1.

    • Total sales XnT otal : Source: 2007 Economic Census of the United States; Dataset: EC0700A1 - All sectors:
       Geographic Area Series: Economy-Wide Key Statistics: 2007; Variable: Employer value of sales, shipments,


                                                              38
      receipts, revenue, or business done. The source of county-level sales is the U.S. Census Bureau - 2007 Survey of
      Business Owners and Self-Employed Persons (SBO); Variable: Sales and Receipts, Firms with Paid Employees.

    • International Exports ExportsROW
                                   t   : Source: U.S. Department of Commerce International Trade Administra-
      tion; Dataset: TradeStats Express - State Export Data; Variable: Exports of NAICS Total All Merchandise
      to World

    • Consumption expenditures Pn Cn : Source: U.S. Department of Commerce – Bureau of Economic Analysis
      (BEA) Regional Data; Dataset: Personal Consumption Expenditures by State; Variable: Personal consumption
      expenditures

    • State GDP GDPn : Source: U.S. Department of Commerce – Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Regional
      Data; Dataset: GSP NAICS ALL and and GSP SIC ALL; Variable: Gross Domestic Product by State

    • Value of Bilateral Trade flow Xni : Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: Commodity Flow Survey; Variable:
      Value. County-level bilateral trade flows are imputed using weighted shares of state flows, where weights
      correspond to county shares of state payroll.

    • Number of Establishments Mn : Source: 2007 Economic Census of the United States; Dataset: EC0700A1
      - All sectors: Geographic Area Series: Economy-Wide Key Statistics: 2007; Variable: Number of employer
      establishments

    • We derive the following variables from the primary sources listed above:

         – Value of Intermediate Inputs: Pn In = Xn − GDPn
         – Total state spending and revenue: Pn Gn = Rn = Tnc + Tny + Rncorp .
         – Total expenditures: Pn Qn = Pn Gn + Pn In + Pn Cn
         – Sales from state n: Xn = XnT otal − ExportsROW
                                                      n   .
         – Sales to the own state: Xii = Xi −
                                                P
                                                   n   Xni .
         – Share of sales from n to state i: sin =   P Xin     .
                                                      i0 Xi0 n

         – Share of expenditures in i from state n: λin =       P Xin      .
                                                                 n0 Xin0




F.3     Estimation (Section 6.2)
    The variables used for estimation are different from those used for the calibration due to data availability. In
computing both the calibrated parameters and the counterfactuals, we use the Economic Census measures for wages
and employment; the reason being that we collect the sales data from the Economic Census as well. However, the
Economic Census is available less frequently than the following data sources, which we use for estimation.

    • Number of Workers Ln : Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: County Business Patterns (CBP); Variable:
      Total Mid-March Employees with Noise; Data cleaning: implemented David Dorn’s fixed-point algorithm to
      impute employment counts in industry-county-year cells that withheld information for confidentiality reasons,
      and then summed county-level observations by state and year.

    • Annual Payroll: Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: County Business Patterns (CBP); Variable: Annual
      Payroll

    • Number of Establishments Mn : Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Dataset: County Business Patterns (CBP);
      Variable: Total Number of Establishments




                                                           39
• Annual Hours worked hn : Source: IPUMS; Dataset: March Current Population Survey (CPS); Variable
  Construction: the number of weeks worked (wkswork1 ) is multiplied by the usual number of hours worked per
  week (uhrsworkly). Sample: our sample is restricted to civilian adults between the ages of 18 and 64. In order
  to be included in our sample, an individual had to be working at least 35 weeks in the calendar year and with
  a usual work week of at least 30 hours per week. We also drop individuals who report earning business or farm
  income.

• Wages from CPS wnCP S : Source: IPUMS; Dataset: March Current Population Survey (CPS); Variable Con-
  struction: annual wage income (incwage) is divided by annual hours worked. Sample: the sample for this
  variable is the same as the one we used to compute state-year average annual hours worked. Top-coded values
  for years prior to and including 1995 are multiplied by 1.5.

• Rental prices rn : Source: IPUMS; Dataset: American Community Survey (ACS); Variable: Mean rent; Sample:
  Adjusted for top coding by multiplying by 1.5 where appropriate

• Price Index Pn = PnBLS ; Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS); Dataset: Consumer Price Index; Variable:
  Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers; Note: Not available for all states. We used population data
  to allocate city price indexes in cases when a state contained multiple cities with CPI data (e.g., LA and San
  Francisco for CA’s price index)




                                                    40
