NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CLIMATE CHANGE AND LONG-RUN DISCOUNT RATES:
EVIDENCE FROM REAL ESTATE
Stefano Giglio
Matteo Maggiori
Johannes Stroebel
Andreas Weber
Working Paper 21767
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21767
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2015

We thank Arthur van Benthem, Robert Barro, John Campbell, Thom Covert, Robert Engle, Xavier
Gabaix, Kenneth Gillingham, Christian Gollier, Bob Hall, Lars Hansen, Derek Lemoine, Martin Lettau,
William Nordhaus, Monika Piazzesi, Nick Stern, Christian Traeger, Martin Weitzman as well as seminar
participants at the Energy Policy Institute (EPIC) and the Becker Applied Economics Workshop at
the University of Chicago, American Economic Association, World Bank, EUI, NYU, Harvard, and
LMU Munich for helpful discussions and comments. We are particularly grateful to Michael Greenstone
for his encouragement and guidance in writing this paper. We thankfully acknowledge the generous
research support from the Harvard Weatherhead Center for International Affairs, the NYU Stern Center
for the Global Economy and Business as well as from the Fama-Miller Center and the Initiative on
Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. We thank iProperty and Rightmove
for sharing part of their data, and Andreas Schaab for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Stefano Giglio, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Andreas Weber. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Climate Change and Long-Run Discount Rates: Evidence from Real Estate
Stefano Giglio, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Andreas Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 21767
November 2015
JEL No. G11,G12,R30
ABSTRACT
The optimal investment to mitigate climate change crucially depends on the discount rate used to evaluate
the investment’s uncertain future benefits. The appropriate discount rate is a function of the horizon
over which these benefits accrue and the riskiness of the investment. In this paper, we estimate the
term structure of discount rates for an important risky asset class, real estate, up to the very long horizons
relevant for investments in climate change abatement. We show that this term structure is steeply downward-sloping,
reaching 2.6% at horizons beyond 100 years. We explore the implications of these new data within
both a general asset pricing framework that decomposes risks and returns by horizon and a structural
model calibrated to match a variety of asset classes. Our analysis demonstrates that applying average
rates of return that are observed for traded assets to investments in climate change abatement is misleading.
We also show that the discount rates for investments in climate change abatement that reduce aggregate
risk, as in disaster-risk models, are bounded above by our estimated term structure for risky housing,
and should be below 2.6% for long-run benefits. This upper bound rules out many discount rates suggested
in the literature and used by policymakers. Our framework also distinguishes between the various
mechanisms the environmental literature has proposed for generating downward-sloping discount
rates.
Stefano Giglio
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefano.giglio@chicagobooth.edu

Johannes Stroebel
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

Matteo Maggiori
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer building
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA, 02138
and NBER
maggiori@fas.harvard.edu

Andreas Weber
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York
aw1945@stern.nyu.edu

Any consideration of the costs of meeting climate objectives requires confronting one of
the thorniest issues in all climate-change economics: how should we compare present
and future costs and benefits? [...] A full appreciation of the economics of climate
change cannot proceed without dealing with discounting. (Nordhaus, 2013)

1

Introduction

Much of the economics literature on the optimal policy responses to climate change focuses on the trade-off between the immediate costs and the potentially uncertain long-run
benefits of investments to reduce carbon emissions. Discount rates play a central role in
this debate, since even small changes in discount rates can dramatically alter the present
value of investments with very long horizons. As an example, assume that an investment to reduce carbon emissions costs $3 billion, and is expected to avoid environmental
damages worth $100 billion in 100 years. At a discount rate of 3%, the present value of
those damages is $5.2 billion, and the project should be implemented. At an only slightly
higher discount rate, 5% for instance, the present value of the investment drops to $760
million, an order of magnitude smaller, and the investment no longer appears attractive.
Greenstone, Kopits and Wolverton (2013) remark that “the choice of a discount rate to
be used over very long periods of time raises highly contested and exceedingly challenging scientific, economic, philosophical, and legal issues. As a result, there is no
widespread agreement in the literature concerning the discount rates that should be used
in an intergenerational context.” In this paper, we make progress on this question along
two dimensions. First, we provide new empirical evidence on the term structure of
discount rates for an important asset class, real estate, up to the extremely long horizons
that are relevant for analyzing climate change (hundreds of years). Second, we combine
these new empirical facts with insights from asset pricing theory to discipline the debate
on the appropriate choice of discount rates for investments in climate change abatement.
So far, the debate on appropriate discount rates has either relied on theoretical arguments, or has tried to infer discount rates from the realized returns of traded assets such as
private capital, equity, bonds, and real estate.1 For example, in the context of the canonical
dynamic integrated climate-economy (DICE) model proposed by Nordhaus and Boyer
(2000) and Nordhaus (2008), Nordhaus (2013) chooses a discount rate of 4% to reflect his
preferred estimate of the average rate of return to capital. We show that this common
practice of valuing investments in climate change abatement by discounting cash flows
1 See

also, for example, Kaplow, Moyer and Weisbach (2010), Schneider, Traeger and Winkler (2012), and
Weisbach and Sunstein (2009) on a discussion of normative and descriptive approaches to discounting.

1

using the average rate of return to some traded asset ignores important considerations
regarding the maturity and risk properties of such investments.
As we review in Section 2, per-period discount rates could vary by horizon either
because the risk profile of cash flows differs, or because households’ sensitivity to risks
that materialize over different horizons varies. In particular, asset pricing theory shows
that the rate at which a particular expected cash flow should be discounted depends on
the state of the world in which the cash flow is realized; cash flows that materialize in
bad states are more desirable, and hence less risky for the investor. They should therefore
be discounted at a lower rate. In addition, most traded assets are claims to cash flows
at different horizons, each of which might require a different per-period discount rate.
The average rate of return to an asset only captures the value-weighted average discount
rate applied to all its cash flows. Therefore, this average rate is generally not informative
for determining the appropriate discount rate for another asset such as an investment in
climate change abatement, whose cash flows tend to occur at much longer horizons and
which might have very different risk properties.
While the absence of assets with cash flows that exactly replicate those of investments
in climate change abatement is an important limitation, it does not preclude the inference
of essential information for applicable discount rates from the observed returns of traded
assets. In this paper, we make progress along a number of the important empirical and
theoretical dimensions in determining the appropriate discount rate for such investments.
Our first empirical contribution in Section 3 is to provide estimates of the term structure of discount rates for an important asset class, real estate, over a horizon of hundreds
of years. This represents the first data-driven characterization of a term structure of
discount rates for any asset over the horizons relevant for guiding the choice of discount
rates for the distant benefits of climate change investments. Using a variety of empirical
approaches, we estimate the average return to real estate to be above 6%. At the same
time, recent estimates from Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2015b) show that the discount
rate for real estate cash flows 100 or more years in the future is about 2.6%. This combination of high average returns and low long-run discount rates implies a downward-sloping
term structure of discount rates for real estate.
These findings reinforce how problematic it is to use the average rate of return to
traded assets to discount investments in climate change abatement. Even if we assumed
that climate change and real estate had similar risk properties at all horizons, using an
average rate of return would suggest that climate change investments should be discounted at 6%. Instead, the appropriate discount rate for the very long-run benefits of
these investments should be much lower, and their present value much higher.
2

After documenting a downward slope of discount rates for an important asset class,
we next consider whether real estate might have different risk properties from climate
change investments. We first document that real estate is indeed a risky asset: its returns are positively correlated with consumption growth, and it performs badly during
consumption disasters, financial crises, and wars.2
To interpret the downward-sloping term structure of risky real estate, we build on
insights from asset pricing theory and discuss the mechanisms that can produce such a
slope. We also elaborate on the implications of these mechanisms for determining the
appropriate discount rate for investments in climate change abatement.
Section 4 begins by providing a general decomposition of the term structure of risk
and returns of the leading asset pricing models, based on Dew-Becker and Giglio (2013).
This decomposition highlights that the shape of the term structure of discount rates for
any asset can be attributed to the interaction of three main forces: 1) how much individuals care about long-term news relative to short-term news about consumption growth
(i.e., the term structure of horizon-specific risk prices); 2) how much news about future
consumption growth there is in the economy (e.g., whether the economy is subject to
persistent or i.i.d. shocks); and 3) how exposed an asset is to news at different horizons.
We operationalize this general decomposition by building on the canonical asset pricing
model of Lettau and Wachter (2007). We parameterize this model to match an extensive
set of observable discount rates for traded assets (equity and real bonds), as well as
the term structure for real estate estimated in this paper. Since we find that the term
structure of risk-free discount rates for the U.K. is approximately flat at 1%, the declining
discount rates for risky assets, common to both equities and real estate, must be driven
by a declining term structure of risk premia (see also van Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen,
2012). The Lettau and Wachter (2007) model rationalizes this important feature of the data
by inducing partial mean reversion in aggregate cash flows. In a similar spirit, Nakamura
et al. (2013) motivate their downward-sloping term structure of discount rates for risky
assets by documenting that consumption disasters tend to partially mean-revert in a large
cross section of countries for the last century. Within the environmental literature, our results are therefore consistent with an interesting and empirically-motivated modification
of models of climate change as a disaster risk (e.g., Weitzman, 2012; Barro, 2013), that
would allow for a partial recovery of economic activity following a climate disaster.
In the context of climate change as a possible source of disaster risk, we show that our
results of a downward-sloping term structure and a very long-run discount rate of 2.6%
2 This is consistent with the average return to real estate of more than 6%, which is above the real risk-free

rate of 1%, and thus includes a risk premium to compensate investors for bearing risk.

3

for risky real estate provide an upper bound on discount rates for investments in climate
change abatement. Since such investments reduce consumption risk, their discount rate
has to be below that for real estate, which is a risky asset. We find that this upper bound
is a simple yet powerful result that challenges a wide range of estimates previously used
in the literature. For example, this bound is substantially below the 4% rate suggested
by Nordhaus (2013) and the 4.6% suggested by Gollier (2013). Quantitatively, it is more
in line with long-run discount rates that are close to the risk-free rate, as suggested by
Weitzman (2012), or the 1.4% suggested by Stern (2006), or results by Barro (2013).3 It is
also close to the average recommended long-term social discount rate of 2.25% elicited by
Drupp et al. (2015) in a survey of 197 experts, and falls within the range of 1% to 3% that
more than 90% of these experts are comfortable with.
Our framework also helps to determine which models generate term structures, for
risky or hedging assets, that are compatible with equilibrium outcomes and with the
new empirical evidence presented in this paper. In particular, declining discount rate
(DDR) functions have become increasingly common in environmental economics (Arrow et al., 2013b; Cropper et al., 2014; Farmer et al., 2015; Traeger, 2014b) and, in some
cases, have been adopted by governmental institutions for the conduct of cost-benefit
analyses.4 While superficially our results are consistent with a DDR schedule, we find
that the mechanisms that generate the downward slope differ dramatically across papers
in the climate change literature, and are in many cases at odds with or orthogonal to
our empirical findings. For example, the hyperbolic discounting of Laibson (1997) or
the gamma discounting of Weitzman (2001) cannot rationalize our data. The hyperbolic
subjective discount rate, while popular in the micro-behavior literature, has been shown
by Barro (1999) and Luttmer and Mariotti (2003) to generate a flat term structure of
risk-free discount rates in general equilibrium and to have no direct implications for
risk premia. Gamma discounting is largely complementary to our analysis since it does
not focus on risk premia, and our evidence on real estate does not rely on the polling
of heterogeneous expert opinions that is at the core of Weitzman (2001)’s mechanism.
Similarly, we find that introducing Epstein-Zin preferences makes it harder to rationalize the data because the pricing of long-run risks tends to induce an upward-sloping
term structure of discount rates for risky assets and a downward-sloping one for risk3 For

models of climate change where costs materialize mostly in good states of the world, and in which
climate change abatement investments behave as risky investments at all horizons, our findings suggest
that climate change abatement investments should also be discounted at a rate that declines over maturity.
4 France and the U.K. use discount rate schedules in which the discount rate applied today to benefits
and costs occurring in the future declines over time (see HM Treasury, 2003; Lebègue, 2005). Relatedly,
Metcalf and Stock (2015), Shapiro et al. (2010), and Stern (2014a,b) provide interesting discussions of the
policy dimensions of economic research related to climate change.

4

free assets. Along these lines, in an interesting contribution, Gollier (2013) notes that
Epstein-Zin preferences and uncertainty about climate change, a form of long-run risk,
counterfactually lead to an upward-sloping term structure of discount rates for risky
assets, which also include climate change abatement investments in his model.

2

Discounting: The Role of Risk and Horizon

How should policymakers decide whether a particular investment in climate change
abatement is worth pursuing? A common approach is to conduct a cost-benefit analysis to
determine the societal net present value (NPV) of an investment project that is costly today
and provides a stream of potentially uncertain future benefits (cash flows), with positive
NPVs indicating socially beneficial projects. As highlighted in the introduction, discount
rates play a central role in determining NPVs, since even small changes in discount rates
can dramatically alter the NPV of investments with long horizons (see e.g., Arrow et al.,
2013a; Dreze and Stern, 1987; Moyer et al., 2014; van Benthem, 2015; Weisbach, 2014).
In this section, we review the basic theoretical concepts and introduce the framework
for our empirical and structural analysis in Sections 4 and 5. Section 2.1 describes how the
appropriate rate for discounting a particular cash flow depends on both the riskiness and
the maturity of that cash flow. Section 2.2 highlights what this implies for learning about
the appropriate discount rates for climate change policies from observable assets that pay
cash flows with different riskiness and maturity. The rest of the paper uses insights from
the term structure of discount rates for one particular asset, real estate, to guide the choice
of appropriate discount rates for investments in climate change abatement.
To introduce our basic notation, let us represent an investment at time t as a claim to
a stream of future benefits (cash flows), Dt+k , k = 1, 2..., n, where n is the final maturity
of the cash flows. For example, an investment to avoid one ton of CO2 emissions today
provides benefits in terms of mitigated climate change in each future period for hundreds
of years. Each of these benefits, Dt+k , is stochastic and depends on the state of the world
at time t + k. For example, the future benefits of reducing CO2 emissions today could
depend on how much the economy grows in the future. We denote the state of the
world at time t + k as ωt+k ∈ Ωt+k and stress the dependence of benefits on its stochastic
realization with the notation Dt+k (ωt+k ). The set Ωt+k includes all possible states of the
world at time t + k, which can differ along many dimensions, including the health of
the aggregate economy and the degree of environmental damage. In what follows, we
will sometimes refer to general assets with maturity n that could pay cash flows such as
dividends or rents at any point in time up to their maturity; these will simply be referred
5

to with superscript n. A subset of these assets is the set of claims to a single cash flow at
a specific point in time, maturity n; we will refer to these with superscript (n).

2.1

The Value of a Single-Cash-Flow Investment

We begin our analysis by studying the value of an investment that pays only one cash
flow, at a specific point in time: t+n. This cash flow is not predetermined: it might be
different in different states of the world, ωt+n ∈ Ωt+n . We denote the present value of the
(n)
claim to this benefit as Pt . A classic tenet of asset pricing is that, under the relatively
(n)
mild assumptions of no arbitrage and the law of one price, Pt can be expressed as
the weighted expected value of that cash flow across scenarios ωt+n , where a benefit
paid in each scenario is weighted by the importance investors assign to benefits in that
state (see Hansen and Richard (1987), and Cochrane (2005) for a textbook treatment). Let
Mt,t+n (ωt+n ) > 0 denote the value that investors attach at time t to benefits in state ωt+n .
An asset is considered more risky if it pays off primarily in states of the world in which
investors value that payoff less. If investors value benefits paid out earlier more than
benefits paid out later, the weighting Mt,t+n will also adjust for this time discounting. We
can then write the value of an investment that yields Dt+n as:
(n)

Pt

=

∑

Mt,t+n (ωt+n ) Dt+n (ωt+n )πt,t+n (ωt+n ) = Et [ Mt,t+n Dt+n ] ,

(1)

ωt+n ∈ Ωt+n

where πt,t+n (ωt+n ) is the conditional probability of state ωt+n . The object Mt,t+n is called
the stochastic discount factor (SDF). In economic terms, the SDF reflects the marginal utility
of a payoff in different states of the world. The value of the asset thus reflects both the
physical properties of the asset (when and how much it pays in each state ωt+n ) and the
preferences of investors (how much they value payoffs in each scenario ωt+n ).
(n)
An equivalent representation of Pt , which is more prevalent in policy analysis, is
in terms of discount rates. The time and risk adjustments are then expressed using a perperiod discount rate r nt :
(n)

Pt

= Et [ Mt,t+n Dt+n ] =

Et [ Dt+n ]
.
(1 + r nt )n

(2)

Put differently, we can also think of prices as the expected value of the cash flow, not
weighted by the SDF, Mt,t+n , but discounted at a per-period discount rate r nt . The appropriate discount rate will differ across investments depending on which states of the world
an investment pays benefits in, and the relative valuation of benefits across states of the
6

world: more risky investments are valued less, and thus discounted at higher per-period
discount rates.

2.2

The Importance of Horizon-Specific Risk Adjustments of Discount
Rates

We now consider a multi-period-payoff investment project that pays stochastic benefits
at different points in time up to maturity n. Any such asset can be thought of as the
combination of many single cash-flow assets, each paying at specific points in time, t +
1, t + 2, ..., t + n. Therefore, the value of a multi-period-payoff investment project is the
sum of the values of the individual single-period-payoff projects:
(1)

Ptn = Pt

(2)

+ Pt

(n)

+ ... + Pt

Since the two representations discussed above for the one-period case also apply to the
multi-period case, the value Ptn can be written as:
Ptn = Et [ Mt,t+1 Dt+1 + Mt,t+2 Dt+2 + ... + Mt,t+n Dt+n ]
Et [ Dt+n ]
Et [ Dt+1 ] Et [ Dt+2 ]
+
+
...
+
.
=
(1 + r nt )n
(1 + r2t )2
1 + r1t

(3)
(4)

These two representations differ markedly from the valuation formula that is typically
applied in cost-benefit analyses, which discounts each cash flow at the same per-period
discount rate r t :
Et [ Dt+1 ] Et [ Dt+2 ]
Et [ Dt+n ]
Ptn =
+
+ ... +
.
(5)
2
1 + rt
(1 + r t ) n
(1 + r t )
Representations 3 and 4 are always correct and equivalent; the last one is only correct
if the discount rate r t is chosen to match the risk and maturity of a particular asset.
Therefore, r t can only be applied to value the benefits of a project with exactly the same
risk characteristics and exactly the same maturity as the asset from which r t was derived
in the first place. For the purpose of discounting the benefits of a project with different
characteristics, the full term structure of discount rates r1t , r2t , ..., r nt needs to be known and
appropriately adjusted for differences in risk characteristics. We highlight the importance
of this by considering the valuation of three different investment projects below: A project
with the same risk and payoff horizon as those of an observed traded asset (whose average per-period discount rate is r t ); a project with the same risk properties but a different
payoff horizon; and a project with different risk properties but the same payoff horizon.

7

Case 1: Same Risk, Same Horizon. Consider first an observable asset with maturity
n and stochastic cash flows Dt+1 , Dt+2 ,..., Dt+n (if the asset has infinite maturity as in
the case of the stock market, then n = ∞). Imagine we are able to observe the average
discount rate of this asset, r t . Put differently, given an asset with maturity n and some risk
profile, r t is defined as the constant discount rate consistent with the asset’s price. Now
consider the case in which an investment in climate change abatement pays cash flows
D̃t+1 , ..., D̃t+n that are different from the cash flows of the observed asset, but have the
same risk characteristics (i.e., the same dependence on the state of the world ωt+n ). This
is the only case in which cash flows from climate change abatement can be discounted at
the same average rate as those from the observable asset. The value of the climate change
investment, Ctn , will be:






E
D̃
E
D̃
E
D̃
t
t
t
+
n
t
t
+
2
t
+
1
+
+ ... +
.
Ctn =
1 + rt
(1 + r t ) n
(1 + r t )2
Case 2: Same Risk, Different Horizon. Since the risk preferences captured by Mt,t+k
potentially depend on the horizon, using average discount rates from one asset to discount cash flows from another investment is no longer valid if those cash flows materialize over different horizons. Take our example from above and assume that the asset’s cash
flows have the same riskiness as the cash flows from the investment in climate change
abatement at each horizon. Assume further that the observable asset yields benefits in
every period between time t and time t + n, while the investment in climate change
abatement only yields benefits after maturity n > 1. Since the riskiness of the cash
flows of both investments is the same, one may be tempted to use the observed average
discount rate r t from the observable asset to discount climate change project cash flows.
This turns out to be incorrect, however. The correct price is obtained as below:
(n,n)
Ct







Et D̃t+n
Et D̃t+n+1
Et D̃t+n
=
+
+ ... +
,
(1 + r nt )n
(1 + r nt )n
(1 + r nt +1 )n+1
n

n +1

where each dividend is discounted at the horizon-specific discount rate, r t , r t , ..., r nt .
Since r t was obtained as the discount rate that applies to the observable asset, it reflects
an average of all the horizon-specific discount rates r1t , r2t , ..., r nt , including the ones for
maturities up to n − 1. Since the climate change project does not accrue benefits at those
horizons, its value should not depend on the discount rates between t + 1 and n − 1.
To see this more clearly, suppose that investors are only worried about the states
of the world in which the relatively near cash flows are being paid out (horizons 1 to
8

n − 1), while they are not worried about risks for horizons higher than n: for long maturities, investors only care about the expected payout from the asset, not the state of the
world, in which it is paid out. They will discount the short-term cash flows at high rates,
n −1
n n +1
r1t , r2t , ..., r t , but the longer-maturity cash flows at lower rates, r t , r t , ..., r nt , reflecting
their risk-neutrality at those horizons. The term structure of discount rates for this particular asset is thus downward-sloping. The claim to all cash flows may have a relatively
high implied average discount rate, in particular if many of the cash flows accrue before
n. At the same time, if the benefits from a climate change investment had the same risk
properties, but only accrued after n, the correct present value for such an investment
n n +1
should only depend on the low discount rates r t , r t , ..., r nt . It would thus be higher than
under the relatively high average discount rate r t .
Case 3: Different Risk, Same Horizon. Beyond the timing of cash flows, a second potentially important difference between an observed asset’s discount rates and those that
apply to some investment project is the relative riskiness of the payoffs at the same horizon.
As outlined before, riskiness here refers to whether an asset mostly pays in states of the
world ωt+k where payments are least valuable for the investor. Consider our example
from above again. Assume that the asset as well as the climate change investment project
only pay a single cash flow in period t + n. Further assume that the observed asset’s cash
flow is riskier than the investment’s cash flow: for example, equities generally pay off in
states of the world where the economy is doing well, while investments that mitigate the
impact of climate disasters would pay off in states of the world where the economy is not
doing well. The discount rate implied by the observable price of the asset will then be
different from the appropriate discount rate for the investment project.
For concreteness, assume that there are only two equally likely states of the world – a
good one (ωtG+n ) and a bad one (ωtB+n ). Assume that marginal utility in the good state of
the world is lower than marginal utility in the bad state of the world, and assume that the
observed asset pays out in the good state of the world only, while the investment project
only pays out in the bad state of the world; both pay out the same amount if they pay out.


This implies that Et [ Mt,t+n Dt+n ] < Et Mt,t+n D̃t+n . It then follows from equation 2 that
the investment project should be discounted at a lower rate than the asset.

3

The Term Structure of Real Estate Discount Rates

To illustrate the importance of allowing discount rates to vary with the maturity of the
cash flow, we next analyze the term structure of discount rates in real estate markets. In
9

recent work, Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2015b) use unique data from the U.K. and
Singapore to estimate how much value households attach to future real estate cash flows
accruing over a horizon of hundreds of years. In these real estate markets, residential
properties trade either as freeholds, which are permanent ownership contracts, or as
leaseholds, which are pre-paid and tradable ownership contracts with finite maturity.
The initial maturity of leasehold contracts generally varies between 99 years and 1,000
years. By comparing the relative prices of leasehold and freehold contracts for otherwise
identical properties, the authors estimate the present value of owning a freehold after the
expiration of the leasehold contract. They show how this present value is informative
about the discount rate attached to real estate cash flows that occur in the very long run.
Figure I reports the estimates from Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2015b). It shows the
price discount of leaseholds with varying maturities compared to freeholds for otherwise
identical properties. For the U.K. estimates, for example, the bucket with leaseholds of
remaining maturity between 100 and 124 years shows that households are willing to pay
11% less for a leasehold with that maturity than for a freehold. Interpreted differently, at
least 11% of the value of a freehold property is due to cash flows that accrue more than
100 years into the future. In general, leasehold discounts are strongly associated with
maturity, with shorter leaseholds trading at bigger discounts: 17.6% for leaseholds with
remaining maturity of 80-99 years, 11% for remaining maturities of 100-124 years, 8.9%
for remaining maturities of 125-149 years, and 3.3% for remaining maturities of 150-300
years. Leaseholds with more than 700 years remaining maturity trade at the same price
as freeholds. Pricing patterns are similar for properties in Singapore. The authors provide
a detailed investigation of the institutional setup of leasehold and freehold contracts, and
examine a number of possible explanations for the observed leasehold discounts. They
conclude that leasehold price discounts are tightly connected to the contracts’ maturity
and that discount rates of around 2.6% for cash flows more than 100 years in the future
are necessary to match their data.
In this section, we provide new evidence on the expected return and riskiness of real
estate to study an important and previously unexplored dimension of real estate data: the
term structure of real estate discount rates. Section 3.1 introduces our analysis of expected
real estate returns, which we find to be relatively high, between 6.4% and 8.0%. Section
3.2 presents our analysis of the riskiness of real estate, which allows us to rationalize
this relatively high average rate of return. This section shows that real estate returns are
particularly low during consumption disasters and wars. In Section 3.3, we combine these
new data with the estimates of Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2015b) to provide evidence
for the slope of the term structure of real estate discount rates. Our analysis suggests
10

that this term structure is strongly downward-sloping, and thus cautions against the use
of another asset’s average rate of return to infer discount rates for very long-run benefits
associated with investments in climate change abatement. In subsequent sections, we will
use insights from asset pricing theory to inform what can be learned from the downwardsloping term structure of risky real estate cash flows about the optimal discount rate for
investments in climate change abatement.

3.1

Average Rate of Return to Housing and Rental Growth Rate

We employ two complementary approaches to estimate the average return to real estate.
The first approach, which we call the balance sheet approach, is based on the total value of
the residential real estate and housing stock, and the total value of real estate and housing
services consumed (the ‘dividend’ from the real estate and housing stock). We obtain
this information from countries’ national accounts.5 We control for the growth of the
real estate and housing stock over time to construct the return series for a representative
property. The second approach, which we label the price-rent approach, starts from the
price-rent ratio estimated in a baseline year and constructs a time series of returns by
combining a house price index and a rental price index. This approach focuses on a
representative portfolio of houses and, therefore, does not need to correct for changes in
the real estate and housing stock. After adjusting for inflation, both methods provide
estimates of the gross real returns to real estate, E[ RG ]. To compute net returns, we
subtract maintenance costs and depreciation (δ) and any tax-related decreases in returns
(τ). We estimate net returns as r = E[ R] = E[ RG ] − δ − τ. See Appendix A.1 for details
on these procedures and the underlying data sources used.
The top panel of Table I presents the estimated average real estate returns for the U.S.,
the U.K., and Singapore. Our estimates for real estate returns in the U.S. follow Favilukis,
Ludvigson and van Nieuwerburgh (2010). While U.S. real estate returns are not the focus
of this paper, since they cannot be compared with the long-run real estate discount rates
in the U.K. and Singapore from Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2015b), they provide a
useful benchmark as they have been the subject of an extensive literature (e.g., Flavin
and Yamashita, 2002; Gyourko and Keim, 1992; Lustig and van Nieuwerburgh, 2005;
Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel, 2007). The balance-sheet and the price-rent approaches
provide similar estimates for the average annual real gross return (E[ RG ]) in the U.S.:
10.3% and 9.6% respectively. We calibrate the impact of maintenance and depreciation at
5 To

determine the total consumption of real estate services, these measures impute the value of the
owner-occupied equivalent rents, the real estate services consumed by individuals from living in their own
house. See Mayerhauser and Reinsdorf (2006) and McCarthy and Peach (2010) for details.

11

2.5% and the property tax impact at 0.67%.6 We conclude that average real net returns in
the U.S. real estate market are between 6.4% and 7.1%. This is similar to the estimates in
Flavin and Yamashita (2002), who find a real return to real estate of 6.6%, and Favilukis,
Ludvigson and van Nieuwerburgh (2010), who find a real return of 9-10% before netting
out depreciation and property taxes.
Columns 3 and 4 in Table I report our estimates for the Singapore real estate market.
The balance-sheet and price-rent approaches provide similar estimates for the average
annual real gross return (E[ RG ]): 10.4% and 10.3%, respectively. We assume the cost of
maintenance and depreciation to be 2.5%, in line with the estimates for the U.S., and the
property tax impact to be 0.5%.7 Our estimate of the real net returns in the Singapore real
estate market is therefore between 7.3% and 7.4%.
Columns 5 and 6 of Table I report the estimates for the real estate market in the U.K.
The balance-sheet and the price-rent approaches provide similar estimates for the average
annual real gross return (E[ RG ]) again: 10.5% and 9.8%, respectively. We maintain the
calibration for the cost of maintenance and depreciation at 2.5%. There are no property
taxes to be considered in the U.K. Average real net returns in the U.K. real estate market
are therefore approximately between 7.3% and 8.0%.
Overall, these estimates show that real expected returns for real estate are at least 6.4%
for the countries we consider. These estimates are in line with the existing literature, and
robust to the different methodologies we use.8 Our estimates are also consistent with the
notion that average house price growth over extended periods of time is relatively low,
6 In

a recent study, Harding, Rosenthal and Sirmans (2007) find that between 1983 and 2001, real estate
(housing) depreciated at roughly 2.5% per year gross of maintenance. Malpezzi, Ozanne and Thibodeau
(1987) provide an overview of the earlier literature on depreciation. For example, Leigh (1980) estimates the
annual depreciation rate of housing units in the U.S. to be between 0.36% and 1.36%. Depreciation is also a
key calibration parameter for much of the recent literature in macroeconomics that considers households’
portfolio and consumption decisions with housing as an additional asset. Cocco (2005) chooses an annual
depreciation rate equal to 1%; Díaz and Luengo-Prado (2008) use an annual depreciation rate of 1.5%.
Property taxes in the U.S. are levied at the state level and, while there is variation across states, are generally
around 1% of house prices. Property taxes, however, are deductible from federal income tax. We assume
that the deductibility reflects a marginal U.S. federal income tax rate of 33%. The net impact is therefore
(1 − 0.33) ∗ 0.01 = 0.67%.
7 Singapore levies a 10% annual tax on the estimated rental income of the property. A lower tax rate
applies to owner-occupied properties (6%), but we use the more conservative (higher) rate for rental
properties. The tax impact on returns is the tax rate times the average rent-price ratio, estimated at 5%.
Hence, τ = 0.1 ∗ 0.05 = 0.5%.
8 Also note that most movements in rent-price ratios are driven by movements in house prices and not
by movements in rents (see Shiller, 2007); therefore, our estimates of returns are relatively unaffected by the
time periods chosen. Take the U.S as an example: by 2013 rent-price ratios in the U.S. had declined to their
2000 levels approximately. Ending our sample in 2005 would have produced a slightly lower average rentprice ratio. However, at the same time, this would exclude the house price crash after 2005, thus leading to
higher estimated average capital gains. In the overall estimates of expected returns, the higher estimated
capital gains would be offset by a lower estimated rent-price ratio.

12

as argued by Shiller (2006), with high rental yields being the key driver of real returns to
real estate and housing. In particular, our estimated average capital gains are positive but
relatively small for all three countries, despite focusing on samples and countries that are
often regarded as having experienced major growth in house prices.
Our estimates of average returns to real estate imply a positive real estate risk premium. Intuitively, houses are risky because they have low payoffs during bad states of the
world such as wars, financial crises, natural disasters, and epidemics. We formalize this
intuition in the next section by analyzing how house prices react during such events, as
well as by estimating their average correlation with consumption and personal disposable
income.
Finally, we estimate the average real growth rate of rental income, which we denote
by g. The estimated real growth rate of rents is low for the U.K., Singapore, and the U.S.,
which we add to compare our estimates with those in the existing literature again. We
obtain an estimate of g = 0.2% for Singapore and a somewhat higher estimate of g = 0.7%
for the U.K.9 For the U.S., we estimate g = 0.5%, an estimate in line with that of Campbell
et al. (2009), who obtain a median growth rate of 0.4% per year.10 This is consistent with
Ambrose, Eichholtz and Lindenthal (2013), who find very low real rental growth in a long
time series of rents for Amsterdam, and with Shiller (2006), who estimates long-run real
house price growth rates to be very low, often below 1%.11
To recap, our estimates indicate an average real net rate of return to real estate of
at least 6.4% and an average real growth rate of rents below 0.7% in both the U.K. and
Singapore.
9 For

the U.K., we use the CPI component “Actual rents for housing” (series D7CE) from the Office of
National Statistics as a rental index, and the CPI series from the same source (series D7BT). Our sample
covers the years 1996-2013. For Singapore, we obtain a time series of rental indices for the whole island
from the Urban Redevelopment Authority (the official real estate arm of the government: ura.gov.sg), and
use the CPI series from the National Statistical Office. Our sample covers the years 1990-2012.
10 For the U.S., we follow Favilukis, Ludvigson and van Nieuwerburgh (2010) and compute rent growth
using the BLS shelter index (the component of CPI related to shelter, item CU.S.R0000SAH1 from the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis). We obtain the CPI series from the same source, item CPIAUCSL.
Our sample covers the years 1953-2013.
11 The equivalence of these two long-run growth rates is necessary for rental yields to be stationary.
Eichholtz (1997), Eitrheim and Erlandsen (2005) and Ambrose, Eichholtz and Lindenthal (2013) also confirm
Shiller’s observation of negligible long-run real house price growth in different countries using different
data. Ambrose, Eichholtz and Lindenthal (2013) find evidence of cointegration between house prices and
rents using very long-run real estate data for Amsterdam.

13

3.2

The Riskiness of Housing

In this section, we assess the riskiness of real estate assets. Given the relatively high rate of
return on real estate documented in the previous section, one would expect real estate to
perform particularly poorly in bad states of the world; finding evidence for the riskiness
of real estate would therefore validate the relatively high estimated average rate of return.
To see whether this is the case, we analyze the behavior of real house prices during
financial crises and periods of rare disasters; we also estimate the average correlation
between consumption as well as personal disposable income and house prices.
Panel A of Figure II shows the average reaction of real house prices to financial (banking) crises. The analysis is based on dates of financial crises in Schularick and Taylor
(2012), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Bordo et al. (2001) for 20 countries for the period
1870-2013, and on our own dataset of historical house price indices for these countries.12
The beginning of a crisis is normalized to be time zero. The house price level is normalized to be one at the onset of the crisis. House prices rise on average in the three
years prior to a crisis, achieve their highest level just before the crisis, and fall by as
much as 7% in the three years following the onset of the crisis. This fall in house prices
during crisis periods contributes to the riskiness of real estate as an asset. Panel (B) of
Figure II shows the average behavior of house prices during the rare disasters based
on Barro (2006) and Barro and Ursua (2008). The consumption disaster dates for the 20
countries included in our historical house price index dataset are those defined by Barro
and Ursua (2008). The dotted line tracks the level of consumption: consumption falls
for three years before reaching its trough (normalized to be time zero) and recovers in
the subsequent three years. The solid line tracks the house price level: house prices fall
together with consumption over the first three years of the disaster but fail to recover
over the subsequent three years. The fall in house prices during these rare disasters also
contributes to the riskiness of real estate as an asset.
Figure III shows the time series of house prices and marks crisis years for the U.K.
and Singapore with shadowed bands.13 The pattern of house price movements during
crises in these two countries is similar to the average pattern described above. House
prices peak and then fall during major crises in the sample: the 1974-76 and 1991 banking
12 Appendix A.2.1 provides details of the crisis dates and the house price series.

The raw data are available
on the authors’ websites. Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) also analyze real estate prices for 16 countries and 18
crises occurring in the period 1974-2008. We analyze real estate prices in 20 countries for 43 crises and 17
rare disasters occurring in the period 1870-2013.
13 All crisis dates are from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) except the periods 1997-98 and 2007-08 for
Singapore. The latter dates have been added by the authors and correspond to the Asian financial crisis
of 1997-98 and the global financial crisis of 2007-08.

14

crises in the U.K. as well as the 1982-83 banking crisis and the 1997 Asian financial crisis
in Singapore.14 Similarly, both countries experience a drop in house prices during the
2007-08 global financial crisis.
Figure IV shows the performance of house prices during major wars, namely World
War I and II (WWI and WWII). In both cases, time zero is defined to be the start date of
the war period, 1913 and 1939 for WWI and WWII, respectively. The dotted line tracks
house prices of five countries for the duration of WWI (1913-1918).15 House prices fell
throughout the war with a total fall in real terms of around 30%. Similarly, the solid line
tracks house prices of six countries for the duration of WWII (1939-1945).16 House prices
fell by 20% in real terms from 1939 to 1943 and then stabilized for the last two years of the
war, 1944-45. Overall, we find wars to be periods of major declines in real house prices,
which further contributes to the riskiness of real estate as an asset.
We also investigate the average correlation between consumption and house prices
over the entire sample rather than just during crisis periods. Table II reports the correlation of house price changes with consumption changes over the entire sample and for
each country. The correlation is positive for all 20 countries, except for France (-0.05), and
often above 0.5. The estimated positive correlation between house prices and consumption reinforces the evidence that real estate is a risky asset: it has low payoffs in states of
the world in which consumption falls and marginal utility is high. We also investigate the
correlation between house price growth and alternative measures of economic activity by
using data from Mack and Martínez-García (2011), and report the correlation between
annual real house price growth and real personal disposable income growth in a panel
of 20 developed and emerging countries (see Table III). The average correlation is 0.36,
with a minimum of 0.05 for Luxembourg and a maximum of 0.63 for Spain. Overall, this
evidence further corroborates the fact that real estate returns are risky.
Despite extensive efforts to collect an exhaustive database, our results are still limited
by the relatively small number of crises for which house price data are available, and by
the relatively low quality of house price time series before 1950. In addition, rental data
is available only in extremely short time series. The lack of such rental data prevents us
from performing a comprehensive study of the riskiness of the underlying cash flows of
housing. For example, trying to detect the presence of long-run shocks for rent growth
would even be challenging with time series that extend back for many more decades.
14 The

1984 banking crisis in the U.K. is the sole exception with increasing house prices.
the countries included are Australia,
France, Netherlands, Norway, and the United States.
16 Due to data availability for house price indices during this period, the countries included are Australia,
France, Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, and the United States.
15 Due to data availability for house price indices during this period,

15

Nevertheless, our results suggest that real estate is an asset with risks broadly consistent
with its estimated expected return.17
We summarize our results in the following stylized facts: (i) real estate is a risky asset
that performs poorly in economic crises, (ii) correspondingly, it has an expected return of
at least 6.4% per year; (iii) real rent growth rates are low, below 0.7% per year.

3.3

Matching Risk, Return and Leasehold Discounts in Reduced-Form

We started this section by presenting facts about the relative pricing of freeholds and
leaseholds of different maturities. In general, leasehold discounts are strongly associated
with maturity, with shorter leaseholds trading at bigger discounts: from 17.6% for leaseholds with remaining maturity of 80-99 years all the way down to 3.3% for remaining
maturities of 150-300 years. The previous discussion also showed that, on average, real
estate has a real expected rate of return of at least 6.4% per year. In this section, we
focus on how economic theory might jointly match the significant leasehold discounts
and the high average return to real estate. We highlight that only a model with declining
discount rates for risky real estate cash flows is able to match the data, which also suggests
a downward-sloping term structure of risk premia. In Section 4, we calibrate a leading
reduced-form asset pricing model to rationalize these leasehold discounts and our estimates of the average rate of return to real estate, and propose one plausible explanation
for the observed term structure of discount rates.
We start by considering the simple constant-discount-rate extension of the classic
valuation model of Gordon (1982). We assume that rents (cash flows) arising in each
future period are discounted at a constant rate r, so that the s-period discount function is
e−rs . We also assume that rents are expected to grow at a constant rate g, so that expected
rents follow: Et [ Dt+s ] = Dt e gs .18 In this model, a claim to the rents for n periods, the
17 Note

that our results are likely to underestimate the riskiness of real estate and housing due to three
effects: index smoothing, declining rents during bad times, and the destruction of housing stock during
wars and natural disasters. (1) House price indices are generally smoothed and therefore underestimate
the true variation in house prices. (2) We only consider the behavior of house price changes (capital gains)
and have not considered the behavior of rents (dividends). For the two countries for which long highquality time series of rental indices are available (France for the period 1949-2010 and Australia for the
period 1880-2013), we find rent growth to be positively correlated with consumption growth (0.36 and 0.15
respectively). (3) A substantial part of the housing stock tends to be destroyed during wars. Therefore, the
return to a representative investment in real estate would be lower than the fall in index prices as it would
incorporate the physical loss of part of the asset.
18 Technically, g is the sum of the expected growth rate of rents and a Jensen inequality term. Given the
low variance of rent growth and in the interest of intuitive results, we ignore the latter term and refer to g
as the expected growth rate of rents.

16

n-maturity leasehold, is valued at:
Ptn

=

Z t+n
t

e−r(s−t) Dt e g(s−t) ds =

Dt
(1 − e−(r− g)n ).
r−g

(6)

Correspondingly, the infinite maturity claim, the freehold, is valued at:
Pt = lim Ptn =
n→∞

Dt
,
r−g

where we have imposed r > g, and the transversality condition limn→∞ e−rn Pt+n = 0. In
related work, Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2015a) show that there is no evidence of a
failure of this transversality condition in housing markets in the U.K. and Singapore, even
during periods when a sizeable bubble was regularly thought to be present. The above
valuation formula for infinite maturity claims is the classic formula by Gordon (1982).
The price discount for an n-maturity leasehold with respect to the freehold is:
Discnt ≡

Ptn
− 1 = −e−(r− g)n .
Pt

(7)

For any given maturity, the price discount decreases (in absolute value) the higher the
discount rate r and the lower the growth rate of rents g. The first effect occurs because
a higher discount rate reduces the present value of rents accruing far in the future. The
second effect occurs because a lower growth rate of rents lowers actual future rents.
At the estimated benchmark values of r = 6.4% and g = 0.7%, the constant-discountrate model implies a leasehold discount at 100 years of Disc100 = −e−0.064∗100 = −0.17%.
In other words, the 100-year leasehold would be valued only 0.17% less than the freehold.
The discount we find in the data is at least 11%, orders of magnitude higher. More generally, Figure V compares the logarithmic discounts obtained under our baseline calibration
for different leasehold maturities (white bars) with those observed in the data for the U.K.
and Singapore (black bars). The 700+ year leaseholds are valued essentially at a 0% discount to freeholds both in the data and in the model. However, the model cannot match
the discounts observed for leaseholds with maturities of 300 years or less. For example,
for U.K. leaseholds with 80-99 years remaining, we observe a log discount of 17.6% in the
data. The log discount in the model for leaseholds with 80 to 99 years remaining is a mere
0.76%. Intuitively, a model of exponential discounting assigns essentially zero present
value to cash flows occurring 100 or more years into the future when discounting at an
effective rate r − g of close to 6% or more.19
19 This

intuition is robust to even more conservative calibrations of r and g. We also evaluate a “high

17

While the long-run discounts could be matched by a calibration with a constant net
discount rate of r − g = 1.9%, such a calibration would not be consistent with new
evidence of a high average return to real estate and a low growth rate of rents in this
paper. This simple constant-discount-rate model highlights the challenge for economic
theory posed by our results: to jointly rationalize both a high expected return to real estate
as a risky asset and the low long-run discount rates necessary to match the observed
discounts for leaseholds relative to freeholds.
In reduced form, we find our estimates to be consistent with a downward-sloping
term structure of total discount rates for real estate cash flows. Discount rates have to be
sufficiently high in the short to medium term to contribute to the high average expected
returns on real estate estimated in Section 3.1, but also sufficiently low in the long term
to match the observed discounts estimated for long-run cash flows in Giglio, Maggiori
and Stroebel (2015b). Section 4 introduces a reduced-form asset pricing model that is calibrated to match key moments of multiple asset classes including real estate. Our analysis
shows that downward-sloping term structures of discount rates are a common feature
of risky assets, and highlights which mechanisms may help to explain those patterns.
Section 5 will discuss the resulting implications for valuing investments in climate change
abatement.

4

Price and Quantity of Risk Across the Term Structure

The previous section showed empirically that the term structure of discount rates for real
estate – a risky asset – is steeply downward-sloping. In this section, we apply asset pricing
theory to discuss a decomposition of this term structure into its building blocks: risk and
return across the term structure. This decomposition will help us understand the forces
that drive discount rates at different horizons, and provides a link between discount rates
observed on tradable assets and investments in climate change abatement.
rent growth rate” scenario by setting g = 2%, and a “low expected returns” scenario with r = 5.4% per
year, significantly less than our lowest estimate. Figure V also shows the discounts obtained in the highrent-growth and low-expected-return scenarios. Both robustness exercises increase the model’s implied
discounts only slightly. Even a calibration that allows for both low returns and high rent growth cannot
match the data, especially at longer horizons.

18

4.1

Per-Period Discount Rates as Weighted Averages of Expected OnePeriod Returns

Most of the insights of asset pricing theory are clearest to interpret when thinking about
one-period expected returns, independent of the maturity of the asset. Since any asset can
be bought, held for one period, and then sold at the end of that period (before its maturity), looking at the one-period return is one way to reduce assets of different maturities
to a common horizon. This allows us to compare their risk and return properties.
We start by introducing our main notation and by linking together the concepts of
returns to maturity and one-period returns. In what follows, we will sometimes refer to
general assets with maturity n that could pay cash flows such as dividends or rents at any
point in time up to maturity; these will simply be denoted with superscript n. A subset
of these assets is the set of claims to single cash flows at a specific point in time, maturity
n; we will denote these with superscript (n).
Define the one-period (gross) return per dollar spent on any security with maturity n
as the total amount obtained from buying the security and liquidating it after one period:
Rnt,t+1 ≡

Ptn+−11 + Dt+1
,
Ptn

Note that at the time the asset is sold, its maturity has shortened to n − 1. The return to
holding the security over multiple periods (and reinvesting all intermediate cash flows)
can be found by compounding the one-period returns. For example, the return to maturity of any investment with maturity n is
Rnt,t+n =

n −1

∏ Rnt+−k,tk +1+k .

k =0

Of particular interest to us are the one-period returns and discount rates for claims to a
single cash flow Dt+n . In this case, the one-period returns in all but the last period are
entirely driven by price movements (since Dt+k is zero for all k, except for k = n, the last
cash flow at maturity). What makes the return to this security of particular interest is its
intimate link to our per-period discount rates for horizon-specific cash flows, r nt . To see
this, we can rewrite the return to maturity of such a claim as:
(n)

Rt,t+n =

19

Dt + n
(n)

Pt

;

we can do this since there are no dividends to be reinvested over the life of this security.
Taking expectations on both sides, and then rearranging, we obtain:
(n)

Pt

=

Et [ Dt+n ]
(n)

.

Et [ Rt,t+n ]

Comparing this equation with equation 2 in Section 2, we immediately see that the nperiod expected return to maturity of a claim to a single dividend at t + n is exactly the
(n)
compounded discount rate to be applied to that security: Et [ Rt,t+n ] = (1 + r nt )n .
Next, we want to link these quantities to the one-period expected return, for which
we are able to provide a very intuitive risk-return decomposition. The focus of this
paper is on the average shape of the term structure of discount rates. Time-variation in
discount rates, while important in the asset pricing literature, plays a second-order role
in thinking about climate change investments. We therefore derive the link between one(n)
period expected returns Et [ Rt,t+1 ] and per-period discount rates r nt under the assumption
that per-period discount rates for a cash flow with a particular maturity are constant
over time; relaxing this assumption would complicate the intuition without adding any
economically relevant elements to the analysis. If expected returns are constant over time
(though they may be different across maturities, such that the term structure of discount
rates is not necessarily flat at each point in time), we have
(n)
Et [ Rt,t+n ]

n −1

=

(n−k)

∏ Et [ Rt,t+1 ],

k =0

where all the returns are for claims to single cash flows, Dt+k , at different horizons k. The
formula shows that in this case, not only the realized but also the expected returns are
(n)
linked through compounding. Since Et [ Rt,t+n ] is directly linked to r nt as shown above, we
can then easily substitute and take logs (and recall that ln(1 + x ) ' x), to obtain:
r nt =

1 n
(k)
ln( Et [ Rt,t+1 ]).
n k∑
=1

(8)

Therefore, the discount rate for a particular horizon n is simply the average of the oneperiod expected returns for claims to cash flows at each horizon. A flat term structure
of discount rates must then imply a flat term structure of expected one-period returns
across maturities; in fact, expected one-period returns and discount rates across maturities would all be equal. In Section 4.2, we will build on this decomposition to further
elaborate on the forces that shape the term structure of discount rates.
20

4.2

Decomposing the Term Structure of Expected One-Period Returns

Now that we have clarified the link between one-period returns and per-period discount
rates, we focus on the one-period returns of securities with maturity n. We start by
using the fundamental asset pricing equation introduced in Section 2.1 to decompose the
(n)
expected one-period returns Rt,t+1 into a component that reflects time discounting and a
component that reflects the riskiness of the underlying cash flow. It follows from:20
(n)

1 = Et [ Mt,t+1 Rt,t+1 ]
that:
f

(n)

(n)

f

Et [ Rt,t+1 ] = Rt,t+1 − Covt [ Rt,t+1 , Mt,t+1 ] Rt,t+1 ,
f

where the first component Rt,t+1 = Et [ Mt,t+1 ]−1 is the one-period risk-free rate that
reflects time discounting and the second component reflects an additional discount compensating the investor for bearing risk (the covariance with the SDF; it reflects whether
this asset primarily pays off in good states of the world that have a low marginal utility
of consumption). The risk premium has the opposite sign of the covariance between
(n)
the stochastic discount factor (SDF) and the one-period return, Covt [ Mt,t+1 , Rt,t+1 ]. This
reflects the fact that a claim with a higher return in states of the world in which extra
resources are less valuable (i.e., when marginal utility Mt,t+1 is low), is less valuable to
the investors, and thus has a positive risk premium. Finally, to highlight the fact that only
innovations in the SDF matter for the purpose of understanding risk premia (rather than
its mean, which instead pins down the risk-free rate), we can rewrite excess returns as:
(n)

f

f

(n)

Et [ Rt,t+1 ] − Rt,t+1 = −Covt [ Rt,t+1 , Mt,t+1 − Et [ Mt,t+1 ]] Rt,t+1 .
As is common in asset pricing theory, we make the additional assumption that log returns
(n)
(n)
rt,t+1 ≡ ln( Rt,t+1 ) as well as the log stochastic discount factor mt,t+1 ≡ ln( Mt,t+1 ) are
jointly normally distributed, which allows us to simplify our expression for the risk premium to the covariance term alone (see, for example, Campbell and Vuolteenaho, 2004):
(n)

f

(n)

Et [ Rt,t+1 ] − Rt,t+1 ' −Covt [rt,t+1 , mt,t+1 − Et [mt,t+1 ]],

(9)
(n)

20 The

fundamental asset pricing equation introduced in Section 2.1 (equation 1) can be restated as Pt


h
i
h
i
( n −1)
P
(n)
( n −1)
Et Mt,t+1 Pt+1 , which implies 1 = Et Mt,t+1 t+(1n) = Et Mt,t+1 Rt,t+1 .
Pt

21

=

The above notation highlights again that only innovations in the (log-)SDF,
mt,t+1 − Et [mt,t+1 ], matter for expected returns.
To highlight the forces that shape the term structure of expected one-period returns,
we will focus on analyzing the set of linear and log-linear consumption-based asset pricing models, in which the stochastic discount factor is a function of consumption growth.
This class of models encompasses the vast majority of modern asset pricing models,
in particular those employed in climate change analysis, such as power utility models
(Lucas, 1978), long-run risk models with Epstein–Zin preferences (Bansal and Yaron,
2004), and rare disaster models (Barro, 2006; Gabaix, 2012). As noted in Dew-Becker
and Giglio (2013), these asset pricing models can be nested in the following general
representation for the SDF innovations:21
∞

mt,t+1 − Et [mt,t+1 ] = −

∑ zk · (Et+1 − Et )∆ct+1+k ,

(10)

k =0

where ∆ct+1 − Et ∆ct+1 (the first term of the sum, i.e. for k = 0) is the shock to current consumption growth, while ( Et+1 − Et )∆ct+1+k with k > 0 is news about future consumption
growth at horizon k, received during the holding period (between t and t + 1).
The terms zk depend only on the parameters of the utility function (not on the consumption growth process), and represent risk aversion regarding news about consumption growth at a particular horizon. They can be thought of as horizon-specific risk prices.
Substituting equation 10 into equation 9, we can write the expected return of any asset by
decomposing it across horizons:
(n)

f

(n)

Et [ Rt,t+1 ] − Rt,t+1 = z0 Covt [ Rt,t+1 , ∆ct+1 ] +
(n)

+ z1 Covt [ Rt,t+1 , ( Et+1 − Et )∆ct+2 ) +
(n)

+ z2 Covt [ Rt,t+1 , ( Et+1 − Et )∆ct+3 ] +
+ ....

(11)

The above decomposition holds for any asset, and therefore holds for all claims to cash
flows at one particular point in the future, Dt+n , which jointly characterize the term
structure of discount rates as discussed above. In particular, it highlights that the shape of
the term structure of expected one-period returns (and thus ultimately of horizon-specific
discount rates) can be attributed to the interaction of three forces:
21 More

precisely, all of these models produce this representation of the SDF depending only on
consumption growth news as long as the variance of consumption growth and higher moments are
constant; the decomposition easily generalizes to cases with arbitrary affine processes.

22

1. The term structure of horizon-specific risk prices zk , i.e., how much agents care about
long-term news relative to short-term news. The higher zk is for long maturities,
the more worried agents are about the long-run risks in the economy. For example,
Dew-Becker and Giglio (2013) show that in a power utility model, only z0 is different
from zero (and equal to risk aversion γ): the agent is only worried about the oneperiod innovation in consumption. On the other hand, an Epstein–Zin investor has
z0 = γ like in the power utility model, but also zk = (γ − ψ1 )θ k for k > 0, where ψ
is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution and θ a parameter close to 1 related to
the time discount factor. Epstein–Zin parameterizations with γ > ψ1 , as in standard
calibrations of the long-run risk model, imply that agents are worried both about
immediate consumption growth and news regarding future consumption.
And remembering that the covariance of two random variables can always be written as a
product of the correlation and the standard deviations of those two random variables:
2. How much news about future consumption growth there is in the economy (which
will affect the covariance terms for k > 0): if there is no news about future consumption growth, for example because it is unpredictable, all of the standard deviations
that involve news about future consumption growth and hence all of the respective
covariances will be equal to zero. This force reflects horizon-specific risk quantities.
3. How exposed each of the assets studied is to news at different maturities (which
will be reflected in the correlations and thus the covariance terms). For example, the
one-period return on a claim to very long-run consumption will be exposed to news
about this very long-run consumption, whereas a claim to short-run consumption
will not. We can think of this as horizon-specific risk exposures.
In principle, different combinations of these three forces can generate a downward-sloping
term structure of expected returns and discount rates as observed in the data. However,
they can also help us determine which combinations are not compatible with observed
data. Before we discuss this point in more detail, we now turn to a specific model of the
asset pricing literature, based on Lettau and Wachter (2007), that is able to match both
the term structure of stocks and real bonds and, most importantly, the term structure of
discount rates we estimate for real estate.

23

4.3
4.3.1

A Reduced-Form Asset Pricing Model for Stocks and Real Estate
Setup and Key Results

Uncertainty in this model is characterized by two shocks: a shock to current cash flow
growth and a shock to expected future cash flow growth. Let et+1 be a 2 × 1-vector of independent standard normal shocks. Denote by Dti with i ∈ {s, h} aggregate stock market
dividends and aggregate real estate and housing rents in the economy, respectively, and
let dit ≡ ln( Dti ). Aggregate cash flows evolve according to
∆dit+1 ≡ dit+1 − dit = gi + κi zt + σi et+1 ,
where zt is a scalar that follows the AR(1) process
zt+1 = φz zt + σz et+1 ,
with persistence 0 ≤ φz < 1, and where σi and σz are 1 × 2 row vectors. σi determines
which combination of the two shocks in et+1 drives the transitory shock to dividend or
rent growth. zt is a persistent long-run shock to the growth rate of cash flows that affects
both dividends and rents. To keep the model parsimonious, we assume that only one
shock drives the long-term fluctuations of dividend and rent growth, although the two
can load on it differently (through different κi ). The one-period risk-free rate, denoted
by r f ≡ ln( R f ), is assumed to be constant, as in Lettau and Wachter (2007). In the
spirit of an endowment economy in which endowments take the form of dividends,
such that consumption equals dividends as markets clear, the stochastic discount factor
is a function of dividend growth instead of consumption growth.22 Moreover, following
Lettau and Wachter (2007), only the current shock to dividend growth is priced, so that
the stochastic discount factor in this economy can be directly specified as:
1
Mt,t+1 = exp{mt,t+1 } = exp{−r f − x2 − xed,t+1 },
2
with
ed,t+1 =

σd
e ,
||σd || t+1

where x is the price of current cash flow risk in the model. The risk premium of expected
one-period returns on claims to cash flows at individual maturities can then be shown to
22 While

this keeps the model parsimonious, we show in Appendix A.3 how to re-cast the model with a
consumption-based, rather than a dividend-based SDF.

24

follow23
0

h

i,(n)
Et Rt,t+1

−R

f

i

' (σi +

Bzi (n − 1)σz )

σd
x,
||σd ||

(12)

with
Bzi (n) = κi

1 − φzn
.
1 − φz

(13)

Risk premia depend on the loadings on the different risk sources as well as the price of
each source of risk. All claims load equally, irrespective of their maturity, on shocks to
0
current cash flow growth ∆dit+1 and ||σd ||−1 σi σd x is the associated price of risk. Bzi (n − 1)
0
is the loading on shocks to the growth rate of cash-flows zt and ||σd ||−1 σz σd x is the
associated price of risk. Notice that the term-structure variation is generated by the
loading Bzi (n − 1), which is a strictly increasing function of horizon n, starting at 0 and
converging to 1−κiφz as n → ∞.
Note that in this setup with a constant price of risk x, the simple relationship between
the per-period discount rate for maturity n and the expected one-period holding return of
i,(k )
1 n
single-claim assets with maturities up to n applies: ri,n
t = n ∑k =1 ln( Et [ Rt,t+1 ]). Therefore,
the model will imply a downward slope in the term structure of per-period discount rates
if it generates a downward slope in one-period expected returns over maturities.
4.3.2

Calibration and Asset Pricing Moments

Lettau and Wachter (2007) and Lettau and Wachter (2011) show that this type of model can
successfully match a large number of asset pricing moments, including the term structure
of bonds and equity.24 To discipline our analysis, we maintained the calibration of Lettau
and Wachter (2007) whenever possible.25 We made one simplification by keeping the
price of risk x constant, since for the purpose of the analysis in this paper time variation
in risk prices is not of first-order importance (in Appendix A.3, we calibrate the full model
with time-varying risk prices, and verify that our conclusions are robust). Since real estate
was not present in Lettau and Wachter (2007), we add it to the model. We calibrate it by
setting gh = 0.7% to reflect the average rent growth estimated in Section 3.1, and choose
volatility kσh k as well as κ h to target the expected return on real estate in the data (6.4%)
23 See

Appendix A.3 for the derivations of all results stated here.
also the exciting work of van Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2012) and van Binsbergen et al. (2013)
for the model implications for claims to individual stock market dividends at horizons of 1 to 10 years.
25 In the interest of space, the calibration is discussed in Appendix A.3.
24 See

25

and the empirical term structure of real estate discount rates, in particular the estimate of
the very long-run discount rate of 2.6%. We set the risk-free rate at 1%, based on the U.K.
gilts real yield curve between 1998 and 2013 reported in Figure VI. These data show that
the U.K. real yield curve is approximately flat on average, with a real yield of 1.4% for
maturities between 1 and 25 years, and that there is some evidence for a mild downward
slope at longer maturities.26 Our calibration is summarized in Table IV.
Table V shows that our benchmark calibration, just as in Lettau and Wachter (2007),
allows us to match the key moments for equity. The average annual return on the stock
market is 9.1%. As a consequence of assuming away time-variation in the price of risk, the
volatility of the stock market is significantly lower than in the data, but as we show in Appendix A.3, this is easily fixed once we allow for time-variation in x. Expected dividend
growth is above 3% with a standard deviation of 14.5%. Importantly, the term structure
of discount rates for equity is downward-sloping as shown in Panel A of Figure VII. It
falls from 18.2% for claims to one year ahead dividends, to 6% for claims to one hundred
year ahead dividends, all the way to 4.6% for one thousand year ahead dividends. This
pattern of falling discount rates is consistent with empirical findings of van Binsbergen,
Brandt and Koijen (2012), who decompose the S&P 500 index into a portfolio of claims
to short-term dividends and a portfolio of claims to long-term dividends and show that
expected returns on the portfolio of short-term claims are higher than the returns on longterm claims.
The expected return on real estate is 5.9%, just below our empirical net return estimates between 6.4% and 8.0%. Expected rent growth is 1.6%. Our calibration implies
that returns as well as rent growth are about as volatile as equity, with 8.2% and 14.2%,
respectively. In line with our empirical findings, rental yields contribute more than two
thirds to total returns. The term structure of discount rates for real estate is downwardsloping as shown in Panel B of Figure VII. It falls from 17.8% for claims to one year ahead
rents, to 3.9% for claims to rents one hundred years ahead, all the way to 2.3% for one
thousand year ahead rents.
These results show that the extended Lettau and Wachter (2007) model can broadly
26 The

real yield curve is computed by the Bank of England and is available at http://www.
bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/yieldcurve/archive.aspx. Figure VI plots the
average shape of the real U.K. gilts curve for the period 1998-2013, as well as for two sub-periods: 19982007 and 2007-2013. The level of the yield curve shifted down during this latter period and the yield curve
became hump-shaped. The U.K. government debt also includes some perpetual bonds: the War Loan and
the Annuities. These bonds comprise a negligible part of the outstanding U.K. government debt (£2.6bn
out of £1.5trn of debt outstanding), and are classified as small and illiquid issuances by the U.K. Debt and
Management Office. They are excluded from our analysis, not only because they are nominal and we only
use data on U.K. real gilts, but also because their negligible size, scarce liquidity, and callability make it
hard to interpret their prices in terms of discount rates.

26

match the estimated term structure of discount rates for real estate, while at the same time
maintaining the original calibration of the model that matched stock and bond discount
rates. In the next subsection, we discuss in more detail the forces that allow the model
to match the downward-sloping term structures of risky assets like real estate and equity,
and highlight which modifications of the model would make the data harder or easier to
match.
4.3.3

The Term Structure of Risk Prices, Quantities and Exposures

The assumption that the SDF depends exclusively on the dividend shock ed is crucial to
understand the term structure implications of the model. It implies that agents, similar
to the consumption-based power utility model of Lucas (1978), care about next period’s
dividend growth, but do not directly care about news concerning future cash flows (z0 =
x > 0, but zk = 0 for k > 0). Therefore, a claim to long-term cash flows commands a
positive risk premium only if news about long-term cash flows are correlated with the
current dividend shock. Furthermore, this risk premium decreases with the maturity of
the claim if the cash flow process is mean-reverting, as is the case in the above calibration
of the model. Intuitively, after a negative shock ed hits the economy, the economy is
expected to recover and grow faster. This makes claims to short-run cash flows that do
not benefit from this mean reversion riskier than long-run cash flows that do.
To formalize these two intuitions, we can look at the model through the lens of the
price-quantity-exposure decomposition in equation 10. The innovations in the log stochastic discount factor mt,t+1 depend only on the immediate cash flow shock ∆dt+1 :
∞

mt,t+1 − Et [mt,t+1 ] = −

∑ zk · (Et+1 − Et )∆dt+1+k = −x · (Et+1 − Et )∆dt+1,

k =0

where the second equality follows from z0 = x > 0 and zk = 0 for all k > 0. We can
now see immediately that agents care about next period’s dividend growth, but do not
directly care about news concerning future cash flows, and that the term structure of risk
prices is equivalent to that of a power utility model, where x determines the relative risk
aversion of the agent.27 Similarly, from equation 11, we obtain:
0

(n)
Et [ Rt,t+1 ] −

f

R =

(n)
x · Covt [ Rt,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ]

= (σi +

Bzi (n − 1)σz )

σd
x,
||σd ||

where the last equality follows from equation 12. Since cash flows are mean-reverting,
27 In

the notation of Lucas (1978), x = γ, and γ determines the agent’s relative risk aversion.

27

the term structure of expected one-period holding returns is downward-sloping (σz σd0 is
negative and Bzi (n) is monotonically increasing in maturity n). Put differently, it is the
quantity of risk and the exposure to it across horizons that creates the downward slope in
the term structure of risky assets.
In the following, we will go back to our general price-quantity-exposure decomposition in equation 11 to discuss which alternative asset pricing mechanisms proposed by
the literature and previously applied to discounting climate change projects (see Section
5) might work towards or against matching our data on the term structure.
Long-Run Risks and Epstein–Zin Preferences. As discussed above, log-linear models with Epstein–Zin preferences feature zk > 0 for k > 0, so that pure news about
expected growth rates of cash flows directly affect the SDF. Since claims to long-run
cash flows Dt+n are naturally exposed to all dividend growth shocks from t to t + n
(Dt+n = Dt exp[∆dt+1 + ... + ∆dt+n ]), claims become more exposed to long-run shocks as
their maturity increases. Accordingly, their risk premium grows with maturity as more
and more of the covariance terms in equation 11 are added up with positive weights.
Therefore, introducing Epstein–Zin preferences would make it more difficult to match
the data on downward-sloping term structures of discount rates for risky assets.
Rare disasters. In a model with permanent disasters such as Barro (2006) and Gabaix
(2012), the covariance between returns and current dividend growth (the first term in
equation 11) increases.28 This would help to match expected returns of equities and real
estate, even with low prices of risk (z0 ) and a relatively low volatility of cash flow and
consumption growth. Section 3.2 provided evidence that real estate is indeed exposed to
disaster risk. A model of permanent disasters, however, generates a flat term structure
of discount rates since all assets load equally on the disaster risk, irrespective of maturity.29 Nakamura et al. (2013) show that this shortcoming is remedied if output growth
in the economy is modelled to partially recover following a disaster. Importantly, the
authors document that such an output process does a better job matching the data on
consumption and output growth during disaster periods across multiple countries over
the past century. In other words, the most comprehensive study on consumption behavior
in disaster periods shows precisely the kind of mean reversion that is captured by our
28 Note

that while the Lettau and Wachter (2007) model solved in the previous subsection features lognormal shocks, the term-structure decomposition in equation 11 does not depend on assumptions about
the distribution of the shocks and is compatible with rare disasters.
29 In other words, the covariance term Cov [ R(n) , ∆d
t t,t+1
t+1 ] would be the same for all n.

28

simple extension of the Lettau and Wachter (2007) model, and it is key in both setups to
generate a downward-sloping term structure of discount rates.
To sum up, Section 3 has demonstrated that the term structure of discount rates of
risky assets is downward-sloping for important and large asset classes. Our discussion of
alternative asset-pricing mechanisms shows that no generally accepted modifications of
simple power-utility preferences generate such a downward slope (Epstein–Zin preferences even counteract it!). Mean reversion in cash flows of risky assets emanates as a key
mechanism to generate a downward-sloping term structure of discount rates. The next
section will discuss what these findings imply for valuing climate change investments.

5

Implications for Environmental Policy

Our new empirical evidence on the term structure of real estate discount rates, combined
with our structural analysis from asset pricing theory, provides a number of insights for
evaluating climate change policy. In this section, we highlight the implications of our
findings on the level and slope of the term structure of real estate discount rates for
valuing investments in climate change abatement. We also discuss which of the existing frameworks for thinking about discounting the future benefits from climate change
abatement are consistent with the observed downward-sloping term structure of discount
rates (DDR) for risky assets.

I. Applying observed average returns of traded assets to discount cash
flows from investments in climate change abatement can be misleading
Our evidence cautions against using the observed average rate of return of traded assets
to discount investments in climate change abatement, even if the traded asset has the same
riskiness as the investment in climate change abatement at all horizons. Many benefits of
climate change abatement will materialize over several centuries, while average returns to
most traded assets are largely driven by benefits over much shorter horizons. This creates
a maturity mismatch between the cash flows of observed assets and those of investments
in climate change abatement.
Consider for example the discount rate choices of Nordhaus and Boyer (2000) and
Nordhaus (2008), who develop a classic workhorse model of climate change, the dynamic
integrated climate-economy (DICE) model. Nordhaus (2013) suggests a constant rate of
discounting for investments in climate change abatement of 4% based on an “opportunity
cost approach.” In particular, he considers the returns to alternative investments that
29

the government could undertake instead of investing in climate change abatement; a
discount rate of 4% reflects the author’s preferred estimate of the average return to capital
(see also Piketty, 2014). But the capital stock of the economy is an asset that pays cash
flows at all horizons, including the short term. In thinking about an investment with
primarily long-term payoffs, such as climate change abatement, the appropriate discount
rate should be the one that applies to the long-term cash flows only.
To emphasize the quantitative importance of this distinction, remember that our estimates of average real estate returns are between 6.4% and 8.0% (an estimate that is within
the range used by Nordhaus (2013) for real estate returns), while the returns to a claim
to rents 100 or more years into the future are estimated to be below 2.6%. The benefits of
climate change abatement that have a similar riskiness as real estate should be discounted
at rates much closer to the (low) long-term discount rate rather than at the average rate of
return, which reflects some value-weighted average of (high) short-term and (low) longterm discount rates. A choice of discount rates based on the average return to real estate
as opposed to the appropriate long-run discount rate would select a rate that is more than
two times too high, with dramatic effects on the present value of future benefits.

II. The appropriate discount rate for long-run climate-hedging investments is below 2.6%
Our empirical evidence in Section 3 shows that real estate is a risky asset with returns that
covary positively with consumption growth and which performs poorly during disasters.
Since its cash flows are risky, its discount rates are above the risk-free discount rate at all
horizons.30 This observation implies that in any model in which long-run investments in
climate change abatement pay off in bad states of the world (and therefore act as a hedge),
the appropriate discount rate needs to be below the long-run discount rate for real estate
that we estimated at 2.6%. To formally derive this bound, we can express any discount
rate as a combination of risk-free discounting and a risk premium correction:
2.6% = r h,n = r f ,n + RPh,n .
Since real estate is risky, it has a positive risk-premium: RPh,n > 0. Conversely, a climate
change abatement investment, denoted cl, that reduces (hedges) risk at the same horizon
30 To

be precise, we provide evidence that claims to residential real estate cash flows at all horizons (i.e., a
house including its grounds) are risky, which is supportive for the riskiness of its long-run cash flows.

30

will have a negative risk premium: RPcl,n < 0. Therefore:
2.6% = r h,n = r f ,n + RPh,n > r f ,n + RPcl,n = r cl,n
This is a simple yet powerful result. First, climate change abatement investments are
indeed often considered to be hedges in the literature (Barro, 2013; Lemoine, 2015; Wagner
and Weitzman, 2015; Weitzman, 2012). Second, this upper bound is lower than numerous
estimates used in the existing literature and by policymakers for discounting investments
in climate change abatement. For example, it is substantially below the 4% suggested
by Nordhaus (2013) and the 4.6% suggested by Gollier (2013). Quantitatively, it is more
in line with long-run discount rates that are close to the risk-free rate, as suggested by
Weitzman (2012), or the 1.4% suggested by Stern (2006)31 , or results by Barro (2013). It
is also close to the average recommended long-term social discount rate of 2.25% elicited
by Drupp et al. (2015) in a survey of 197 experts, and falls within the range of 1% to
3% that more than 90% of these experts are comfortable with. At the same time, while
some authors have proposed low long-run discount rates for climate change abatement,
the theoretical arguments underlying these proposals vary widely, and some are at odds
with our empirical evidence (see point III below).
In light of the general disagreement in the literature regarding the appropriate discount rate, the interagency group tasked by the U.S. government to value reductions in
CO2 chose three certainty-equivalent constant discount rates: 2.5%, 3%, and 5% per year.
Our estimates provide a tight bound that is only consistent with the lowest rate of 2.5%
for investments providing a long-run hedge against climate disasters. Greenstone, Kopits
and Wolverton (2013) report the cost of 1 metric-ton of CO2 to be $57 when using our
suggested 2.5% discount rate, but only $11 when using a 5% discount rate, illustrating
the impact of this bound on climate-change-related welfare calculations (see also Pizer
et al., 2014).

III. Which downward-sloping discount rates (DDR)?
The existing economics literature on valuing investments in climate change abatement
has developed a variety of models with vastly different theoretical implications for discounting cash flows from these investments. Some of this literature has argued for a
downward-sloping term structure of discount rates (DDR) for investments in climate
change abatement, where benefits that occur in later periods are discounted at a lower
31 See

also Stern (2008) for comments on the discussion of the Stern Review’s approach to discounting.

31

per-period discount rate (Arrow et al., 2013b; Cropper et al., 2014; Farmer et al., 2015;
Traeger, 2014b).32 As discussed in the introduction, these arguments have motivated
policy changes in France and the U.K., which have adopted a downward-sloping term
structure of discount rates for evaluating long-run investments.
At a superficial level, our empirical finding of a downward-sloping discount rate for
real estate cash flows might appear consistent with much of this literature proposing
downward-sloping discount rates to evaluate investments in climate change abatement.
On a deeper level however, our data and structural analysis help to restrict the space
of valid mechanisms that may generate a downward-sloping term structure of discount
rates for such investments in climate change abatement. In particular, since these investments are likely to pay off conditional on the state of the economy, it is important to
understand the forces that drive the term structure of risk premia.
IIIa. Forces that struggle to generate DDRs for risky assets
We start by reviewing a number of economic mechanisms that have been proposed to
justify downward-sloping term structures for climate change policies, but which at the
same time imply a flat or even increasing term structure of discount rates for risky assets
in equilibrium. These models therefore cannot rationalize our empirical finding of a
downward-sloping term structure of discount rates for risky assets such as real estate.
Hyperbolic Discounting. A first argument for justifying downward-sloping discount
rates adopts the hyperbolic discounting framework of Laibson (1997), where investors
with time-inconsistent preferences apply higher rate of time preferences between the
present and the immediate future and lower rates when comparing investments across
periods further in the future. While this might be a good description of the preferences of
individual agents, and one might be tempted to conjecture that it leads to a downwardsloping term structure of discount rates, Barro (1999) and Luttmer and Mariotti (2003)
have pointed out that a hyperbolic subjective rate of time preferences actually generates
a flat term structure of risk-free discount rates in general equilibrium models and has no
direct implications for the term structure of risk premia.33 It is then evident that these
32 See,

for example, Traeger (2013) for a discussion of the Weitzman-Gollier puzzle in this context.
precisely, in the presence of commitment there would be a one-off downward-sloping risk-free
yield curve on the convergence path to the steady state. However, this downward slope would not affect
risk premia and would disappear in the steady state. In the absence of commitment, the term structure
is always flat. Cropper and Laibson (1998) point out that in this class of models there might be undersaving and a too-high risk-free rate, and it is therefore optimal for the government to increase aggregate
investment. They correctly point out that this might lead to more climate change abatement investments,
but that the argument equally holds for other investments.
33 More

32

kind of preferences by themselves are insufficient to rationalize our data.
Ramsey Rule. A second approach to motivating downward-sloping discount rates has
extended the Ramsey Rule of deterministic models with a horizon-dependent precautionary savings term to a stochastic environment (see, for example, Arrow et al., 2013b;
Dasgupta, 2008; Gollier, 2008, 2011, 2012; Groom et al., 2005; Karp and Traeger, 2013;
Kopp et al., 2012). In particular, when preferences are time-separable with a flow utility
of consumption u, the representative agent’s first-order condition with respect to a real
risk-free bond with maturity n is:
f

u0 (Ct ) = δn Rt,t+n Et [u0 (Ct+n )]
with δ the per-period time discount factor. Assuming standard power utility, u(Ct ) =
1− γ

Ct
1− γ

, with γ the coefficient of relative risk aversion, log-normal consumption growth as
in Arrow et al. (2013b), and re-writing the discount factor in terms of the rate of time
preference ρ: δ = 1+1 ρ , we can derive the following simplified expression for the risk-free
discount rate at horizon n:34
f ,n

rt

1 γ2
1
Vart [∆ct,t+n ]
= ln ρ + γ Et [∆ct,t+n ] −
n
n 2
f ,n

where ∆ct,t+n is the logarithmic consumption growth between t and t + n, and r t ≡
f
1
n ln( Rt,t+n ) is the per-period risk-free discount rate up to horizon n.
There are only two ways to generate a downward-sloping term structure for perf ,n
period discount rates r t within this framework. The first is to assume that consumption
growth will slow down at long horizons, such that n1 Et [∆ct,t+n ] is declining with maturity.
This mechanism is unlikely to generate a quantitatively large downward slope, nor can it
generate a downward slope in steady state.
The second is to assume that uncertainty about consumption growth is strongly in2
creasing with the horizon, so that the term n1 γ2 Vart [∆ct,t+n ] increases with maturity n.
This would push down the long-run risk-free rate. Intuitively, the presence of substantial
uncertainty about long-horizon growth in consumption gives rise to a precautionary
motive that induces agents to save more for these horizons, ultimately pushing down
equilibrium discount rates at long horizons (see Arrow et al., 2013b). Despite the intuitive
34 The

result is derived as follows: Parameterize the utility function and rearrange to obtain 1 =
· ln ρ − γ∆ct,t+n }]. Using the log-normal result that E[exp{ X }] = exp{ E[ X ] + 21 Var [ X ]},

f
Rt,t+n Et [exp{−n

f

we can rewrite: 1 = Rt,t+n exp{−n · ln ρ − γEt [∆ct,t+n ] + 12 γ2 Vart [∆ct,t+n ]}]. Taking logs, we obtain the
result.

33

appeal of this mechanism, it has several theoretical and empirical limitations that our
framework sheds light upon. First, it is only informative about the term structure of
f ,n
risk-free discount rates r t . Since investments in climate change abatement are unlikely
to be risk-free, one also needs to understand the term structure of risk premia to determine appropriate discount rates.35 Second, downward-sloping risk-free discount rates
are inconsistent with the essentially flat, and certainly not strongly downward-sloping,
real yield curve for U.K. government bonds reported in Figure VI. We conclude that
the Ramsey framework provides only limited guidance for climate change abatement
investment.
Gamma Discounting. A third approach, pioneered by Weitzman (2001), generates DDRs
in a reduced-form environment where a number of experts, who are assumed to have
a constant but heterogeneous discount rate, are polled regarding the appropriate level
of the discount rate for environmental policy. The author then shows that if the disagreement among experts takes the form of a particular (Gamma) distribution, the resulting expert-average discount rate is hyperbolic and thus declining in the horizon of
the investment. This analysis is theoretically interesting from a policy perspective and
largely complementary to our own analysis. We have shown that downward-sloping
term structures of discount rates are a pervasive phenomenon in the data and can be
rationalized in both models and real life situations where the polling of experts plays no
role.
Epstein–Zin Preferences. Finally, another strand of the climate change literature produces interesting shapes for the term structure of discount rates by introducing preferences that reflect a distaste for long-run risks (in particular Epstein–Zin preferences
with a risk aversion, γ, that is higher than the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution, ψ). As discussed in Section 4, standard calibrations of Epstein–Zin preferences imply that risky assets that are positively exposed to risk in long-run consumption
growth (such as long-maturity claims to aggregate cash flows) will have an increasing
term structure of discount rates, inconsistent with our data for real estate (see also van
Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen, 2012). Standard calibrations of Epstein–Zin preferences in
a long-run risk economy also generate a downward slope in the term structure of risk-free
35 For

example, in an exciting debate Gollier (2013) points out that in the DICE model climate change
costs, being a by-product of production and consumption, tend to occur the most in good states of the
economy, thus behaving like a hedge asset. Weitzman (2012), on the contrary, argues that climate costs
behave like a risky asset because they occur the most in bad states of the economy via tipping points and
feedback loops that induce low output and consumption as a result of a climatic disaster.

34

discount rates, a feature that is inconsistent with the yield curve data in Figure VI (see also
Beeler and Campbell, 2012). For example, Gollier (2013) evaluates climate change policy
in a long-run risk model that combines parametric uncertainty about the growth rate of
the economy with uncertainty about the probability of rare disasters. He acknowledges
that the model produces a counterfactual downward-sloping term structure of risk-free
discount rates and an upward-sloping term structure of risky discount rates in its benchmark parametrization with Epstein–Zin preferences.36
IIIb. Forces that work towards generating DDRs for risky assets
As we show in Section 4, traditional preference specifications cannot, by themselves,
produce a downward-sloping term structure of discount rates for risky assets, with some
even working against such a downward slope. This suggests that the observed downwardsloping term structure of discount rates for risky assets must be largely driven by its cash
flow dynamics.
In particular, our empirical finding of a downward-sloping term structure of discount
rates for risky assets such as real estate, paired with our structural analysis in Section
4, suggests that important shocks in the economy exhibit partial mean reversion in cash
flows. Intuitively, after a negative shock hits the economy, the economy is expected to recover and grow faster when cash flows are (partially) mean-reverting. This makes claims
to short-run cash flows that do not benefit from this mean reversion riskier than longrun cash flows that do, and creates a downward-sloping term structure of discount rates.
In this spirit, Nakamura et al. (2013) motivate their downward-sloping term structure of
discount rates for risky assets by documenting that consumption disasters as in Barro
(2006) and Gabaix (2012) tend to partially mean-revert in a large cross section of countries
for the last century. Such mean reversion also rationalizes the downward-sloping risk
premia in our parameterization of the Lettau and Wachter (2007) model in Section 4.3.
Our empirical estimates in Section 3.2 show that real estate is exposed to many economic disasters, including consumption disasters and wars. Specifically, due to its tight
connection with immovable land, it is an asset class that is particularly exposed to risks
that are focused geographically. As such, real estate cash flows might be informative
about the response of the economy to climate disasters (e.g., real estate is likely to lose
substantial value on average if sea levels rise significantly). The evidence on mean reversion after disasters in Nakamura et al. (2013) and our structural analysis suggest that the
36 The

long-run risk model of climate change by Bansal, Kiku and Ochoa (2013) behaves similarly. Cai,
Judd and Lontzek (2013) also study climate change policy implications in a DSGE extension of the DICE
model that includes beliefs about uncertain climate tipping points along with Epstein–Zin preferences.

35

economy as a whole might also exhibit features of mean reversion in cash flows following
climate change disasters. Within the environmental literature, our results are therefore
consistent with an interesting and empirically-motivated modification of models of climate change as a disaster risk (e.g., Barro, 2006; Weitzman, 2012), that would allow for a
partial recovery of economic activity following a climate disaster. It remains an exciting
open question for future research to investigate how such partial mean reversion can
be rationalized in models that mix physical elements of climate change (tipping points,
increasing ocean levels, etc.) with the likely response of economic activity (technological
innovation, geographic relocation of production, etc.). Exciting new work in this broad
direction is being undertaken by Crost and Traeger (2014), Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg
(2015), Lemoine (2015), Lemoine and Traeger (2014), and Traeger (2014a, 2015).

IV. Social and private discounting
A well-known problem when thinking about climate change is the potential difference
between private and social discount rates. If individuals are not fully internalizing all future benefits of a certain investment (for example in climate change abatement), observing
private discount rates related to that investment will not be informative about the social
discount rate a policymaker should apply in a normative analysis, i.e., when internalizing
all these benefits.
When estimating discount rates from different assets and applying them to climate
change policies, it is therefore crucial to consider assets for which individuals internalize
all costs and benefits, just like a policymaker would.37 For those assets, private and
social discount rates are more closely aligned. The empirical evidence in this paper is
based on one particular asset class, real estate, that is typically viewed as a very longduration asset that passes from generation to generation. Based on a similar reasoning,
a large literature has used hedonic regressions of house prices to estimate the values that
policymakers should assign to environmental amenities and dis-amenities. For example,
Chay and Greenstone (2005) estimate the capitalization of total suspended particulates
air pollution into real estate values. Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) look at changes in
house prices to estimate households’ valuation of cleanups of hazardous waste cites. In
agreement with this literature, we conclude that the private discount rates in real estate
are highly informative and provide a tight upper bound for social discount rates in real
37 See also Schneider, Traeger and Winkler (2012) for an interesting discussion of the challenges in using
observable data based on individual decision-making in infinite-time-horizon models, which result from
the discrepancy between individual decision horizons and time horizons relevant for discounting climate
change investments.

36

estate; and, with appropriate risk and maturity adjustments, they are informative for the
social discount rates of other investments such as climate change projects.

V. Time consistency and optimal intertemporal policy
The environmental literature on DDRs has emphasized the problem of time-inconsistency
supposedly immanent in such discounting schedules. These worries mainly stem from
the motivation of DDRs based on hyperbolic or gamma discounting. However, our discussion in Section 4 shows that mean-reverting cash flows in general, and mean-reverting
disasters paired with standard power utility preferences in particular, are able to rationalize a downward-sloping term structure of discount rates for risky assets. Note that such
a setup is void of any time-inconsistency problem. In particular, the specific calibration
of our reduced-form model can be recovered from agents with time-separable utility and
k
preferences over one-period consumption growth, U = Et [∑∞
k =0 δ u ( ct+k )], with u of the
power-utility form, and consumption equal to the aggregate dividends paid by the stock
market.

6

Conclusion

We estimate the term structure of discount rates for real estate over the very long horizons
(100 or more years) crucial for evaluating investments in climate change abatement. We
find these discount rates to be downward-sloping over maturity, with an average rate of
return to real estate of at least 6.4% and a long-run discount rate of 2.6%. In light of this
evidence, we provide a structural analysis based on asset pricing theory to show how
these declining discount rates, which are also found in other risky asset classes such as
equity, imply a declining term structure of risk premia, which we link to partial mean
reversion in aggregate cash flows.
Based on our term structure estimates and our structural analysis, we derive several
implications for the appropriate discount rate schedule for investments in climate change
abatement. First, we show that applying observed average returns of traded assets to
discount cash flows from investments in climate change abatement is misleading when
discount rates vary substantially across horizons. Second, we show that as long as climate
change is a form of aggregate risk, the long-run benefits of investments in its abatement
should be discounted at a rate below 2.6%. Finally, we discuss which of the mechanisms
used in the current literature to generate a downward-sloping term structure of discount
rates are consistent with our empirical findings.
37

References
Ambrose, Brent W., Piet Eichholtz, and Thies Lindenthal. 2013. “House Prices and
Fundamentals: 355 Years of Evidence.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45(23): 477–491.
Arrow, Kenneth, Maureen Cropper, Christian Gollier, Ben Groom, Geoffrey Heal,
Richard Newell, William Nordhaus, Robert Pindyck, William Pizer, Paul Portney,
Thomas Sterner, Richard S. J. Tol, and Martin Weitzman. 2013a. “Determining
Benefits and Costs for Future Generations.” Science, 341(6144): 349–350.
Arrow, Kenneth, Maureen Cropper, Christian Gollier, Ben Groom, Geoffrey Heal,
Richard Newell, William Nordhaus, Robert Pindyck, William Pizer, Paul Portney,
et al. 2013b. “How Should Benefits and Costs Be Discounted in an Intergenerational
Context? The Views of an Expert Panel.” Resources for the Future Discussion Paper No.
12-53.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles.” Journal of Finance, 59(4): 1481–1509.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Marcelo Ochoa. 2013. “Climate Change, Growth, and
Risk.”
Barro, Robert J. 1999. “Ramsey Meets Laibson in the Neoclassical Growth Model.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4): 1125–1152.
Barro, Robert J. 2006. “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3): 823–866.
Barro, Robert J. 2013. “Environmental Protection, Rare Disasters, and Discount Rates.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19258.
Barro, Robert J., and Jose F. Ursua. 2008. “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 39(1): 255–350.
Beeler, Jason, and John Y. Campbell. 2012. “The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate
Asset Prices: An Empirical Assessment.” Critical Finance Review, 1: 141–182.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad MartinezPeria. 2001. “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy, 16(32): 51–
82.
Cai, Yongyang, Kenneth L. Judd, and Thomas S. Lontzek. 2013. “The Social Cost of
Stochastic and Irreversible Climate Change.” NBER Working Paper, 18704.
Campbell, John Y, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. 2004. “Bad Beta, Good Beta.” American
Economic Review, 94(5): 1249–1275.
Campbell, Sean D, Morris A Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert F Martin. 2009. “What
Moves Housing Markets: A Variance Decomposition of the Rent–Price Ratio.” Journal
of Urban Economics, 66(2): 90–102.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence
from the Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2).
Cocco, Joao F. 2005. “Portfolio Choice in the Presence of Housing.” Review of Financial
Studies, 18(2): 535–567.
Cochrane, John H. 2005. Asset Pricing. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.
Cropper, Maureen, and David Laibson. 1998. The Implications of Hyperbolic Discounting
for Project Evaluation. The World Bank.
Cropper, Maureen L., Mark C. Freeman, Ben Groom, and William A. Pizer. 2014.
“Declining Discount Rates.” American Economic Review, 104(5): 538–43.
Crost, Benjamin, and Christian P. Traeger. 2014. “Optimal CO2 Mitigation Under
Damage Risk Valuation.” Nature Climate Change.
Dasgupta, Partha. 2008. “Discounting Climate Change.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
37(2): 141–169.
38

Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2015. “On the Spatial Economic Impact of
Global Warming.” Journal of Urban Economics, 88: 16 – 37.
Dew-Becker, Ian, and Stefano Giglio. 2013. “Asset Pricing in the Frequency Domain:
Theory and Empirics.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19416.
Díaz, Antonia, and María José Luengo-Prado. 2008. “On the User Cost and
Homeownership.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(3): 584–613.
Dreze, Jean, and Nicholas Stern. 1987. “The Theory of Cost-Benefit Analysis.” In
Handbook of Public Economics. Vol. 2, , ed. A. J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein, Chapter
14, 909–989. Elsevier.
Drupp, Moritz A., Mark Freeman, Ben Groom, and Frikk Nesje. 2015. “Discounting
Disentangled: An Expert Survey on the Determinants of the Long-Term Social Discount
Rate.” Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy Working Paper No. 195.
Eichholtz, Piet. 1997. “A Long Run House Price Index: The Herengracht Index, 1628–
1973.” Real Estate Economics, 25(2): 175–192.
Eitrheim, Øyvind, and Solveig K Erlandsen. 2005. “House Prices in Norway, 1819–1989.”
Scandinavian Economic History Review, 53(3): 7–33.
Farmer, J. Doyne, John Geanakoplos, Jaume Masoliver, Miquel Montero, and Josep
Perelló. 2015. “Value of the Future: Discounting in Random Environments.” Physical
Review E, 91: 052816.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh. 2010. “The
Macroeconomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing
in General Equilibrium.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15988.
Flavin, Marjorie, and Takashi Yamashita. 2002. “Owner-Occupied Housing and the
Composition of the Household Portfolio.” American Economic Review, 92(1): 345–362.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2012. “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten
Puzzles in Macro-Finance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 645–700.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. 2015a. “No-Bubble Condition:
Model-Free Tests in Housing Markets.” Econometrica, Forthcoming.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. 2015b. “Very Long-Run
Discount Rates.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1): 1–53.
Gollier, Christian. 2008. “Discounting With Fat-Tailed Economic Growth.” Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 37(2/3): 171–186.
Gollier, Christian. 2011. “On the Understanding of the Precautionary Effect in
Discounting.” Geneva Risk and Insurance Review, 36: 95–111.
Gollier, Christian. 2012. Pricing the Planet’s Future: The Economics of Discounting in an
Uncertain World. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.
Gollier, Christian. 2013. “Evaluation of Long-Dated Investments Under Uncertain
Growth Trend, Volatility and Catastrophes.” Toulouse School of Economics TSE
Working Papers 12-361.
Gordon, Myron J. 1982. The Investment, Financing, and Valuation of the Corporation.
Greenwood Press.
Greenstone, Michael, and Justin Gallagher. 2008. “Does Hazardous Waste Matter?
Evidence from the Housing Market and the Superfund Program.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 123(3): 951–1003.
Greenstone, Michael, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton. 2013. “Developing a Social
Cost of Carbon for US Regulatory Analysis: A Methodology and Interpretation.”
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 7(1): 23–46.
Groom, Ben, Cameron Hepburn, Phoebe Koundouri, and David Pearce. 2005.
“Declining Discount Rates: The Long and the Short of it.” Environmental and Resource
Economics, 32(4): 445–493.
39

Gyourko, Joseph, and Donald B. Keim. 1992. “What Does the Stock Market Tell us About
Real Estate Returns?” Real Estate Economics, 20(3): 457–485.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Scott F Richard. 1987. “The Role of Conditioning Information
in Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models.”
Econometrica, 55: 587–614.
Harding, John P, Stuart S Rosenthal, and CF Sirmans. 2007. “Depreciation of Housing
Capital, Maintenance, and House Price Inflation: Estimates From a Repeat Sales
Model.” Journal of Urban Economics, 61(2): 193–217.
HM Treasury. 2003. “Green Book.”
Kaplow, Louis, Elisabeth Moyer, and David A. Weisbach. 2010. “The Social Evaluation
of Intergenerational Policies and Its Application to Integrated Assessment Models of
Climate Change.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 10(2).
Karp, Larry, and Christian P. Traeger. 2013. “Discounting.” Encyclopedia of Energy, Natural
Resource, and Environmental Economics, 286–292.
Kopp, Robert E., Alexander Golub, Nathaniel O. Keohane, and Chikara Onda. 2012.
“The Influence of the Specification of Climate Change Damages on the Social Cost of
Carbon.” Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 6(2012-13): 1 – 40.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(2): 443–478.
Lebègue, Daniel. 2005. “Révision du taux d’actualisation des investissements publics.
Rapport du Groupe d’Experts, Commisariat Gènèral du Plan.”
Leigh, Wilhelmina A. 1980. “Economic Depreciation of the Residential Housing Stock of
the United States, 1950-1970.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 62(2): 200–206.
Lemoine, Derek. 2015. “The Climate Risk Premium.” Available at SSRN 2560031.
Lemoine, Derek, and Christian P. Traeger. 2014. “Watch Your Step: Optimal Policy in a
Tipping Climate.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1): 137–166.
Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter. 2007. “Why Is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky?
A Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium.” Journal of Finance, 62(1): 55–92.
Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter. 2011. “The Term Structures of Equity and Interest
Rates.” Journal of Financial Economics, 101(1): 90–113.
Lucas, Robert E, Jr. 1978. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy.” Econometrica,
46(6): 1429–45.
Lustig, Hanno N., and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh. 2005. “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance, and Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective.” Journal of Finance,
60(3): 1167–1219.
Luttmer, Erzo G., and Thomas Mariotti. 2003. “Subjective Discounting in an Exchange
Economy.” Journal of Political Economy, 111(5): 959–989.
Mack, Adrienne, and Enrique Martínez-García. 2011. “A Cross-Country Quarterly
Database of Real House Prices: A Methodological Note.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Working Paper 99.
Malpezzi, Stephen, Larry Ozanne, and Thomas G Thibodeau. 1987. “Microeconomic
Estimates of Housing Depreciation.” Land Economics, 63(4): 372–385.
Mayerhauser, Nicole, and Marshall Reinsdorf. 2006. “Housing Services in the National
Economic Accounts.” US Bureau of Economic Analysis.
McCarthy, Jonathan, and Richard Peach. 2010. “The Measurement of Rent Inflation.”
FRB of New York Staff Report 425.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and James Stock. 2015. “The Role of Integrated Assessment Models
in Climate Policy: A User’s Guide and Assessment.” The Harvard Project on Climate
Agreements Discussion Paper 15-68.
Moyer, Elisabeth J., Mark D. Woolley, Nathan J. Matteson, Michael J. Glotter, and
40

David A. Weisbach. 2014. “Climate Impacts on Economic Growth as Drivers of
Uncertainty in the Social Cost of Carbon.” The Journal of Legal Studies, 43(2): 401 – 425.
Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert Barro, and José Ursúa. 2013. “Crises and
Recoveries in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters.” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3): 35–74.
Nordhaus, William D. 2008. A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
Policies. Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, William D. 2013. The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics for a
Warming World. Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, William D., and Joseph Boyer. 2000. Warming the World: Economic Models of
Global Warming. MIT press.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel. 2007. “Housing, Consumption
and Asset Pricing.” Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3): 531–569.
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-first Century. Harvard University Press.
Pizer, William, Matthew Adler, Joseph Aldy, David Anthoff, Maureen Cropper,
Kenneth Gillingham, Michael Greenstone, Brian Murray, Richard Newell, Richard
Richels, et al. 2014. “Using and Improving the Social Cost of Carbon.” Science,
346(6214): 1189–1190.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2008. “Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial
Crisis so Different? An International Historical Comparison.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings, 98(2): 339–344.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries
of Financial Folly. Princeton University Press.
Schneider, Maik T., Christian P. Traeger, and Ralph Winkler. 2012. “Trading Off
Generations: Equity, Discounting, and Climate Change.” European Economic Review,
56(8): 1621 – 1644.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises.” American Economic Review, 102(2): 1029–
1061.
Shapiro, Harold T., Roseanne Diab, Carlos H. DeBrito Cruz, Maureen Cropper, Jingyun
Fang, Louise O. Fresco, Syukuro Manabe, Goverdhan Mehta, Mario Molina, Peter
Williams, Ernst-Ludwig Winacker, and Abdul H. Zakri. 2010. “Climate Change
Assessments – Review of the Processes and Procedures of the IPCC.” Amsterdam,
InterAcademy.
Shiller, Robert J. 2006. “Long-Term Perspectives on the Current Boom in Home Prices.”
The Economists’ Voice, 3(4): 1–11.
Shiller, Robert J. 2007. “Understanding Recent Trends in House Prices and Home
Ownership.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15988.
Stern, Nicholas. 2006. Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change. London, UK:Her
Majesty’s Treasury.
Stern, Nicholas. 2008. “The Economics of Climate Change.” American Economic Review,
98(2): 1–37.
Stern, Nicholas. 2014a. “Ethics, Equity and the Economics of Climate Change Paper 1:
Science and Philosophy.” Economics and Philosophy, 30: 397–444.
Stern, Nicholas. 2014b. “Ethics, Equity and the Economics of Climate Change Paper 2:
Economics and Politics.” Economics and Philosophy, 30: 445–501.
Traeger, Christian P. 2013. “Discounting Under Uncertainty: Disentangling the Weitzman
and the Gollier Effect.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 66(3): 573 –
582.
Traeger, Christian P. 2014a. “A 4-Stated DICE: Quantitatively Addressing Uncertainty
Effects in Climate Change.” Environmental and Resource Economics, 59(1): 1–37.
41

Traeger, Christian P. 2014b. “Why Uncertainty Matters: Discounting Under Intertemporal
Risk Aversion and Ambiguity.” Economic Theory, 56(3): 627–664.
Traeger, Christian P. 2015. “Analytic Integrated Assessment and Uncertainty.”
van Benthem, Arthur. 2015. “What is the Optimal Speed Limit on Freeways?” Journal of
Public Economics, 124: 44 – 62.
van Binsbergen, Jules, Michael Brandt, and Ralph Koijen. 2012. “On the Timing and
Pricing of Dividends.” American Economic Review, 102(4): 1596–1618.
van Binsbergen, Jules, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph Koijen, and Evert Vrugt. 2013. “Equity
Yields.” Journal of Financial Economics, 110(3): 503 – 519.
Wagner, Gernot, and Martin L. Weitzman. 2015. Climate Shock: The Economic Consequences
of a Hotter Planet. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.
Weisbach, David A. 2014. “Distributionally Weighted Cost-Benefit Analysis: Welfare
Economics Meets Organizational Design.” Journal of Legal Analysis, 7(1): 151 – 182.
Weisbach, David, and Cass R. Sunstein. 2009. “Climate Change and Discounting the
Future: A Guide for the Perplexed.” Yale Law & Policy Review, 27(2): 433 – 457.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2001. “Gamma Discounting.” American Economic Review, 91(1): 260–
271.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2012. “Rare Disasters, Tail-Hedged Investments, and Risk-Adjusted
Discount Rates.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18496.

42

-.2

Average Discount to Freehold
-.15
-.1
-.05

0

Figure I: Leasehold Price Discounts by Remaining Lease Length

80-99

100-124
125-149
150-300
Lease Length Remaining

700+

-.6

Average Discount to Freehold
-.4
-.2
0

.2

(A) Leasehold Discounts - U.K.

50-69

70-84

85-89
90-94
Lease Length Remaining

95-99

800+

(B) Leasehold Discounts - Singapore
Note: Source: Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel (2015b). The top panel plots log-price difference between
leaseholds of varying remaining maturity and freeholds for flats sold in the U.K. between 2004 and 2013.
The bottom panel plots log-price difference between leaseholds of varying remaining maturity and freeholds
in Singapore between 1995 and 2013. The vertical axis is expressed in log-points, the horizontal axis shows
leasehold discounts depending on the remaining term of the lease. The bars indicate the 95% confidence
interval of the estimate. See original reference for further details on data and estimation.

43

.88

Real House Prices Relative to Crisis
.9
.92
.94
.96
.98
1

1.02

Figure II: House Price Riskiness I

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Years Relative to Crisis

2

3

2

3

.95

Real House Prices and Consumption
1
1.05 1.1 1.15 1.2 1.25 1.3

(A) Financial Crises

-3

-2

-1
0
1
Years Relative to Consumption Trough
Real House Prices

Real Consumption

(B) Consumption Disasters
Note: The top panel shows average real house price movements relative to financial crises in Schularick and
Taylor (2012), Bordo et al. (2001) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). The bottom panel shows average real house
price movements and average real consumption relative to the trough of consumption disasters identified by
Barro and Ursua (2008). House prices and consumption volumes during the reference year are normalized
to 1. See Appendix A.2.1 and Appendix Table A.2 for a description of the countries included and the data
series and crises considered here.

44

2

Real House Prices (Log Scale)
4
6
8

10

12

Figure III: House Price Riskiness II

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Real House Prices (Log Scale)
200
400
600

800

(A) U.K.

1980

1990

2000

2010

(B) Singapore
Note: The figures show the evolution of real house prices in the U.K. (top panel) and Singapore (bottom
panel). Shaded regions for the U.K. are financial crises identified by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009): 1974-1976,
1984, 1991 and 2008-2009. Shaded regions for Singapore include the 1982-1983 financial crisis identified
by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), as well as the Asian financial crisis (1997-1998), and the 2007-2008 global
financial crisis. See Appendix A.2.1 for a description of the data series studied here.

45

Figure IV: House Price Riskiness III
1

1913

1914

1939

Real House Prices
.8
.9

1940
1915
1916
1941
1942
1944

1945

1917
1943

.7

1918

0

2
4
Years Since Start of War
World War I

6

World War II

(A) Housing During World Wars
Note: Figure shows the evolution of real house prices for countries with available house-price time series
during World War I (Australia, France, Netherlands, Norway, United States) and World War II (Australia,
France, Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, United States). See Appendix A.2.1 for a description of the data
series studied here.

46

Figure V: Gordon Growth Model and Estimated Discounts
0

0

-0.02

-0.05

-0.04
-0.1
-0.06
-0.15

Discount

Discount

-0.08

-0.1

-0.2

-0.25

-0.12

-0.14

-0.3

-0.16
Baseline
High Rent Growth
Low Expected Returns
High Rent Growth + Low Expected Returns
Data

-0.18

Baseline
High Rent Growth
Low Expected Returns
High Rent Growth + Low Expected Returns
Data

-0.35

-0.4

-0.2
80-99

100-124

125-149

150-300

700+

50-70

Leasehold Maturity

71-85

86-90

91-95

96-100

800+

Leasehold Maturity

(A) U.K.

(B) Singapore

Note: Figure shows the discounts for leaseholds observed in the U.K. (Panel A) and Singapore (Panel B)
together with discounts predicted by a Gordon growth model with r = 6.4% and g = 0.7% (Baseline),
r = 6.4% and g = 2% (High Rent Growth), r = 5.4% and g = 0.7% (Low Expected Returns), and r = 5.4%
and g = 2% (High Rent Growth + Low Expected Returns).

47

Figure VI: U.K. Gilts Real Yield Curve
3
Real yield curve, 1998−2007
Real yield curve, 2008−2013
Real yield curve, 1998−2013
2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

Note: The figure plots the real yield curve for U.K. gilts as computed by the Bank of England. It
is available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/yieldcurve/archive.
aspx. The figure plots the average shape of the real U.K. gilts curve for the period 1998-2013, as well as for
two sub-periods: 1998-2007 and 2007-2013. The U.K. government debt also includes some perpetual bonds:
the War Loan and the Annuities. These bonds comprise a negligible part of the outstanding U.K. government
debt (£2.6bn out of £1.5trn of debt outstanding), and are classified as small and illiquid issuances by the U.K.
Debt and Management Office. They are excluded from our analysis, not only because they are nominal and
we only use data on U.K. real gilts, but also because their negligible size, scarce liquidity, and callability
make it hard to interpret their prices in terms of discount rates.

48

Figure VII: Term Structure of Discount Rates
0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12
Per-Period Total Discount Rate
Rf Yield
Risk Premium

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

(A) Equity
0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12
Per-Period Total Discount Rate
Rf Yield
Risk Premium

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

(B) Real Estate
Note: Panel A shows per-period discount rates, risk-free rates and risk premia of claims to single dividends
with a maturity up to 1000 years implied by the reduced-form asset pricing model from Section 4.3. Panel B
shows per-period discount rates, risk-free rates and risk premia of claims to single rents with a maturity up
to 1000 years implied by the reduced-form asset pricing model from Section 4.3. The calibration details are
discussed in Appendix A.3.2.1 and summarized in Table IV.

49

Table I: Expected Returns and Rental Growth
United States
Balance Sheet Price/Rent

Gross Return

Singapore
Balance Sheet Price/Rent

United Kingdom
Balance Sheet Price/Rent

10.3%
8.3%
2.0%

9.6%
9.2%
0.4%

10.4%
6.1%
4.3%

10.3%
6.0%
4.3%

10.5%
7.7%
2.8%

9.8%
5.8%
4%

Depreciation

2.5%

2.5%

2.5%

2.5%

2.5%

2.5%

Taxes

0.67%

0.67%

0.5%

0.5%

0%

0%

Net Return

7.1%

6.4%

7.4%

7.3%

8.0%

7.3%

1953-2012

1953-2012

1985-2012

1990-2012

1989-2012

1996-2012

Rental Yield
Capital Gain

Sample
Real Rent Growth
Sample

0.5%

0.2%

0.7%

1953-2012

1990-2012

1996-2012

Note: This table shows our estimates for net real returns to housing and real rent growth in the U.S., the U.K.,
and Singapore. See Appendix A.1 for details on the estimation procedures and the underlying data sources
used.

Table II: Real House Price Growth and Real Consumption Growth
Period
Australia
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Singapore
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
U.S

1901 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1840 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1814 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1830 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1975 - 2009
1952 - 2009
1937 - 2009
1952 - 2009
1890 - 2009

Real HP Growth
Mean
Std. Dev.

Real Cons. Growth
Mean
Std. Dev.

2.51%
2.92%
2.38%
1.99%
2.17%
2.06%
-0.45%
1.28%
0.02%
2.79%
2.46%
1.77%
7.18%
1.13%
0.58%
3.14%
1.55%
0.47%
2.89%
0.49%

1.51%
1.56%
1.64%
1.03%
2.09%
1.53%
1.71%
1.69%
2.00%
1.57%
0.90%
1.78%
3.37%
0.90%
4.58%
1.54%
1.66%
1.55%
2.22%
1.80%

12.1%
6.06%
7.69%
9.24%
8.70%
11.8%
2.33%
8.10%
4.45%
21.0%
8.09%
11.6%
19.5%
10.1%
7.93%
8.07%
6.04%
7.93%
9.55%
7.36%

5.00%
1.49%
1.71%
2.68%
2.75%
6.32%
1.56%
2.12%
1.59%
7.49%
2.34%
3.83%
2.98%
2.98%
4.43%
2.57%
1.98%
3.85%
2.12%
3.41%

Correlation
0.102
0.438
0.433
0.538
0.710
-0.054
0.494
0.165
0.502
0.078
0.578
0.243
0.348
0.707
0.370
0.593
0.536
0.187
0.700
0.148

Note: The table shows time series properties of annual growth rates of real house prices (as described in
Appendix A.2.1) and real consumption, as collected by Barro and Ursua (2008). Column (1) shows the sample
considered. Columns (2) and (3) show the mean and standard deviation of real house price growth. Columns
(4) and (5) show the mean and standard deviation of real consumption growth. Column (6) shows the
correlation of real house price growth and real consumption growth.

50

Table III: Real House Price Growth and Personal Disposable Income Growth

Australia
Belgium
Canada
Switzerland
Germany
Denmark
Spain
Finland
France
U.K.
Italy
Japan
S. Korea
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Sweden
U.S.
S. Africa

Real HP Growth
Mean
Std. Dev.

Real PDI Growth
Mean
Std. Dev.

3.20%
2.80%
2.51%
0.94%
-0.29%
1.57%
2.05%
2.04%
2.52%
3.53%
0.60%
-0.24%
0.59%
3.94%
2.32%
2.76%
2.20%
1.50%
1.13%
0.88%

1.43%
1.17%
1.37%
1.12%
1.27%
1.09%
0.83%
2.07%
1.22%
2.20%
0.82%
1.55%
3.95%
2.84%
0.48%
2.22%
0.98%
1.34%
1.60%
0.53%

6.89%
5.87%
7.63%
4.73%
2.31%
8.99%
8.26%
8.19%
5.23%
8.54%
8.28%
4.28%
7.70%
6.68%
9.43%
7.23%
7.73%
7.27%
3.89%
9.65%

2.77%
2.27%
2.10%
1.63%
1.70%
2.29%
2.46%
3.21%
1.58%
2.74%
2.44%
1.40%
4.58%
3.75%
3.25%
2.52%
3.45%
2.28%
1.56%
3.05%

Correlation
0.093
0.436
0.489
0.445
0.288
0.211
0.631
0.482
0.358
0.355
0.325
0.587
0.235
0.054
0.472
0.064
0.530
0.431
0.371
0.373

Note: This table shows time series properties of quarterly frequency annual growth rates of real house prices
and personal disposable income between 1975 and Q2 2013, as collected by Mack and Martínez-García (2011).
Columns (1) and (2) show the mean and standard deviation of real house price growth. Columns (3) and (4)
the mean and standard deviation of real personal disposable income growth. Column (5) shows the correlation
of real house price growth with real personal disposable income growth.

51

Table IV: Parameters of the Model
Calibrated Variables

Value

gs
gh
κs
κh
rf
x
φz
kσs k
kσh k
kσz k
Correlation of ∆ds and z shocks

2.28%
0.7%
1
1.14
1%
0.625
0.91
14.5%
14.2%
0.32%
-0.83

Implied Parameters

Value
[0.0724,0]
[0.071,0]
[-0.00136,0.0009]

σs
σh
σz

Note: The table shows the calibration of the reduced-form asset pricing model in Section 4.3. The unconditional
mean of dividend and rent growth rates, the risk-free rate, the persistence variables, and the conditional
standard deviations are in annual terms. The stock market including x is calibrated as in Lettau and
Wachter (2007). The unconditional mean of the dividend growth rate and the conditional standard deviation
of dividend growth are set to match their respective data counterparts. Under the assumption that the
conditional mean of dividend growth can be identified with the log consumption-dividend ratio in the data,
autocorrelation φz and the correlation between shocks to ∆ds and shocks to z are set to match their respective
data counterparts. kσz k is set to reflect the low predictability of dividend growth in the data (for details, see
Lettau and Wachter, 2007). The unconditional mean of the rent growth rate is set to match the data. Volatility
kσh k and κh are calibrated to match the expected return on real estate in the data as well as the empirical term
structure of real estate discount rates. The risk-free rate is set at 1%, based on the U.K. gilts real yield curve
between 1998 and 2013 reported in Figure VI.

Table V: Simulated Moments for the Market and Cash Flow Growth
Moment

Equity

Housing

E[ R]
σ( R)
Expected cash flow growth
σ(∆d)
Expected capital gains
Expected yields

9.1%
9.0%
3.4%
14.5%
2.7%
6.5%

5.9%
8.2%
1.6%
14.2%
1.0%
4.9%

Note: The table shows key moments from simulating the reduced-form asset pricing model in Section 4.3 for
50,000 quarters. Time series are aggregated to an annual frequency. R is the return on the market. Small letters
indicate log variables. Possible differences between expected returns and the sum of expected capital gains
and expected yields are due to rounding errors.

52

Appendix to “Climate Change and Long-Run
Discount Rates: Evidence from Real Estate”
Stefano Giglio

Matteo Maggiori

Johannes Stroebel

Andreas Weber

Not for publication

A.1

Details on the Estimation Procedures of the Average
Return for Residential Real Estate

This section describes the methodology and data used to compute average real returns
and rent growth for residential properties. We report the details of the calculations in an
online worksheet.
The balance-sheet approach Following Favilukis, Ludvigson and van Nieuwerburgh
(2010), this approach uses information about the value of the stock of residential real estate to estimate the value (price) of housing and total household expenditure on housing
as a measure of the value of rents in each period. Since we are only interested in the return
to a representative property, we need to control for changes in the total housing stock. We
proxy for the change in the stock by population growth, assuming that at least over long
periods the per capita stock of housing is constant. We derive the gross return to housing
in each period as:
G
Rt,t
+1 =

Vt+1 + CEt+1 πt Lt
,
Vt
π t +1 L t +1

where V is the value of the housing stock, CE is the household expenditure on housing,
π is the CPI price level index, and L is population.
• For the U.S., we follow Favilukis, Ludvigson and van Nieuwerburgh (2010) and
use data from the Flow of Funds (obtained from the Federal Reserve Board and the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis). For the value of the housing stock, we sum two
series: owner-occupied real estate and tenant-occupied real estate (FL155035005,
FL115035023) from the Flow of Funds. From the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
we obtain: (i) household expenditure on housing services (DHUTRC1A027NBEA);
(ii) Population estimates (POP); and (iii) the Consumer Price Index (U.S.ACPIBLS).
• For the U.K., using the same procedure, we combine the value of the total stock of
A.1

housing (series CGRI) and the total expenditures on housing (series ADIZ) from the
National Accounts (available from the Office of National Statistics). From the same
source, we obtain the CPI (series D7BT). We adjust for the change in the stock of
housing using the population growth series from ONS for the U.K.
• For Singapore, using a similar procedure, we obtain the value of the private residential stock of housing (series M013181.1.1.1 P017199) and the private consumption
expenditure on housing and utilities (series M013131.1.4 P017135) from the National
Accounts (available from the Department of Statistics Singapore). We obtain the CPI
series from the same source. Finally, we obtain the series for the population growth
(that proxies for the change in the stock of housing wealth) from the World Bank
(series SP.POP.GROW).
The price-rent approach This approach constructs a time series of returns by combining
information from a house price index, a rent index, and an estimate of the rent-to-price
ratio in a baseline year. Without loss of generality, suppose we know the rent-to-price
ratio at time t = 0. We can derive the time series of the rent-to-price ratio as:
Pt Dt Pt−1
Pt
=
;
Dt + 1
Pt−1 Dt+1 Dt

P0
D1

given,

where P is the price index and D the rental index. Notice that, given a baseline year
P0
D1 , only information about the growth rates in prices and rents are necessary for the
calculations. We then compute real returns using the formula:
G
Rt,t
+1



=

Dt+1 Pt+1
+
Pt
Pt



πt
,
π t +1

where π is the CPI price level index again.
• For the U.S., we follow Favilukis, Ludvigson and van Nieuwerburgh (2010) and
use the Case-Shiller 10-City House Price Index (series SPCS10RSA from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis), and compute rent growth using the BLS shelter
index (the component of CPI related to shelter, item CU.S.R0000SAH1 from the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis). However, unlike Favilukis, Ludvigson and
van Nieuwerburgh (2010), we choose 2012 as a baseline year for the rent-price ratio,
which we estimate to be 0.1; the choice of the baseline year is motivated by the
availability of high quality data. In particular, we obtain two independent estimates
for the rent-price ratio. The first estimate is the price-rent ratio implied by the
balance-sheet approach. The second estimate is a direct estimate obtained from data
A.2

by the real estate portal Trulia. Figure A.1 shows the distribution of rent-price ratios
across the 100 largest MSAs provided by Trulia.1 Both independent estimates imply
a rent-price ratio of 10% in 2012. Figure A.2 suggests that these rent-price ratios are
close to their long-run average.
• For the U.K., we use the house price index from the U.K. Land Registry to compute
price appreciation and we use the CPI component “Actual rents for housing” (series
D7CE) from the Office of National Statistics as a rental index. As a baseline, we used
the 6% rent-price ratio obtained from the balance-sheet approach for 2012.
• For Singapore, we obtain a time series of price and rental indices for the whole
island from the Urban Redevelopment Authority (the government’s official housing
arm government: ura.gov.sg). To estimate the baseline rent-price ratio, we use data
from for-sale and for-rent listings provided by iProperty.com, Asia’s largest online
property listing portal. We observe approximately 105,000 unique listings from
2012, about 46% of which are for-rent listings. To estimate the rent-price ratio, we
run the following regression, which pools both types of listings. The methodology
is similar to the one used to construct rent-price ratios for the U.S. in Figure A.1:
ln ( ListingPrice)i,t = α + β i ForRenti + γControlsi,t + ei,t

(A.1)

The dependent variable, ListingPrice, is equal to the list-price in “for-sale” listings,
and equal to the annual rent in “for-rent” listings. ForRenti is an indicator variable
that is equal to one if the listing is a for-rent listing. The results are reported in Table
A.1. In column (1), we control for postal code by quarter fixed effects. The estimated
coefficient on β i suggests a rent-price ratio of e βi = 4.5%. In columns (2) - (4),
we also control for other characteristics of the property, such as the property type,
the number of bedrooms, bathrooms as well as the size, age, and the floor of the
building. In columns (3) and (4), we tighten fixed effects to the month by postal code
level and the month by postal code by number of bedrooms level respectively. In
all specifications, the estimated rent-price ratio for 2012 is 4.4% or 4.5%. Finally, we
note that if we used the rent-price ratio obtained from the Balance Sheet approach
as a baseline estimate in 2012 instead, we would obtain a higher total return (as the
baseline in 2012 would be 6% rather than 4.5%). We conservatively choose 4.5%.
1 We

thank Jed Kolko and Trulia for providing these data. Trulia observes a large set of both for-sale and
for-rent listings. The rent-price ratio is constructed using an MSA-level hedonic regression of ln( price) on
property attributes, zip-code fixed effects, and a dummy for whether the unit is for sale or for rent. The
rent-to-price ratio is constructed by taking the exponent of the coefficient on this dummy variable.

A.3

A.2

Details on the Riskiness of Housing

A.2.1

The Riskiness of Housing – Details on Main Analyses

This section provides the details underlying the analysis carried out in Section 3. Section
A.2.2 will provide additional evidence for the riskiness of housing.
Table A.2 reports the availability of house price data and the associated financial crises
and rare disasters. The first column in Table A.2 shows the time coverage of house price
indices for each country. For some countries, we can go far back in time; for example,
we sourced data as far back as 1819 for Norway, 1890 for the U.S., and 1840 for France.
The second and third column report the dates of any banking crises or rare consumption
disasters that occur in each country over the time period provided in the first column.
Banking crises dates for all countries, except Singapore, Belgium, Finland, New Zealand,
South Korea, and South Africa, are from Schularick and Taylor (2012). Banking crises
dates for the countries not covered by Schularick and Taylor (2012) are from Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009).2 Rare disaster dates in the last column indicate the year of the trough in
consumption during a consumption disaster as reported by Barro and Ursua (2008).
For each country, we obtained the longest continuous and high-quality time series of
house price data available. To make the data comparable across countries and time periods, we focus on real house prices at an annual frequency. Finally, to increase historical
comparability across time within each time series, we report each index for the unit of
observation, for instance a city, for which the longest possible high quality time series
is available. For example, since a house price index for France is only available since
1936, but a similar index is available for Paris since 1840, we focus on the Paris index for
the entire history from 1840-2012. We stress, however, that for each index and country
we have carried out an extensive comparison with alternative indices, in particular with
indices available for the most recent time period, in order to ensure that we are observing
consistent patterns in the data. In the following, we detail the sources for each of the 20
countries in our sample:
• Australia: Real annual house price indices are from Stapledon (2012). For our
analysis, we use the arithmetic average of the indices (rebased such that 1880 =
100) for Melbourne and Sydney.
• Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, Italy, New Zealand, South
Africa, South Korea, and Spain: Real annual house price indices are from the
2 For

this second set of countries and dates, we have also consulted Bordo et al. (2001), who confirm all
dates in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), except 1985 for South Korea and 1989 for South Africa.

A.4

Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.3 The sources and methodology are described in
Mack and Martínez-García (2011).
• France: Nominal annual house price index and CPI are available from the Conseil
Général de l’Environnement et du Développement Durable (CGEDD).4 We obtain
the real house price index by deflating the nominal index using the CPI. For our
analysis, we use the longer time series available for the Paris house price index.
• Netherlands: Nominal annual house price index for Amsterdam and CPI for the
Netherlands are available from Eichholtz (1997) and Ambrose, Eichholtz and Lindenthal (2013).5 We obtain the real house price index by deflating the nominal index
using the CPI.
• Norway: Nominal annual house price index and CPI are from the Norges Bank.6
We obtain the real house price index by deflating the nominal index using the CPI.
• Singapore: Nominal annual house price index for the whole island is from the Urban Redevelopment Authority (http://www.ura.gov.sg). CPI is from Statistics
Singapore. We obtain the real house price index by deflating the nominal index
using the CPI.
• Sweden: Nominal house price index for one-or-two-dwelling buildings and CPI
are from Statistics Sweden. We obtain the real house price index by deflating the
nominal index by CPI.
• Switzerland: Nominal house price index for Switzerland is available from Constantinescu and Francke (2013). Among the various indices the authors estimate,
we focus on the local linear trend (LLT) index. The data are available for the period
1937-2007. We update the index for the period 2007-2012 by using the percentage
growth of the house price index for Switzerland available from the Dallas Fed.7
The CPI index for Switzerland is from the Office fédéral de la statistique (OFS). We
obtain the real house price index by deflating the nominal index using the CPI.
3 The

data are available at: http://www.dallasfed.org/institute/houseprice/, last accessed
February 2014.
4 http://www.cgedd.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/les-missions-du-cgedd-r206.
html, last accessed February 2014.
5 Part of the data are available on Eicholtz’ website at: http://www.maastrichtuniversity.nl/
web/Main/Sitewide/Content/EichholtzPiet.htm, last accessed February 2014.
6 http://www.norges-bank.no/en/price-stability/historical-monetary-statistics/,
last accessed February 2014.
7 This source is described in the second bullet point above.

A.5

• U.K.: Annual nominal house price data are from the Nationwide House Price Index.
We divide the nominal index by the U.K. Office of National Statistics “long term
indicator of prices of consumer goods and services” to obtain the real house price
index. The Nationwide index has a missing value for the year 2005, for that year we
impute the value based on the percentage change in value of the house price index
produced by the England and Wales Land Registry.
• U.S.: Real annual house price data are originally from Shiller (2000). Updated data
are available on the author’s website.8
For all countries, the real annual consumption data are from Barro and Ursua (2008) and
available on the authors’ website.9
Figure II is produced by combining the time series of house prices and consumption
described in the previous subsection with the dates for banking crises and rare disasters
in Table A.2. When taking averages across countries in Panel A of Figure II for the 6 year
windows around a banking crisis, the following countries have missing observations for
the house price series: France data are unavailable for the year 2011 following the 2008
crisis, Netherlands data are unavailable for the years 2010 and 2011 following the 2008
crisis, and South Africa data are unavailable for the year 1974 before the 1977 crises. In
these cases, the crises are still included in the sample but the average reported in the
figure excludes these missing country-year observations.10

A.2.2

The Riskiness of Housing – Additional Evidence

In this section, we provide additional details and evidence for the riskiness of real estate
to complement the analysis in Section 3.
Figure A.3 plots the growth rates of rents and personal consumption expenditures
(PCE) in the U.S. since 1929. In periods of falling PCE, in particular the Great Depression, rents also fell noticeably. The bottom panel shows a (weak) positive relationship
between the growth rates of rents and personal consumption expenditures. This suggests
that housing rents tend to increase when consumption increases and marginal utility of
consumption is low. Figure A.4 indicates that rents in London are positively correlated
with house prices in London, but more volatile.
8 Available

at: http://aida.wss.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm, last accesses February 2014.
at: http://rbarro.com/data-sets/, last accessed February 2014.
10 In unreported results, we have verified that the result is essentially unchanged if we exclude the 2008
crisis for France and the Netherlands and the 1975 crisis for South Africa from the data.
9 Available

A.6

A.3

Details on the Reduced-Form Asset Pricing Model

This section presents the reduced-form asset pricing model, which extends Lettau and
Wachter (2007) to include real estate and wealth as two additional asset classes and casts
the stochastic discount factor as a function of consumption. Section A.3.1 reviews and
discusses the assumptions on aggregate cash flows and the stochastic discount factor, and
presents the key results for the term structure of discount rates. Section 4.3 in the main
part of the paper features a simplified version of this model with a constant price of risk
and a dividend-based stochastic discount factor. Section A.3.2 describes the calibration
for this simplified version of the model as well as the calibration and consistent asset
pricing results for the full model. Section A.3.3 derives the key results analytically.

A.3.1

Model and Key Results

A.3.1.1

Setup

Uncertainty in this model is characterized by three shocks: a shock to current cash flow
growth, a shock to expected future cash flow growth, and a shock to the price of risk, which
is directly specified in reduced-from. Let et+1 be a 3 × 1-vector of independent standard normal shocks. Denote by Dti with i ∈ {s, h, c} aggregate stock market dividends,
aggregate real estate and housing rents, and aggregate consumption in the economy,
respectively, at time t, and let dit ≡ ln( Dti ). Aggregate cash flows evolve according to
∆dit+1 ≡ dit+1 − dit = gi + κi zt + σi et+1 ,
where zt is a scalar that follows the AR(1) process
zt+1 = φz zt + σz et+1 ,
with persistence 0 ≤ φz < 1, and where σi and σz are 1 × 3-row vectors. σi determines
which combination of the three shocks in et+1 drives the transitory shock to dividend,
rent, or consumption growth. zt is a persistent long-run shock to the growth rate of cash
flows that affects all three, dividends, rents, and consumption. To keep the model parsimonious, we assume that only one shock drives the long-term fluctuations of dividend,
rent, and consumption growth, although all three can load on it differently (through
different κi ). The one-period risk-free rate, denoted by r f ≡ ln( R f ), is assumed to be
constant, as in Lettau and Wachter (2007). We let the stochastic discount factor be a
function of consumption in the general setup. Only the current shock to cash flow growth
A.7

is priced, so that the stochastic discount factor in this economy can be directly specified
as:
1
Mt,t+1 = exp{mt,t+1 } = exp{−r f − xt2 − xt ec,t+1 },
2
with
σc
e ,
ec,t+1 =
||σc || t+1
where xt is the (time-varying) price of risk, which follows the AR(1) process
xt+1 = (1 − φx ) x + φx xt + σx et+1 ,
with 0 ≤ φx < 1 and 1 × 3-row vector σx . Shocks to the price of risk are assumed to
be uncorrelated with shocks to ∆dit+1 and zt+1 .
A.3.1.2

Pricing Claims to Single-Period Cash Flows of Different Maturities

The price-dividend (price-rent, wealth-consumption) ratio of claims to single cash flows
of maturity n is exponentially affine and follows
i,(n)

PDt

= exp{ Ai (n) + Bxi (n) xt + Bzi (n)zt },

where
1
Ai (n) = Ai (n − 1) − r f + gi + Bxi (n − 1)(1 − φx ) x + V i (n − 1)V i (n − 1)0 ,
2
Bxi (n) = Bxi (n − 1)(φx − σx

σ0
σc0
) − (σi + Bzi (n − 1)σz ) c ,
||σc ||
||σc ||

Bzi (n) = κi

1 − φzn
,
1 − φz

V i (n − 1) = σi + Bzi (n − 1)σz + Bxi (n − 1)σx .
with Ai (0) = Bxi (0) = Bzi (0) = 0. Note that ||σσc|| is simply [1, 0, 0] given the basec
line calibration. As discussed in Lettau and Wachter (2007), Ai (n) is a constant that
determines the level of price-dividend (price-rent, wealth-consumption) ratios. We have
Bzi (n) > 0 for all n. Intuitively, the higher zt , the higher expected cash flow growth and
the higher the price of an asset that pays a single cash flow in the future. Moreover, Bzi (n)
increases in n and converges to 1−κiφz as n grows large, reflecting persistence in cash flow
growth and the cumulation of shocks between t and t + n in Dti +n . Since shocks to the
price of risk and shocks to cash flow growth are uncorrelated by assumption, Bxi (n) < 0
A.8

for all n and prices decrease (and risk premia increase) as the price of risk increases.
A.3.1.3

Returns on Claims to Single-Period Cash Flows
i,(n)

Denote one-period returns on claims to cash flows at maturity n of asset i by Rt,t+1 and
i,(n)

corresponding log-returns by rt,t+1 . The risk premium of expected one-period returns on
claims to cash flows at individual maturities then follows (see Lettau and Wachter, 2007)
i 1
h
i
i
h
h
i,(n)
i,(n)
i,(n)
Et Rt,t+1 − R f ' Et rt,t+1 − r f + Vart rt,t+1
2

= (σi +

Bxi (n − 1)σx

+

Bzi (n − 1)σz )

0

σc
xt .
||σc ||

Risk premia depend on the loadings on the different risk sources as well as the price
of each source of risk. All claims load equally, irrespective of their maturity, on shocks to
0
current cash flow growth ∆dit+1 and ||σd ||−1 σi σd xt is the associated price of risk. Bzi (n − 1)
0
is the loading on shocks to the growth rate of cash-flows zt and ||σd ||−1 σz σd xt is the
associated price of risk. Notice that the loading on shocks to the price of risk is irrelevant
when xt+1 and ∆dit+1 are assumed to be uncorrelated. As a consequence, the termstructure variation is generated by the loading Bzi (n − 1), which is a strictly increasing
function of horizon n, starting at 0 and converging to 1−κiφz as n → ∞.
A.3.1.4

Per-Period Discount Rates

The per-period discount rate ri,n
t is implicitly given by
i,(n)

PDt

≡

i,(n)
Pt
Dti
i,(n)

i,n
Using ri,n
t ' ln(1 + r t ) and defining pdt
period discount rate as

ri,n
t

1
=
n

ln( Et [

1
= gi +
n



Dti +n
Dti

Dti +n
]
Dti
.
n
(1 + ri,n
)
t

Et [

=

i,(n)

≡ ln( PDt

), we can solve for the the per-

!

]) −

i,(n)
pdt


(1 − φzn )
1 i,(n)
i,n
κi
zt + 0.5V
− pdt ,
1 − φz
n

where V i,n captures a Jensen’s inequality adjustment that arises from taking the expectation of a variable that is exposed to cumulative log-normal shocks; its functional form is
A.9

detailed in Section A.3.3.2. For a more intuitive expression, we can take the unconditional
expectation:
1 i,n 1
i,(n)
V − E[ pdt ].
E[ri,n
t ] = gi +
2n
n
It is increasing in expected cash flow growth and decreasing in the price-dividend ratio.
In the main body of the paper, which considers the case of a constant price of risk
xt = x, the simple relationship between the per-period discount rate for maturity n and
the expected one-period holding return of single-claim assets with maturities up to n
applies:
1 n
i,(k )
ln( Et [ Rt,t+1 ]).
ri,n
=
t
n k∑
=1
A.3.1.5

Pricing the Aggregate Market and Market Returns

The price-dividend (price-rent, wealth-consumption) ratio of the market is just the sum
of the respective ratios of the claims to single-period cash flows:
PDti =

∞

∑ PDt

i,(n)

.

n =1

The expected return of each market can be found as the weighted average of the expected
return of the claims to single-period cash flows:
Et [ Rit,t+1 ]

∞

=

∑

n =1

A.3.1.6

"

#
"
#
i,(n)
Pti+1 + Dti +1
PDt
i,(n)
Et [ Rt,t+1 ] = Et
.
PDti
Pti

Constant Price of Risk and a Dividend-Based Stochastic Discount Factor

In Section 4.3 of the main part of the paper, we discuss a simplified version of the above
setup to keep the model parsimonious. In particular, we fix the price of risk at xt = x,
since for the purpose of the analysis in this paper, time variation in risk prices is not
of first-order importance. Here, we also calibrate the full model with time-varying risk
prices, and verify that our conclusions are robust. In the main part of the paper, we
also express the stochastic discount factor as a function of dividend growth instead of
consumption growth for simplicity. Consequently, all expressions from the main text can
be recovered by setting xt = x, σx = 0, and by replacing σc /||σc || with σd /||σd ||.

A.10

A.3.2

Calibration and Results

A.3.2.1

Constant Price of Risk and a Dividend-Based SDF

Lettau and Wachter (2007) and Lettau and Wachter (2011) show that this type of model can
be calibrated to successfully match a large number of asset pricing moments, including
the term structure of bonds and equity.11 To discipline our analysis, we maintained the
calibration of Lettau and Wachter (2007) whenever possible. We made one simplification
by keeping the price of risk x constant, since for the purpose of the analysis in this
paper, time variation in risk prices is not of first-order importance. Returns, prices, and
dividends for equity are based on corresponding moments of the S&P 500 index. Average
dividend growth is set to 2.28%. kσd k is set to match the unconditional standard deviation
of annual dividend growth at 14.5%. The predictable component of dividend growth is
captured by zt ; kσz k is set to 0.32% to reflect low predictability in the sample, and κs is
set to 1. Importantly for the term structure results, the correlation between shocks to zt
and shocks to ∆dst is calibrated to −0.83.12 This implies that the underlying fundamental
cash flow process is mean-reverting: drops in cash flows are partially reversed through
higher growth in the future. To calibrate the additional process for rents we set gh = 0.7%
to reflect the average rent growth estimated in Section 3. We choose a volatility kσh k
of 14.2% as well as a κ h of 1.14 to target the expected return on real estate in the data
(6.4%) and the empirical term structure of real estate discount rates, in particular the
estimate of the very long-run discount rate of 2.6%. As in Lettau and Wachter (2007),
all remaining correlations are assumed to be zero for simplicity. To summarize, we set
quarterly σs = [0.0724, 0], σh = [0.071, 0], and σz = [−0.00136, 0.0009].13 We set the riskfree rate at 1%, based on the U.K. gilts real yield curve between 1998 and 2013 reported
in Figure VI. These data show that the U.K. real yield curve is approximately flat on
average, with a real yield of 1.4% for maturities between 1 and 25 years, and that there
is some evidence for a mild downward slope at longer maturities.14 Our calibration is
11 See also the exciting work of van Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2012) and van Binsbergen et al. (2013)
for the model implications for claims to individual stock market dividends at horizons of 1 to 10 years.
12 See Lettau and Ludvigson (2005) for further discussion on how the consumption-dividend ratio can be
used as an empirical proxy for the calibration of zt .
13 Note that we have restricted ourselves to two shocks to keep the number of state variables low and the
model parsimonious. As a consequence, kσh k should capture the systematic risk of rents only.
14 The real yield curve is computed by the Bank of England and is available at http://www.
bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/yieldcurve/archive.aspx. Figure VI plots the
average shape of the real U.K. gilts curve for the period 1998-2013, as well as for two sub-periods: 19982007 and 2007-2013. The level of the yield curve shifted down during this latter period and the yield curve
became hump-shaped. The U.K. government debt also includes some perpetual bonds: the War Loan and
the Annuities. These bonds comprise a negligible part of the outstanding U.K. government debt (£2.6bn
out of £1.5trn of debt outstanding), and are classified as small and illiquid issuances by the U.K. Debt and

A.11

summarized in Table IV. Results are displayed in Table V and discussed in the main part
of the paper.
A.3.2.2

Time-Varying Price of Risk and a Consumption-Based SDF

We also calibrate a general version of the model with a time-varying price of risk and a
consumption-based stochastic discount factor and verify that our conclusions are robust.
For all parameters that appear in both versions of the model, we keep the calibration
described in Section A.3.2.1. The only exception is the volatility of rents; since we calibrate
the process for rents numerically to target the expected return on real estate and the
empirical term structure of real estate discount rates estimated in Section 3, we have to
adjust kσh k to 14.5%; we keep κ h at 1.14. The process for xt is calibrated to fit various
moments of returns to equities, in particular the volatility of stock prices; we follow Lettau
and Wachter (2007) and set φx to 0.87 and kσx k to 24%. For the consumption process, we
follow Bansal and Yaron (2004) and equalize consumption and dividend growth rates (at
2.28%), and set volatility (kσc k) to 4.83% and κc to 0.33, one third of the respective values
for the dividend growth process. Table A.3 summaries our calibration of the extended
model.
Table A.4 shows that our extended model matches the same key moments as our
simplified model in the main part of the paper. The average annual return on the stock
market is 7.3%. Due to time-variation in the price of risk, the volatility of returns is
17.0%, in line with the data. Expected dividend growth is above 3% with a standard
deviation of 14.5% as before. Importantly, the term structure of discount rates for equity
is downward-sloping as shown in Panel A of Figure A.5. It falls from 18.5% for claims
to one year ahead dividends, to 5.0% for claims to one hundred year ahead dividends,
all the way to 4.1% for one thousand year ahead dividends. The expected return on
real estate is 5.7%, just below our empirical net return estimates between 6.4% and 8.0%
again. Expected rent growth is 1.8%. Our calibration implies that returns as well as rent
growth are about as volatile as equity, with 13.3% and 14.5% respectively. In line with our
empirical findings, rental yields contribute more than two thirds to total returns. The term
structure of discount rates for real estate is again downward-sloping, as shown in Panel
B of Figure A.5. It falls from 18.5% for claims to one year ahead rents, to 3.7% for claims
to one hundred year ahead rents, all the way to 2.5% for one thousand year ahead rents.
The expected return on wealth is 2.4% and its volatility is 4.4%, about one third of the
Management Office. They are excluded from our analysis, not only because they are nominal and we only
use data on U.K. real gilts, but also because their negligible size, scarce liquidity, and callability make it
hard to interpret their prices in terms of discount rates.

A.12

respective values for equity. Expected consumption growth is 2.4%. Our calibration also
implies that consumption growth is about one third as volatile as dividends are (4.8%).
The term structure of discount rates for wealth is downward-sloping as well, as shown
in Panel C of Figure A.5. It falls from 6.9% for claims to one year ahead rents, to 2.6% for
claims to one hundred year ahead rents, all the way to 2.2% for one thousand year ahead
rents.15

A.3.3

Solving the Model

A.3.3.1

Derivation of Prices of Claims to Single-Period Cash Flows

As in Lettau and Wachter (2007), conjecture
PDti,n = exp{ Ai (n) + Bxi (n) xt + Bzi (n)zt } ≡ Fi ( xt , zt , n).
From the fundamental asset pricing equation, we know
Et

h

i,(n)
Mt,t+1 Rt,t+1

i

= 1,

and
i,(n)

Pt

h
i
i,(n−1)
= Et Mt,t+1 Pt+1
,

with boundary condition
i,(0)

Pt

= Dti .

By the boundary condition,
Ai (0) = Bxi (0) = Bzi (0) = 0.
Substituting Fi , we get
"
Et Mt,t+1

Dti +1
Dti

#
F i ( x t +1 , z t +1 , n − 1 ) = F i ( x t , z t , n ).

15 Note

that our calibration implies a very high wealth-consumption ratio; this is a moment that is not
of any direct relevance for our analysis. Since wealth is not very risky, its return is close to the risk-free
rate. Moreover, our high quality data on the risk-free rate guides us to choose a lower risk-free rate than
in the original calibration of Lettau and Wachter (2007). At the same time, we choose a relatively high
growth rate for consumption. In sum, this pushes r − g close to zero for wealth, which creates a very high
wealth-consumption ratio.

A.13

Substituting for Fi and Mt,t+1 , we get
1
Et [exp{−r f − xt2 − xt ec,t+1 + ∆dit+1 + Ai (n − 1) + Bxi (n − 1) xt+1 + Bzi (n − 1)zt+1 }]
2

= exp{ Ai (n) + Bxi (n) xt + Bzi (n)zt }.
Substituting functional forms for t + 1-variables:
1
Et [exp{−r f − xt2 − xt ec,t+1 + [ gi + κi zt + σi et+1 ] + Ai (n − 1) + Bxi (n − 1) [(1 − φx ) x + φx xt + σx et+1 ]
2

+ Bzi (n − 1) [φz zt + σz et+1 ]}]
= exp{ Ai (n) + Bxi (n) xt + Bzi (n)zt }.
Solving the expectation:
1
exp{−r f − xt2 + [ gi + κi zt ] + Ai (n − 1) + Bxi (n − 1) [(1 − φx ) x + φx xt ]
2
0

+ Bzi (n − 1) [φz zt ] +


 σ
1 2
c
[ xt − 2xt σi + Bxi (n − 1) σx + Bzi (n − 1) σz
+ V i (n − 1)V i (n − 1)0 ]}
2
||σc ||

= exp{ Ai (n) + Bxi (n) xt + Bzi (n)zt },
where:
V i (n − 1) = σi + Bxi (n − 1)σx + Bzi (n − 1)σz .
Collecting terms:
1
exp{[−r f + gi + Ai (n − 1) + Bxi (n − 1)(1 − φx ) x + V i (n − 1)V i (n − 1)0 ]
2

+[ Bxi (n − 1)φx



− σi +

Bxi

(n − 1) σx +

Bzi

 σ0
c
] xt + [κi + Bzi (n − 1)φz ]zt }
(n − 1) σz
||σc ||

= exp{ Ai (n) + Bxi (n) xt + Bzi (n)zt }.
Matching terms:
1
Ai (n) = Ai (n − 1) − r f + gi + Bxi (n − 1)(1 − φx ) x + V i (n − 1)V i (n − 1)0 ,
2
0

Bxi (n)

=

Bxi (n − 1)(φx

σ0
σ
− σx c ) − (σi + Bzi (n − 1)σz ) c ,
||σc ||
||σc ||
A.14

Bzi (n) = κi
A.3.3.2

1 − φzn
.
1 − φz

Derivation of Per-Period Discount Rates

To compute the per-period discount, we need to compute the expectation of cash flow
growth, since ri,n
t is that discount rate such that:
i,(n)

PDt
Now,
Et [

Dti +n
Dti

Dti +n
]
Dti
n
(1 + ri,n
t )

Et [

=

n

] = Et [exp{ ∑ ∆dit+k }]
k =1

which is equal to
Et [exp{( gi + κi zt + σi et+1 )

+( gi + κi zt+1 + σi et+2 )
+( gi + κi zt+2 + σi et+3 )
..
.

+( gi + κi zt+n−1 + σi et+n )}]
=
Et [exp{( gi + κi zt + σi et+1 )

+( gi + κi (φz zt + σz et+1 ) + σi et+2 )
+( gi + κi (φz zt+1 + σz et+2 ) + σi et+3 )
..
.

=
Et [exp{( gi + κi zt + σi et+1 )

+( gi + κi (φz zt + σz et+1 ) + σi et+2 )
+( gi + κi (φz (φz zt + σz et+1 ) + σz et+2 ) + σi et+3 )
..
.

A.15

Collecting terms, this is equal to
exp{ gi n} Et [exp{(σi + κi σz + κi φz σz + ... + κi φzn−2 σz )et+1

+(σi + κi σz + κi φz σz + ... + κi φzn−3 σz )et+2
..
.

+(σi + κi σz )et+n−1
+(σi )et+n
+κi (1 + φz + φz2 + ... + φzn−1 )zt }]
Since these are geometric sums, we can rewrite

(σi + κi σz + κi φz σz + ... + κi φzn−2 σz ) = (σi + κi σz (1 + φz + ... + φzn−2 )) = (σi + κi σz
(σi + κi σz + κi φz σz + ... + κi φzn−3 σz ) = (σi + κi σz

(1 − φzn−2 )
),
1 − φz

..
.
to get

= exp{ gi n} Et [exp{(σi + κi σz
+(σi + κi σz

(1 − φzn−1 )
) e t +1
1 − φz

(1 − φzn−2 )
) e t +2
1 − φz
..
.

+(σi + κi σz )et+n−1
+σi et+n
+κ i

(1 − φzn )
zt }].
1 − φz

We can then compute the variance term as
Vti,n = Vart [(σi + κi σz

(1 − φzn−1 )
(1 − φzn−2 )
)et+1 + (σi + κi σz
) e t +2
1 − φz
1 − φz

. . . + (σi + κi σz )et+n−1 + (σi )et+n ].
A.16

(1 − φzn−1 )
),
1 − φz

Since all e are independent, the variance reduces to
Vti,n = V i,n =

n

∑ Ṽ i,k ,

k =1

where:
Ṽ i,1 = σi σi0 ,
Ṽ i,2 = (σi + κi σz )(σi + κi σz )0 ,
Ṽ i,3 = (σi + κi σz

(1 − φz2 )
(1 − φz2 ) 0
)(σi + κi σz
),
1 − φz
1 − φz
..
.

Ṽ i,n = (σi + κi σz
Therefore,
Et [

(1 − φzn−1 ) 0
(1 − φzn−1 )
)(σi + κi σz
).
1 − φz
1 − φz

Dti +n
Dti

n

] = Et [exp{ ∑ ∆dit+k }]
k =1

= exp{ gi n + κi

(1 − φzn )
zt + 0.5V i,n },
1 − φz

and thus:
i,(n)
PDt

=

(1−φzn )
1−φz zt
(1 + rni )n

exp{ gi n + κi
i,(n)

Using ri,n ' ln(1 + ri,n ) and defining pdt
ri,n
t

1
= gi +
n



+ 0.5V i,n }

i,(n)

= ln( PDt

.

), we get


(1 − φzn )
1 i,(n)
i,n
κi
zt + 0.5V
− pdt .
1 − φz
n

A.17

Appendix References
Ambrose, Brent W., Piet Eichholtz, and Thies Lindenthal. 2013. “House Prices and
Fundamentals: 355 Years of Evidence.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45(23): 477–491.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles.” Journal of Finance, 59(4): 1481–1509.
Barro, Robert J., and Jose F. Ursua. 2008. “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 39(1): 255–350.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad MartinezPeria. 2001. “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy, 16(32): 51–
82.
Constantinescu, Mihnea, and Marc Francke. 2013. “The Historical Development of the
Swiss Rental Market - A New Price Index.” Journal of Housing Economics, 22(2): 135 –
145.
Eichholtz, Piet. 1997. “A Long Run House Price Index: The Herengracht Index, 1628–
1973.” Real Estate Economics, 25(2): 175–192.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh. 2010. “The
Macroeconomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing
in General Equilibrium.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15988.
Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter. 2007. “Why Is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky?
A Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium.” Journal of Finance, 62(1): 55–92.
Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter. 2011. “The Term Structures of Equity and Interest
Rates.” Journal of Financial Economics, 101(1): 90–113.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. 2005. “Expected Returns and Expected
Dividend Growth.” Journal of Financial Economics, 76(1): 583–626.
Mack, Adrienne, and Enrique Martínez-García. 2011. “A Cross-Country Quarterly
Database of Real House Prices: A Methodological Note.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Working Paper 99.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries
of Financial Folly. Princeton University Press.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises.” American Economic Review, 102(2): 1029–
1061.
Shiller, Robert. 2000. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Stapledon, Nigel. 2012. “Trends and Cycles in Sydney and Melbourne House Prices from
1880 to 2011.” Australian Economic History Review, 52(3): 293–317.
van Binsbergen, Jules, Michael Brandt, and Ralph Koijen. 2012. “On the Timing and
Pricing of Dividends.” American Economic Review, 102(4): 1596–1618.
van Binsbergen, Jules, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph Koijen, and Evert Vrugt. 2013. “Equity
Yields.” Journal of Financial Economics, 110(3): 503 – 519.

A.18

Appendix Figures

0

5

Density
10

15

20

Figure A.1: Cross-Sectional Distribution of the Rent-to-Price Ratio in the U.S.

.05

.1

.15
Rent to Price Ratio

.2

.25

Note: The figure shows the distribution of the rent-to-price ratio for the 100 largest MSAs in the U.S.
in 2012 as constructed by Trulia, which observes a large set of both for-sale and for-rent listings. It is
constructed using a metro-level hedonic regression of ln( price) on property attributes, zip-code fixed
effects, and a dummy for whether the unit is for rent. The rent-to-price ratio is constructed by taking the
exponent of the coefficient on this dummy variable.

A.19

80

Price to Rent ratio (Jan 2000 = 100)
100
120
140
160
180

Figure A.2: Price-to-Rent Ratio Time-Series in the U.S.

Jan-1985 Jan-1990 Jan-1995 Jan-2000 Jan-2005 Jan-2010 Jan-2015

Note: The figure shows the time series of the price-rent ratio in the U.S., constructed as the ratio of the
10-City Case-Shiller House Price Index (Fred Series: SPCS10RSA) and the Bureau of Labor Statistic’s
Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Owners’ Equivalent Rent of Residences (Fred Series:
CUSR0000SEHC). The index ratio is normalized to 100 in January 2000.

A.20

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Figure A.3: Rent Growth vs. PCE Growth in the U.S.

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

2000

2010

PCE Growth

-.15

-.1

Rent Growth
-.05
0

.05

.1

Rent Growth

1990

-.2

-.1

0
PCE Growth

.1

.2

Note: The figure shows the annual growth rates of the “Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers:
Rent of Primary Residence” (FRED ID: CUUR0000SEHA) and “Personal Consumption Expenditure”
(FRED ID: PCDGA) since 1929.

A.21

Figure A.4: House Prices and Rents in Prime Central London Areas during the 2007-09

200
100

150

Price Index

250

300

Financial Crisis

Jul-05

Jan-07

Jul-08

Kensington

Jul-11
Chelsea

120
80

100

Rental Index

140

Prime Central London

Jan-10

Jul-05

Jan-07

Jul-08

Prime Central London

Jan-10
Kensington

Jul-11
Chelsea

Note: The figure shows the time series of house prices and rents for Prime Central London,
Kensington, and Chelsea for the period January 2005 to January 2012. The series are monthly
and available from John D Wood & Co. at http://www.johndwood.co.uk/content/indices/
london-property-prices/

A.22

Figure A.5: Term Structure of Discount Rates, Full Model
0.2

0.2

0.18

0.18

0.16

0.16

0.14

0.14

0.12

0.12
Per-Period Total Discount Rate
Rf Yield
Risk Premium

0.1

Per-Period Total Discount Rate
Rf Yield
Risk Premium

0.1

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

0

100

200

300

(A) Equity

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

(B) Real Estate

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04
Per-Period Total Discount Rate
Rf Yield
Risk Premium

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

(C) Consumption
Note: Panel A shows per-period discount rates, risk-free rates and risk premia of claims to single
dividends with a maturity up to 1000 years implied by the reduced-form asset pricing model from Section
A.3. Panel B shows per-period discount rates, risk-free rates and risk premia of claims to single rents with
a maturity up to 1000 years implied by the reduced-form asset pricing model from Section A.3. Panel C
shows per-period discount rates, risk-free rates and risk premia of claims to single consumption strips
with a maturity up to 1000 years implied by the reduced-form asset pricing model from Section A.3. The
calibration details are discussed in Appendix A.3.2.2 and summarized in Table A.3.

A.23

Appendix Tables
Table A.1: Rent-to-Price Ratio Singapore - 2012

For-Rent Dummy
Fixed Effects

Controls
Implied Rent-to-Price Ratio
R-squared
N

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-3.095∗∗∗
(0.044)

-3.131∗∗∗
(0.019)

-3.123∗∗∗
(0.014)

-3.107∗∗∗
(0.025)

Quarter ×
Postal Code

Quarter ×
Postal Code

Month ×
Postal Code

Month ×
Postal Code ×
Bedrooms

·

X

X

X

4.5%

4.4%

4.4%

4.5%

0.804
106,145

0.873
105,189

0.872
105,189

0.872
105,189

Note: This table shows results from regression (A.1). The rent-to-price ratio is constructed by taking the
exponent of the coefficient on this dummy variable. The dependent variable is the price (for-sale price
or annualized for-rent price) for properties listed on iProperty.com in Singapore in 2012. Fixed effects
are included as indicated. In columns (2) to (4), we also control for characteristics of the property: we
include dummy variables for the type of the property (condo, house, etc.), indicators for the number of
bedrooms and bathrooms, property age, property size (by adding dummy variables for 50 equal-sized
buckets), information on the kitchen (ceramic, granite, etc.), which floor the property is on, and the tenure
type for leaseholds. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the fixed effect. Significance levels are as
follows: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).

A.24

Table A.2: House Prices, Banking Crises, Rare Disasters

Australia
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Singapore
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
U.S.

House Price Index Time Period

Banking Crises

Rare Disasters

1880 - 2013
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1840 - 2010
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1649 - 2009
1975 - 2012
1819 - 2013
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1975 - 2012
1952 - 2013
1937 - 2012
1952 - 2013
1890 - 2012

1893, 1989
2008

1918, 1932, 1944

1987
1991
1882, 1889, 1907, 1930, 2008
2008
1990, 2008
1992
1893, 1907, 1921, 1939, 2008
1987
1899, 1922, 1931, 1988
1982
1977, 1989
1985, 1997
1978, 2008
1991, 2008
2008
1974, 1984, 1991, 2007
1893, 1907, 1929, 1984, 2007

1993
1871, 1915, 1943

1893, 1918, 1944
1918, 1921, 1944

1998

1945
1921, 1933

Note: The table shows the time series availability of house price indices in the first column. The second
and third column report dates of banking crises or rare consumption disasters for each country in the time
period provided in the first column. Banking crisis dates for all countries, except Singapore, Belgium,
Finland, New Zealand, South Korea, and South Africa, are from Schularick and Taylor (2012). Banking
crisis dates for the countries not covered by Schularick and Taylor (2012) are from Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009). Rare disaster dates indicate the year of the trough in consumption during a consumption disaster
as reported by Barro and Ursua (2008).

A.25

Table A.3: Parameters of the Full Model
Calibrated Variables

Value

gs
gh
gc
κs
κh
κc
rf
x
φz
φx
kσs k
kσh k
kσc k
kσz k
kσx k
Correlation of ∆ds and z shocks
Correlation of x with all other shocks

2.28%
0.7%
2.28%
1
1.14
0.33
1%
0.625
0.91
0.87
14.5%
14.5%
4.83%
0.32%
24.0%
-0.83
0

Implied Parameters

Value
[0.0724,0,0]
[0.0724,0,0]
[0.0241,0,0]
[-0.00136,0.0009,0]
[0,0,0.12]

σs
σh
σc
σz
σx

Note: The table shows the calibration of the reduced-form asset pricing model in Section A.3. The
unconditional mean of dividend, rent, and consumption growth rates, the risk-free rate, the persistence
variables, and the conditional standard deviations are in annual terms. The stock market is calibrated as
in Lettau and Wachter (2007). The unconditional mean of the dividend growth rate and the conditional
standard deviation of dividend growth are set to match their respective data counterparts. Under the
assumption that the conditional mean of dividend growth can be identified with the log consumptiondividend ratio in the data, autocorrelation φz and the correlation between shocks to ∆ds and shocks to z
are set to match their respective data counterparts. kσz k is set to reflect the low predictability of dividend
growth in the data. The unconditional mean of the rent growth rate is set to match the data. Volatility kσh k
as well as κ h are calibrated to match the expected return on housing in the data as well as the empirical
term structure of housing discount rates. The process of consumption is calibrated to the unconditional
mean of dividend growth and to one third of the volatility of dividend growth. x is calibrated to fit various
moments of returns to equities as in Lettau and Wachter (2007), in particular the volatility of stock prices.
The risk-free rate is set at 1%, based on the U.K. gilts real yield curve between 1998 and 2013 reported in
Figure VI.

A.26

Table A.4: Simulated Moments for the Full Model
Moment

Equity

Housing

Consumption

E[ P/D ]
σ( p − d)
AC of p − d
E[ R]
σ( R)
AC of R
Sharpe ratio
Expected cash flow growth
σ(∆d)
AC of ∆d
Expected capital gains
Expected yields

32.0
38.5%
0.90
7.3%
17.0%
-0.05
0.37
3.4%
14.5%
-0.04
3.6%
3.7%

27.5
36.5%
0.91
5.7%
13.3%
-0.04
0.35
1.8%
14.5%
-0.03
1.5%
4.1%

17,700
12.9%
0.92
2.4%
4.4%
-0.04
0.32
2.4%
4.8%
-0.03
2.4%
0%

Note: The table shows key moments from simulating the reduced-form asset pricing model in Section A.3
for 50,000 quarters. Time series are aggregated to an annual frequency. R is the return on the market. Small
letters indicate log variables. Possible differences between expected returns and the sum of expected capital
gains and expected yields are due to rounding errors.

A.27

