                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TARIFF REDUCTIONS, ENTRY, AND WELFARE:
                 THEORY AND EVIDENCE FOR THE LAST TWO DECADES

                                         Lorenzo Caliendo
                                         Robert C. Feenstra
                                           John Romalis
                                          Alan M. Taylor

                                        Working Paper 21768
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21768


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2015




Financial support from the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. We thank
Federico Esposito, Anna Ignatenko and Mingzhi Xu for excellent research assistance. For their
helpful comments we thank Andres Rodríguez-Clare, Kyle Bagwell, Fernando Parro, Stephen
Redding, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Ina Simonovska, and seminar participants. The usual
disclaimer applies.. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Lorenzo Caliendo, Robert C. Feenstra, John Romalis, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tariff Reductions, Entry, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for the Last Two Decades
Lorenzo Caliendo, Robert C. Feenstra, John Romalis, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 21768
December 2015, Revised June 2020
JEL No. F10,F11,F12,F13,F15,F17,F60,F62

                                          ABSTRACT

We show in a multi-sector, heterogeneous-firm trade model that the effect of tariffs on entry,
especially in the presence of production linkages, can reverse the traditional positive optimal
tariff argument. We then use a new tariff dataset, and apply it to a 189-country, 15-sector version
of our model, to quantify the trade, entry, and welfare effects of trade liberalization over the
period 1990–2010. We find that the impact on firm entry was larger in Advanced relative to
Emerging and Developing countries; that slightly more than three-quarters of the total gains from
trade are a consequence of the reductions in MFN tariffs (the Uruguay Round), with two-thirds of
the remainder due to preferential trade agreements and one third due to the hypothetical
movement to free trade; and that free trade would bring gains for some Emerging and Developing
countries, in particular. Ten economies in our sample – including China, Hong Kong, India,
Israel, Vietnam, and five more remote countries – would have benefited from going beyond free
trade to subsidizing their imports in 1990, since their optimal tariffs are negative.

Lorenzo Caliendo                                 John Romalis
Yale University                                  The University of Sydney
School of Management                             School of Economics
135 Prospect Street                              H04 - Merewether
New Haven, CT 06520                              NSW 2006 Australia
and NBER                                         jromalis@gmail.com
lorenzo.caliendo@yale.edu
                                                 Alan M. Taylor
Robert C. Feenstra                               Department of Economics and
Department of Economics                          Graduate School of Management
University of California, Davis                  University of California
One Shields Avenue                               One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616                                  Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER                                         and CEPR
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu                           and also NBER
                                                 amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
1        Introduction
Tariffs have fallen significantly around the globe over the last two decades. Yet, very little is known
about the trade, entry, and welfare effects generated by this unprecedented shift in trade policy. To
study this, we build upon the most up-to-date model in international trade—with heterogeneous
firms in the tradition of Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2008)—and extend this model to incorporate
tariffs and the kind of input-output structure that is realistic for modern economies. With our model
and a novel comprehensive tariff dataset we quantify the effects of arguably the most successful
GATT/WTO process, the Uruguay Round. With these more general model foundations, we find
that sectoral linkages and firm entry decisions can have meaningful impacts on trade and welfare,
in ways not captured hitherto in many current-generation quantitative trade models.
        Specifically, we find that the conventional optimal tariff argument – whereby a small tariff
(starting near free trade) benefits the country applying it and harms its trading partners – can fail
to hold in theory and for some countries of the world. What accounts for the differences between
our results and any other model with (positive) optimal tariffs? The short answer is that in a multi-
sector, Melitz-Chaney model there is an entry distortion, i.e., entry is not at the optimal level as
it would be in a single-sector, CES model.1 That distortion is seen most clearly in a two-sector,
two-country version of the model that we use to derive our main theoretical findings.2
        Consider a “manufacturing” sector where firms produce differentiated varieties under monopo-
listic competition, and a “services” sector where firms produce a non-tradable good under perfect
competition. We first show that tariffs reduce entry relative to a free trade equilibrium. We then
show that this reduction in firm entry contracts the output of the differentiated sector, raises its
price index, and therefore lowers welfare, with tariff revenue only offsetting a part of this effect.
We characterize the conditions under which import tariffs can be used to reduce this distortion and
we show that, in the absence of any other policy instrument, it is possible that a negative tariff is
the optimal policy. We also show how the presence of production linkages contributes importantly
to this unusual result, which distinguishes our paper from most of the literature.3
        We then use a 189-country/15-sector quantitative version of our model. We go well beyond
recent quantitative exercises in expanding the data universe to build a tariff dataset that includes
not just the usual sample of Advanced (e.g., OECD) economies, but also a large subsample of
Emerging and Developing economies, using newly collected data going back to the 1980s.4 Our work
    1
      The social optimality of the one-sector case was analyzed by Dhingra and Morrow (2019).
    2
      Nocco, Ottaviano, and Salto (2014) show that entry could also be inefficiently high in a heterogeneous firm model
a la Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). More related to this work, Bagwell and Lee (2015) show that under the presence
of an entry-externality, starting from a position of global free trade, a country could gain with an export subsidy.
Lasharipour and Lugovsky (2019) in a general, multi-sector treatment of optimal tariffs, note that using tariffs in a
second-best role to offset domestic monopoly distortions can conflict with the terms-of-trade motive.
    3
      A notable exemption is Blanchard, Bown, and Johnson (2015), where they study optimal tariffs under the presence
of production linkages but in the context of perfect competitive firms.
    4
      We unify tariff schedules from five different sources. With more than 1 million observations per year in the 1980s,
rising to 2 million by the 2000s, with our tariff data we can perform tariff policy experiments which could not be
explored before now.


                                                           1
therefore permits a broader and more realistic computation of the retrospective, and prospective,
gains from trade liberalization in both rich and poor nations, a step we think is crucial since it is in
the poorer countries that trade liberalization has proceeded most rapidly since 1990, and in which
there may be still significant scope for further tariff reductions in the future.
      To sum up, our paper develops new theoretical results about optimal tariffs, entry, and welfare;
it builds a new tariff dataset and compiles other data from high- and low-income countries in order
to calibrate the model; and it uses the model to perform policy experiments to evaluate the gains
from actual past trade liberalization and possible future gains yet to be realized.
      We implement four policy experiments. First, we quantify the effects of arguably the most
successful GATT/WTO process, the Uruguay Round.5 We do so by using the model to evaluate
the economic effects of the observed change in Most Favored Nations (MFN) tariffs for countries at
the product level from 1990 to 2010, focusing on the trade, entry, and welfare impacts. We then go
beyond this Uruguay Round experiment and evaluate the impact of all observed changes in tariffs,
namely MFN and preferential tariffs, over the same period; we refer to this model experiment as
Uruguay Round + Preference. After that, we ask if there are any further potential gains in the
world today from zeroing all tariffs, a counterfactual experiment we refer to as Free Trade. Finally,
we also investigate whether, starting from a Free Trade position, the imposition of negative tariffs
would be optimal for each country acting individually.
      We find that the Uruguay Round had the largest impact. Those MFN tariff cuts accounts
for 77% or slightly more than three-quarters of the total welfare gains across countries, the PTAs
account for another 15% or two-thirds of the remaining gains, and the movement to Free trade
for another 7% or one-third of the remaining gains. We find that free trade would bring notable
gains for some Emerging and Developing countries, in particular. Ten economies in our sample –
including China, Hong Kong, India, Israel, Vietnam, and five more remote countries – would have
benefited from going beyond free trade to subsidizing their imports in 1990, since their optimal
tariffs are negative.
      When looking at countries by income group, we find that the distribution of gains across these
two groups are quite different. For the Advanced economies, most countries gain and the gains do
not vary widely. However, for Emerging and Developing economies, not all countries win, but the
ones that do gain substantially. We also evaluate how commercial policy has affected the entry
and exit of firms across markets. We find that tariffs affect firm entry in very different ways across
countries. For instance, the reductions in tariffs as a consequence of the Uruguay Round generated
considerable changes in entry and exit of firms across industries in Advanced economies, while
there was a much smaller effect on Emerging economies. This is despite the fact that the Emerging
economies have greater dispersion in the welfare impact of the Uruguay Round tariff cuts.
  5
    Bagwell and Staiger (2010) survey recent economic research on trade agreements, with a special focus on the
GATT/WTO. For earlier research on the impact of trade agreements, see, inter alia, Anderson and van Wincoop
(2002), Baier and Bergstrand (2007; 2009), Deardorff (1998), Redding and Venables (2004), Rose (2004), Subramanian
and Wei (2007), and Trefler (1993; 2006).



                                                        2
1.1    Comparison to the Literature
Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011) were the first to introduce ad valorem tariffs into a
Melitz-Chaney model. They obtain substantial changes in entry in their quantitative model, which
is based on GTAP and models the heterogeneous-firm sector as a single, aggregate manufacturing
sector, with additional constant-returns sectors in the economy. As we show here, the presence
of the additional sectors guarantees that changes in tariffs applied to the manufacturing sector
will affect entry. Our approach makes further advances in several respects. We analytically solve
for the impact of ad valorem tariffs on entry in a two-country version of our model with a single
manufacturing sector, while in our more general quantitative model we use multiple heterogeneous-
firm sectors. In addition, our tariff data are much more detailed than Balistreri, Hillberry, and
Rutherford (2011), who consider a 50% tariff cut rather than the actual impact of the Uruguay
Round.6
    Like our study, Spearot (2016) analyzes the tariff cuts of 1994–2000 over a large group of
countries, one that is only slightly smaller than the set of countries and the time period that
we shall analyze. In his model, which includes trade in final goods only, he finds that while the
majority of countries benefited from those tariff cuts, those benefits were skewed towards developing
countries. In contrast, the benefits from zeroing all tariffs from their 2000 levels would be skewed
towards advanced countries. Significantly, in his model, only about one-half of countries benefit
from both tariff cuts (i.e., going from 1994 levels to zero), and few countries benefit from unilateral
tariff cuts starting from 2000 levels (though the countries that do gain include India, Japan, Korea,
and the U.S.). These results from Spearot (2016), emphasizing the disparate gains across groups
of countries and the losses from unilateral tariff cuts in most cases, are very much in line with the
conventional optimal tariff argument.7
    Optimal tariffs are examined in a heterogenous firm monopolistic competition model by Costinot,
Rodríguez-Clare, and Werning (2016, henceforth CRW). They find that the selection of heteroge-
neous firms into exporting leads to an aggregate nonconvexity in the foreign production possibilities
set between domestic goods and exports, which dampens the incentive for the home country to ap-
ply a tariff to improve its terms of trade. Nevertheless, if there is a Pareto distribution for firm
productivities then the optimal tariff is still positive, but lower than it would otherwise be. It
follows that individual countries will lose from removing small tariffs, so that mutual gains require
multilateral tariff cuts.
    Three important features of our model are responsible for some very profound differences be-
tween our results and those of Spearot and CRW. First, we allow for production linkages with
   6
     Another difference is that Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011) estimate all the fixed costs in their model
from GTAP data. In contrast, we use the “hat” algebra (Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum 2008) to solve for changes in the
key variables, which avoids the need to estimate fixed costs.
   7
     Another difference between our papers is that Spearot (2016) actually relies on the quadratic utility function in
the spirit of Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). Because he does not assume an outside good, however, he argues that the
results are much the same when using a CES utility function.



                                                           3
the kind of input-output structure that is realistic for modern economies, following Caliendo and
Parro (2015, henceforth CP).8 . Specifically, we have traded intermediate inputs making use of
the non-traded finished goods as material inputs in their production. Second, we analyze only a
simple import tariff, and not the full range of policy instruments as used by CRW. As they stress,
having the full range of instruments available means that tariffs are never used to offset domestic
distortions. Third, there is indeed a domestic distortion present in our model because we allow
for the free entry of firms, and we find that entry is impacted by the use of tariffs. So, while a
reduction in tariffs generates a terms-of-trade loss it generates a welfare gain by adjusting entry to
its optimal level. As a result, the impact of tariffs on entry, especially in the presence of production
linkages, can reverse the traditional positive optimal tariff argument.
    This study also relates to recent work by Melitz and Redding (2015) who show, in a Melitz (2003)
model, that after relaxing the assumption of a Pareto distribution of firm productivities assumed
in Chaney (2008), changes in iceberg trade costs can impact entry and welfare. A contribution of
this paper is to go further and clearly explain how tariffs affect entry, and ultimately welfare, in a
Melitz (2003) model, even without relaxing the maintained assumption of a Pareto distribution of
firm productivities.9
    Two more recent contributions have also sought to consider ad valorem tariffs as opposed to
iceberg transport costs in a Melitz-Chaney model: these are the works by Felbermayr, Jung, and
Larch (2015) and Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014, henceforth CR). The latter include tariffs
in their analysis, but apply them to the variable production cost of imports; they allow for changes
in entry in their theoretical model but do not focus on this margin in reporting their quantitative
work. The former use tariffs applied to either the revenue or production cost of imports; but
they hold entry fixed in their one-sector model. In an earlier version of this working paper, we
carefully compared the difference between applying tariffs to the revenue cost of imports versus
applying tariffs to the variable production cost of imports, and that analysis is briefly summarized in
Appendix A. There are some notable theoretical differences between these two cases—in particular,
regarding whether changes in tariffs affect entry in a one-sector model. As explained more fully
in Appendix A, we assert that modeling tariffs as applying to the revenue cost of imports is the
realistic choice that matches customs practices, and is also a theoretically parsimonious benchmark
case, so we will focus only on that case here.
    The potential for tariffs to impact entry, and hence welfare, has not received sufficient attention
in the literature. We believe that one reason for this is that iceberg transport costs do not affect
   8
     The importance of the input-output structure has been made clear in Yi (2003), CP and in Costinot and
Rodríguez-Clare (2014). The latter used uniform tariff cuts to show how the gains from trade are systematically
larger when the input-output structure is taken into account. Here are echoes of an earlier trade literature on distor-
tions due to high effective rates of protection, and more recent empirical trade and growth papers highlighting the
damaging effects of tariffs on inputs (Goldberg et al. 2010; Estevadeordal and Taylor 2013).
   9
     Contemporaneous work continues on this theme. Bagwell and Lee (2015) consider tariffs and entry in the Melitz-
Ottaviano (2008) model. Hsieh et al. (2016) adopt a Melitz and Redding (2015) iceberg structure, and empirically
examine the selection effect on firms due to the Canada-U.S. free trade agreement, which occurred just prior to our
sample period.


                                                          4
entry in a standard one-sector Melitz-Chaney model, as shown most clearly by Arkolakis, Costinot,
and Rodríguez-Clare (2012, henceforth ACR).10
    Finally, we note that strong evidence of the impact of trade policy on entry is provided for the
case of apparel exporters from Bangledesh by Cherkashin, Demidova, Kee, and Krishna (2015).
They analyze how European Union (EU) preferences provided to these exporters led to an increase
in entry and an increase in exports to both the EU and to the United States. We confirm in our
quantitative exercise that changes in foreign tariffs impact entry in the exporting countries, and we
find the greatest changes in entry for Advanced countries, which face the largest tariff reductions
in Emerging and Developing markets.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we briefly present the quan-
titative model. In Section 3, to develop intuition, we present some key results with the aid of a
simplified two-sector two-country model. Section 4 describes the new tariff dataset and the rest of
the data sources that we use in order to calibrate the 189-country/15-sector version of the model.
Section 5 explains how we take the model to the data, and section 6 presents the empirical results
which quantify the gains from tariff liberalization in the last 20 years, and the potential remaining
gains from tariff liberalization going forward. Section 7 concludes. Throughout, all proofs and
many details are relegated to the Appendix.


2    Model
Consider a world with M countries, indexed by i and j. There is a mass of Li agents in each
country i. There are S sectors indexed by s and s′ . Agents consume nontradable finished goods
from all sectors. The finished goods in turn are produced with intermediate goods from different
sources, either traded or nontraded. Finished goods are also used as materials, i.e., inputs, for the
production of intermediate goods, along with raw labor. Intermediate goods producers in sector s
have heterogenous productivities φ (which, following convention, we will also use as an index for
each producer, or firm). Specifically, upon entry, for which it pays a fixed cost, a firm’s φ is drawn
from the known distribution of productivities Gs (φ), where we assume that Gs (φ) = 1 − φ−θs
follows a Pareto distribution with coefficient θs > 0. We further impose the standard condition
that θs + 1 > σs , where σs is the elasticity of substitution of intermediate varieties defined later,
so as to ensure that average aggregate productivity under constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
aggregation is well defined.
  10
     One of ACR’s “macro” assumptions—which they label R2—is that aggregate profits in any country i (Πi , mea-
sured gross of the entry fee) are a constant share of aggregate revenue (Ri ), and that assumption is indeed satisfied in
the special case of a Pareto distribution on productivity draws. In the further special case of a symmetric, one-sector,
one-factor model, revenue equals the factor supply (Li ), since without loss of generality we can normalize wages
wi = 1. In turn, revenue is fixed, aggregate profits are also fixed, and since these equal the number of entrants N
times the fixed costs of entry fiE , it follows that Ni = Πi /fiE ∝ Ri /fiE = Li /fiE , which in turn is also then fixed.
Therefore, changes in iceberg transport costs have no impact on entry in this very special case. In a multi-sector
model, however, the factor supply to each sector is not fixed so it is quite possible that changes in iceberg transport
costs will affect entry, as ACR (section IV.A) note.


                                                           5
       In addition to fixed entry costs, the intermediate goods producers face fixed operating costs,
and costs of trading, in all markets. As regards trading costs, traded intermediate goods are subject
to two types of bilateral trade frictions. First, as is conventional there is an iceberg trade cost in
the ad valorem form τji,s − 1 > 0 of shipping goods from j to i, where we assume τii,s = 1 for all
i, s. Second, we introduce the ad valorem tariff tji,s which is applied to the revenue cost of imports
from j to i, where we assume that tii,s = 0 for all i, s. Intermediate goods producers decide how
much to supply to the domestic market and how much to supply abroad. Intermediate producers
in sector s and country j pay a fixed operating cost fji,s in order to produce goods for market i,
and we make the standard assumption that home operation is less costly than export operation, so
that fii,s < fji,s for all j ̸= i. As a result of these fixed costs, less efficient producers of intermediate
goods do not find it profitable to supply certain markets, and some do not operate even in the
home market. We denote by φ∗ji,s the cutoff or threshold productivity level such that all firms in
each sector s and country j with φ < φ∗ji,s are not active in exporting to country i, or not active
in the home market, in the case where φ < φ∗ii,s .
       Denote by Nj,s the mass of entering firms in equilibrium in each sector s and country j. By
virtue of the Pareto distribution, the number of firms/products actually sold in sector s, from
country j, into market i is the the total number
                                            h    ofentering
                                                         i firms times the mass of firms above the
relevant threshold, which is given by Nj,s 1 − Gs φ∗ji,s                     = Nj,s φ∗ji,s −θs .
       We assume that agents have Cobb-Douglas preferences where αi,s are the expenditure shares
on consumed goods Ci,s . Agents derive income from two sources, labor income and rebated tariff
revenue, and firm profits will be equal to zero by an assumption of free entry. We let Ri represent
the income of the agents in country i, and Pi,s to the price of finished good s in country i.

2.1      Finished goods producers
Finished goods are produced with a nested CES production function: the upper-level distinguishes
home and foreign inputs, with an elasticity of substitution of ωs > 1 between these two groups;
and the lower-level is defined over varieties of home and varieties of foreign intermediate inputs,
with an elasticity of substitution σs > ωs between varieties within each group.11
       The home demand for home intermediates of variety φ sold in sector s in country i is given by
                                                               −σs            −ωs
                                                    pii,s (φ)            Pii,s          Yi,s
                                  qii,s (φ) =                                                ,                    (1)
                                                      Pii,s              Pi,s           Pi,s

where Yi,s = Pi,s Qi,s is the value of output of the finished good s in i, and Pii,s is the CES price
index for home intermediate inputs in sector s.
  11
    This nested structure is also used by Feenstra, Luck, Obstfeld, and Russ (2018). We use this nested structure
here (in contrast to our working paper) because Kucheryavyy, Lyn, and Rodríguez-Clare (2016) have recently shown
the potential for corner solutions in multi-sector monopolistic competition models. That potential is offset by adding
the extra upper-level curvature in the nested CES structure.




                                                                6
   Likewise, home demand for imported intermediates sold from country j ̸= i in country i is
                                                                  !−σs             !−ωs
                                                                              F
                                                                            Pi,s
                                                      pji,s (φ)                             Yi,s
                                  qji,s (φ) =              F
                                                                                                 ,                       (2)
                                                        Pi,s                Pi,s            Pi,s

        F is the CES price index of foreign intermediate inputs, inclusive of tariffs. Finally, with
where Pi,s
these results, we can derive the aggregate CES prices index Pi,s over all varieties,

                                                  h                                  i     1
                                                          1−ωs          F 1−ωs            1−ωs
                                     Pi,s = (Pii,s )              +   Pi,s                       .                       (3)

2.2   Intermediate goods producers
The intermediate good firm in sector s in country i with variety φ employs labor and uses materials
from all sectors (production linkages) and combines them using the following production function
                                                                   YS
                                  qi,s (φ) = φ li,s (φ)γi,s                   mi,s′ s (φ)γi,s′ s ,                       (4)
                                                                      s′ =1

where φ is the productivity draw of the firm, li,s (φ) is labor demand, mi,s′ s (φ) is the quantity of
materials used from sector s′ , γi,s ≥ 0 is the share in output of value added (here, labor costs), and
γi,s′ s ≥ 0 is the share in output of the cost of inputs from sector s′ used by sector s (input-output
                                       P
coefficients). We assume that γi,s + Ss′ =1 γi,s′ s = 1.
   The cost of the input bundle, or more simply the input cost index, is given by
                                                             YS                            γi,s′ s
                                  xi,s ≡ (wi /γi,s )γi,s                  Pi,s′ /γi,s′ s              .                  (5)
                                                                  s′ =1

This input cost index contains information on prices from all sectors in the economy and, clearly,
the input cost directly affects production decisions in all sectors. This feature is a key distinction
of our model, as compared to a one-sector model or a multi-sector model without input-output
linkages.

Profit maximization         Consider the profit maximization problem of supplying goods to market
j. Profits are given by
                                                                                                      
                                                  pij,s (φ)             xi,s
                  πij,s (φ) =     max                       qij,s (φ) −      τij,s qij,s (φ) − wi fij,s ,                (6)
                                pij,s (φ)≥0       1 + tij,s              φ

                                                                          pij,s (φ)
subject to (2). The control variable in this problem is                   1+tij,s ,   the net-of-tariff price received by the
exporting firm.
   As we can see, this price differs from the tariff-inclusive price pij,s (φ) paid by the importer,
and means that the sales revenue pij,s qij,s is divided by the tariff factor 1 + tij,s in order to obtain
producer revenue in (6). Note that the quantity sold by the firm is τij,s qij,s (φ) because of the


                                                                  7
iceberg trade costs. So the costs of production (xi,s /φ) qij,s are multiplied by the iceberg trade costs
τij,s to obtain the costs in (6).
       These are subtle but very important details. This discussion shows how the tariffs and iceberg
trade costs enter the profit equation in slightly different ways, and follows from our assumption that
the ad valorem tariff is applied to the sales revenue. In contrast, if the tariff was applied to only
the costs of the imported product then the costs (xi,s /φ) qij,s would be multiplied by the product
of the iceberg trade costs and the tariff factor, τij,s (1 + tij,s ) in (6), so that the tariffs and iceberg
costs would enter the firm’s problem symmetrically.12 We will see that this distinction between
how tariffs and iceberg costs are modeled makes an important difference to the zero-profit-cutoff
productivity that we solve for below.
       The quantity demanded for imported inputs is then a function of this price plus the tariff,
relative to the import price index of all intermediates in sector s in destination market i. Thus,

                           pij,s (φ)      σs xi,s τij,s
                                        =               ,                                                                   (7)
                           1 + tij,s    σs − 1   φ
                                                             F (σs −ωs ) ωs −1
                                            σs xi,s τij,s −σs Pj,s        Pj,s Yj,s
                            qij,s (φ) =                                             .                                       (8)
                                          σs − 1   φ               (1 + tij,s )σs

       The profits for sector s in country i from selling to market j ̸= i are given by the markup minus
one, times unit cost pre-tariff, times output, less fixed costs:

                                                      xi,s τij,s qij,s (φ)
                                        πij,s (φ) =                        − wi fij,s .                                     (9)
                                                         (σs − 1)φ

The price pii,s (φ) and quantity qii,s (φ) of goods selling to the home market are obtained by using
                                                                F with the home price index P
tij,s = 0, τij,s = 1, and by replacing the import price index Pi,s                            ii,s in
the above expressions.
  12
   For clarity, the profit maximization equation in the case where the tariff was applied to firm revenue for the
imported product, profits would be as in (6) and we can scale that up by a factor (1 + tij,s ) to get,
                                                                                                                             
                                                                     xi,s
         (1 + tij,s ) πij,s (φ) = max          pij,s (φ) qij,s (φ) −      τij,s (1 + tij,s ) qij,s (φ) − wi fij,s (1 + tij,s ) .
                                 pij,s (φ)≥0                          φ

In contrast, when the tariff is applied to only the firm cost for the imported product profits would be,
                                                                                                               
                                                                    xi,s
                   πij,s (φ) = max            pij,s (φ) qij,s (φ) −      τij,s (1 + tij,s ) qij,s (φ) − wi fij,s .
                                pij,s (φ)≥0                          φ

In both expressions we use the firm’s destination price pij,s and quantity sold qij,s , to make for comparability. From
these two equations, viewed side-by-side, it is obvious that in the latter case the effect of cost tariffs and icebergs are
totally symmetric, entering as τij,s (1 + tij,s ), and setting aside the income effects arising for the cost tariff rebate
which are absent in the case of icebergs.




                                                                8
2.3      Selection and Entry
Zero cutoff profit condition                Given the presence of fixed operating costs, there exits a threshold
level of productivity such that a firm in a given sector makes zero profit. Using the equilibrium con-
ditions for prices and quantities derived before, the the zero cutoff profit
                                                                        (ZCP)    level of productivity
in sector s for export sales is given for i ̸= j is determined by πij,s φ∗ij,s = 0, namely

                                                                             !     1
                                                                                   σs −1
                                     σs           σs wi fij,s (1 + tij,s )
                    φ∗ij,s =                                                               xi,s τij,s (1 + tij,s ).   (10)
                                   σs − 1               F (σs −ωs )
                                                Yj,s Pj,s              ωs −1
                                                                      Pj,s

       Note that a reduction in the tariff level affects the ZCP condition in a way that is different from
a reduction in iceberg trade costs. This follows from our assumption that tariffs are applied to the
sales value of the import, as discussed above. In practice, this means that a reduction in actual
tariffs acts in the ZCP condition very similarly to a joint reduction in iceberg trade costs and in
fixed costs.13 The gains from tariff reduction will take into account this implicit reduction in fixed
costs, which will act so as to encourage the entry of exporters and increase export variety, as we
show below.
       Another feature of (10) that deserves attention is that the output Yj,s of sector s in country j
appears in the denominator on the right. With country i exporting to country j in that sector, a
higher output means that exporters can spread their fixed costs over greater sales, which therefore
allows more firms to self-select into exporting. We therefore refer to the presence of Yj,s in (10) as
a selection effect, and we will find that it enters our later equations, too.

                                                              E in each sector, in units of labor,
Free entry As noted earlier, firms pay a fixed cost of entry fi,s
in order to allow them to take a draw from the known distribution of productivities Gs (φ). Free
entry implies that expected profits of firms have to equal entry costs in sector s and country i.
       Using the equilibrium conditions (9) and (10), and the analogous conditions for the home
market, and given the assumption of a Pareto distribution of productivities, we end up with the
following equilibrium condition
                                       XM                              θs − σ s + 1 E
                                                  fij,s φ∗ij,s −θs =               fi,s ,                             (11)
                                            j=1                           σs − 1
                                                                                                 E.
which relates the ZCP levels of productivities to the fixed operating and entry costs fij,s and fi,s
  13
     In contrast, if tariffs are applied only to the costs of imported products, then they would have exactly the same
effect on the zero-cutoff-profit condition as do iceberg trade costs τij,s , and would appear only as multiplying those
trade costs above (i.e., as in the final terms in (10)). Under our maintained assumption that tariffs are applied to
the sales revenue, they have the “extra” impact of effectively reduced fixed costs, too.




                                                                9
2.4   Price index
We define the average productivity level of the firms making intermediate goods in sector s sold in
i and sourced from j as
                                                    Z                                  !     1
                                                         ∞                                 σs −1

                                      φ̃ji,s =                   φσs −1 µji,s (φ) dφ               ,                                    (12)
                                                        φ∗ji,s
                         h             i
where µji,s (φ) = gs (φ)/ 1 − Gs φ∗ji,s    is the conditional distribution of productivities (that is,
conditional on the variety φ being actively produced for this {i, j, s} combination). Then using (3)
and (7) we obtain
                  (
                                         1−ωs  σ            
                                                         xi,s 1−ωs
                       φ∗ii,s −θs
                                           1−σs     s
        Pi,s =                      Ni,s
                                                 σs − 1 φ̃ii,s
                         "                                                                                         # 1−ωs  1−ω
                                                                                                                              1

                             XM                       σ x τ                       1−σs                           1−σs 
                                                                                                                                s
                                           ∗ −θs           s   j,s ji,s (1 + tji,s )
                    +                     φji,s  Nj,s                                                                               ,   (13)
                               j̸=i                     σs − 1        φ̃ji,s                                               

                  h             i
where φ∗ji,s −θs = 1 − Gs φ∗ji,s    is the probability that an entering firm in country j actually
exports to market i, so that the number of products actually sold are Nji,s ≡ φ∗ji,s −θs Nj,s .

2.5   Trade balance and market clearing
Two steps remain to close the model, the first being to ensure that all entities obey their budget
constraints, markets clear, and trade is balanced.

Expenditure shares           Recall that Yi,s = Pi,s Qi,s is the value of the output of the finished good
s in country i, which is produced entirely from intermediate goods, these being either imported or
produced domestically. Hence, this value of output equals the total expenditure on those interme-
diate goods.
   Let λji,s denote the share of country’s i total expenditure in sector s on intermediate goods from
market j. In this share, integrating over sales of all varieties of s from j to i yields the numerator,
and summing over all markets j gives the denominator. Using the conditions (7), (8), (12), and
(13) we can obtain the following expression for the expenditure share on domestic inputs
                                                                                 1−σs               1−ωs
                                                              σs       xi,s                   Pii,s
                       λii,s =      φ∗ii,s −θs   Ni,s                                                          ,                        (14)
                                                            σs − 1 φ̃ii,s Pii,s               Pi,s

and on imported inputs
                                                                                       !1−σs                  !1−ωs
                                                                                                         F
                                                                                                       Pi,s
                                                     σs τji,s xj,s (1 + tji,s )
                 λji,s = φ∗ji,s −θs Nj,s                                                                               .                (15)
                                                   σs − 1              F
                                                              φ̃ji,s Pi,s                              Pi,s


                                                                    10
Sectoral trade flows We now solve for sectoral exports and imports and impose balanced trade.
    Consider sector s imports first. The total expenditure by country j on country i intermediate
goods is given by λij,s Yj,s . Due to the presence of tariffs not all of this expenditure reaches producers
in country j. The tariff-adjusted expenditure in country j on goods produced in country i, or
                                       λij,s
exports from i to j, is Eij,s ≡       1+tij,s Yj,s .
    Of course, that term is identical to imports arriving in j from i. Therefore, total exports from
country i, not including goods that are sold domestically, are given by
                                                X                      X             λij,s
                                     Ei,s ≡                Eij,s =                           Yj,s ,                    (16)
                                                    j̸=i                    j̸=i   1 + tij,s
                                       P                   P      λji,s
and total imports are given by                Eji,s =            1+tji,s Yi,s .
                                       j̸=i             j̸=i
    Now that we have derived the sectoral trade flows, we define the trade balance condition,
                           XS        X            λji,s          XS X        λij,s
                                                          Yi,s =                     Yj,s .                            (17)
                               s=1       j̸=i   1 + tji,s         s=1 j̸=i 1 + tij,s


Goods Market Equilibrium We can also define sectoral, Ti,s , and total, Ti , tariff revenue as
    P          P    P
Ti = Ss=1 Tis = Ss=1 j̸=i tji,s Eji,s . With that, the expenditure on finished goods from sector
s by households in country i is given by αi,s Ri , where Ri is total expenditure consisting of labor
income plus this redistributed tariff revenue, Ri = wi Li + Ti .
    The total value of production of all intermediate goods in sector s in country i is given by
σs −1PM λij,s
 σs    j=1 1+tij,s Yj,s ; namely, the net-of-tariff value of sector s goods that are sold locally and
abroad adjusted by markups. Given the input-output coefficients, a share γi,s′ s of this gross produc-
tion is then spent on intermediate inputs from sector s′ . Therefore, the materials from sector s′ de-
                                                                                           PM λij,s
manded in sector s for the production of intermediate goods is then given by γi,s′ s σsσ−1
                                                                                        s   j=1 1+tij,s Yj,s .
    We can then obtain the total demand for the output of sector s of country i, which goes to
both consumers as finished goods and to firms for intermediate use (the term here in braces), and
which must equal total supply of that output:
                                                               XS                    XM         λij,s′
                        Yi,s = αi,s (wi Li + Ti ) +                         ei,ss′
                                                                            γ                            Yj,s′ .       (18)
                                                                    s′ =1               j=1   1 + tij,s′

    To explain this specification, recall that
                                            fixed   costs are paid in units of labor. Then the value
                                             σs′ −1
of output net of markups in each sector,      σ ′    Yj,s′ , equals the value of intermediate inputs used
                                                             s
in their production, and these generate demand for the output Yi,s used as materials
                                                                                     to produce
                                                                             σs′ −1
                                                             ei,ss′ ≡ γi,ss′ σ ′
those intermediate inputs. We define the combined parameters γ                       to reflect the
                                                                                                                   s
demand generated in sector s′ for the output in sector s.14
  14
     If fixed costs are instead paid with the input bundle that costs xi,s′ , the same bundle used in variable costs, then
the value of those fixed costs are measured by the markups earned in sector s′ . So rather than deducting the markup
from the value of final goods, we use the full value Yj,s′ in sector s′ to generate demand for the final goods in sector
s, according to the input-output coefficient γ ei,ss′ ≡ γi,ss′ .


                                                                    11
2.6   Firm Entry and Product Variety
To close the model we need to tackle selection and entry, solving for the mass of firms Ni,s entering
in country i and sector s, and the productivity cutoffs φ∗ij,s for the varieties produced for market j.
   To solve for product variety, use (10) for i ̸= j and the average value φ̃ij,s , substituting into
(15) we obtain an equation governing the cutoffs φ∗ij,s ,
                                                                                                      
                                                       σs wi fij,s (1 + tij,s )               θs
                     λij,s =   φ∗ij,s −θs   Ni,s                                                             .                (19)
                                                                Yj,s                      θs + 1 − σ s

   Next, multiplying this equation by Yj,s / (1 + tij,s ), summing over j and making use of (16) and
(11), we obtain an expression for total domestic plus international sales of intermediate inputs in
sector s by country i,

                               XM                                                                                  
                                                                   σs wi fij,s                               θs σ s
             Eii,s + Ei,s =           φ∗ −θs           Ni,s                          =            E
                                                                                         Ni,s wi fi,s                     ,   (20)
                                   j=1 ij,s                       θs + 1 − σ s                              σs − 1

from which we can obtain an equation governing the mass of entrants Ni,s , namely
                                                                          
                                                               E      θs σ s
                                Ni,s   = (Eii,s + Ei,s )   wi fi,s              .                                             (21)
                                                                     σs − 1

It may appear surprising that the total domestic plus international sales of intermediate inputs
(Eii,s + Ei,s ) is so tightly linked to the mass of entrants Ni,s . But recall from the introduction that
the condition from ACR that aggregate profits in an economy, which equal entry times the fixed
costs of entry, are proportional to the labor force: therefore, entry is fully determined by the labor
force in each country. Equation (20) is the analogous result here: entry times fixed costs of entry
is proportional to domestic sales plus exports in each sector. But here, exports will depend on ad
valorem tariffs, as is clear from (16) and the share equations in (15).

2.7   Changes in the Price Index
Our final step is to solve for changes in the price index of country i due to any changes in ad valorem
tariffs or trade costs. For convenience when comparing to the existing literature, let us focus on
the case where ωs = σs , so that the domestic and foreign varieties all substitute with the elasticity
σs . In addition, let us choose the wage of country i as the numeraire, wi ≡ 1.
   Substituting (10) into (19) and differentiating, we readily obtain
                                                                                                         
              dλii,s   dNi,s                dPi,s XS            dPi,s′                          θs               dYi,s
                     =       + θs                −       γi,ss′                       +              −1                .
              λii,s    Ni,s                 Pi,s   s′ =1        Pi,s′                         σs − 1              Yi,s

We can invert this equation to solve for price index changes d ln Pi,s in all sectors s, but it requires
matrix notation to deal with the input-output coefficients γi,ss′ . Once again, for convenience in



                                                                  12
comparing to existing literature, let us simplify and suppose that γi,ss′ = 0 for s ̸= s′ , so the
input-output matrix is diagonal. Then we can readily solve for the price index changes, with
                                                                                   
                                         dλ                            
                dPi,s         1             ii,s   dNi,s        θs        dYi,s 
                      =                          −        −          −1          .               (22)
                Pi,s    θs (1 − γi,ss )  λii,s      Ni,s      σs − 1       Yi,s 
                                          | {z }    | {z }   |        {z        }
                                          trade volume        entry   selection


The first term on the right of this equation is precisely the rise in prices, and hence loss in welfare,
due to the change in trade volume, which here, is in the form of the change in home share, d ln λii,s ,
just as in ACR. What is new are the next two terms on the right. The second term is due to
the entry of firms into sector s in country i, which ceteris paribus serves to lower the price index
and raise welfare. This term does not appear in a one-sector version of the Melitz-Chaney model,
because entry is fixed in that case. The third term on the right reflects the change in output of
the finished good in sector i, d ln Yi,s . From our prior discussion, just after equation (10), we can
regard this term as capturing the selection of firms into this sector. Thus, in general, we see that
both entry and selection are needed, in addition to the change in the home share, to obtain the
true change in the price index, and in welfare. These additional terms could also arise in principle
in multi-sector versions of ACR and CR, though they are not stressed by those authors. To make
further progress on determining the overall change in welfare, we must solve for all these endogenous
changes. This is what we do next on our two-country, two-sector version of the model.


3    Illustrative Two-Country, Two-Sector Model
To illustrate some key insights from our model, we now consider the case where there are two
initially identical countries and two sectors, with only the home country i = H then applying a
tariff tH ≡ t on intermediate inputs imported from the foreign country, j = F . As we shall see, this
case allows us to obtain a closed-form solution for the comparative statics with respect to small
changes in the home tariff dt.
    Having just two sectors allows us to be more specific about the input-output structure. The
first sector (“manufactures”) will be as we have assumed above, with traded intermediate inputs
and a nontraded output good that is consumed and is also used as a material in the production
of intermediate inputs domestically. So this sector has both backward and forward linkages. For
convenience we ignore the nested CES structure and treat the upper- and lower-level elasticities as
both equal to ωs = σs = σ, while the Pareto parameter is denoted by θs = θ.
    The second sector is much simpler and will consist of purely nontraded consumer services
(“haircuts”) which are produced with labor and which neither use nor are used as intermediate
inputs. In other words, this residual sector has no backward or forward linkages. This second
sector plays a role mainly on the demand side where it has a consumption expenditure share of


                                                         13
1 − α, while the first sector has an expenditure share of α. For convenience, we assume that this
second service sector is perfectly competitive and that, without loss of generality, its productivity
level is unity so that the price of a unit of the service equals the wage wi .
    The condition (18) applies to the first sector only, and for clarity we drop the summation over
                                                                                                    
sectors s in (18); in fact, we can drop the sector subscript altogether. We let γe≡γ  ei,11 = γ σ−1
                                                                                                 σ
denote the single nonzero term in the input-output matrix for the first sector in both countries,
with 0 < γ < 1. Finally, we normalize the wage in the home country H as unity, wH ≡ 1. The
labor force in both countries is of the same size L, and the foreign wage wF will be determined
endogenously. We assume that there are iceberg costs τ > 1.
   For simplicity, we start with a zero tariff on the traded intermediate imports in both countries,
t = 0, which we refer to the symmetric free trade equilibrium (SFTE). In this situation, the iceberg
costs τ > 1 ensure that λHH = λF F > 0.5. We then allow that the home country applies a small
change of tariff dt. In this setting, the change in home welfare is,

                                     dUH      dPH    dTH
                                         = −α     +        ,                                    (23)
                                     UH       PH    L + TH

where PH is the price index for the differentiated good that uses the traded inputs. The change in
this price index can be rewritten using (22) as
                                                       
              dPH       1      dλHH   dNH           dYH               θ
                  =                 −     − (κ − 1)       , with κ ≡     > 1.                   (24)
              PH    (1 − γ) θ λHH     NH             YH              σ−1

Here we see that any reduction in entry or in the output of the differentiated sector raises its
price index, and therefore lowers welfare in (23) unless there is some offsetting change in tariff
revenue. To explain this result, recall that the equilibrium of a one-sector Melitz-Chaney model
is socially optimal (Dhingra and Morrow 2019). In a two sector model, by contrast, we expect
that the competitive service sector means that too few resources are devoted to the differentiated
sector and that entry there is sub-optimal. This creates a domestic distortion that is exacerbated
by any reduction in entry or output of the differentiated sector. The question we need to address is
whether protecting the sector with an import tariff will lead to such a reduction in entry or output.
While that outcome may sound counter-intuitive, recall that by Lerner symmetry, an import tariff
will be equivalent to an export tax. We would not be so surprised if an export tax reduces entry
and/or output in the differentiated sector, and that is what we explore next.

Output and Entry Consider next the goods market clearing conditions from (18). With both
countries having the same labor force of size L, and the home country H imposing an ad valorem
tariff of t on its imports of the differentiated intermediate inputs, we obtain

                             YH = γ̃ (λHH YH + λHF YF ) + α (L + TH )                           (25)



                                                  14
and                                                   
                                                λF H
                              YF = γ̃ λF F YF +      YH + α w F L ,                           (26)
                                                1+t
with home tariff revenue
                                                 t
                                         TH =       λF H YH .                                 (27)
                                                1+t
The trade balance condition from (17) becomes

                                         λF H
                                              YH = λHF YF .                                   (28)
                                         1+t
                                                                 λij,s
Finally, the free entry conditions are from (21) with Eij,s ≡   1+tij,s Yj,s ,   leading to

                                              λHH YH + λHF YF
                                   NH    =                     ,                              (29)
                                               f E θ σ/(σ − 1)
                                              λF F YF + λ1+t
                                                          FH
                                                             YH
                                   NF    =                      ,                             (30)
                                              wF f θ σ/(σ − 1)
                                                   E


where recall that we have normalized the home wage at unity, wH ≡ 1, and the tariff only applies
to the home country imports of foreign intermediate inputs.
   We now differentiate these conditions and evaluate them at the initial SFTE. In the symmetric
equilibrium we have that λHH = λF F ≡ λ, and that λHF = λF H ≡ 1 − λ. While the shares
are changing with the tariff in the above equations, when evaluated at t = 0 these changes all
conveniently cancel out, because λii + λji = 1 ⇔ dλii + dλji = 0, for j ̸= i. Then, for a small
change in the home tariff dt, from (25) using (27) and (28), we obtain, with t = 0 in the SFTE,

                           dYH                                     α − γ̃
                               = ∆ (1 − λ) dt ,         with ∆ ≡          ≤ 1.                (31)
                            YH                                     1 − γ̃

Similarly, using (26) and (28), we obtain

                                             dYF   dwF
                                                 =     .                                      (32)
                                              YF   wF

Changes in entry are obtained in much the same way. From (29) and (30), using (28), we have

                                   dNH
                                            = (∆ − 1) (1 − λ) dt ,                            (33)
                                   NH
                                   dNF
                                            = 0.                                              (34)
                                    NF

   From expression (31), we see that the value of output in the differentiated sector falls if and
                                e. We see from (33) that entry falls due to a rise in the tariff
only if ∆ < 0, meaning that α < γ
if and only if α < 1 so that ∆ < 1, meaning that the second sector exists to absorb some of the
redistributed tariff revenue. Without the second sector, however, the tariff applied to the revenue

                                                   15
                     Figure 1: Entry effects of tariff changes in the two-sector model




Note: This figure shows how the level of firm entry NH and the domestic share λ = λHH vary as the tariff t changes,
for different values of the traded sector share α ∈ {1, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25}. For each of these four cases, tariffs vary in the
range t ∈ (0, ∞), i.e., from the symmetric free trade equilibrium (SFTE) to autarky (AUT). Iceberg costs are set at
τ = 1.1, which creates a small home bias even under free trade, with λ ≈ 0.66. The other model parameters are
γ = 0, σ = 2, θ = 4, fD = fii = 1, fX = fij = 1.1, and fiE = 1. See text.


cost of imports does not affect entry (though it still affects sectoral output).
    We have shown that entry falls for a slight increase in the tariff from the SFTE. What about
for a large increase in the tariff? As t → ∞, then trade is eliminated and we are in the autarky
equilibrium for both countries, which is again symmetric, so that we can treat wF = wH as unity.
The conditions (29) or (30) will give the same level of entry as in the SFTE, because output in the
differentiated sector becomes once again YH = YF = αL/(1 − γ
                                                           e), from (18). So entry is back at
the same level as in the SFTE. We can summarize these results with the following theorem (where
part (c) is proved in Appendix C):

Theorem 1 The mass of entering firms Ni is the same under free trade and prohibitive tariffs.
If and only if α < 1, then: (a) near the free trade equilibrium reducing the tariff will increase
entry; (b) near the prohibitive tariff, reducing the tariff will decrease entry; (c) entry is lower at all
intermediate tariff levels than under free trade or prohibitive tariffs.

    To go a little further, we can turn to numerical simulations of the model to see more clearly how
entry is affected by tariffs in different configurations of the model. Figure 1 shows how the level of
firm entry NH and the domestic share λHH varies as the tariff level t changes over the range from
free trade to autarky, for different values of the traded sector share α.

                                                            16
   Entry is the same under free trade and autarky. Entry is also constant when the nontraded
sector is absent and α = 1. Otherwise, starting from free trade, entry falls as tariffs increase, before
then rising again in a ∪-shape after some point as tariffs approach infinity. The ∪-shape is more
pronounced as the nontraded sector grows in size (i.e., as α falls further below 1). Theorem 1 shows
that this ∪-shape holds in general for changes in the home tariff, i.e., that the graph of entry has
a single local minimum.

Home Welfare       The reduction in entry that we have found for a small increase in tariffs, assuming
that α < 1, necessarily reduces welfare in (23), but this effect is potentially offset by any increase
in output YH and also by any increase in tariff revenue rebated. Evaluated at the SFTE, the
increase in tariff revenue can be calculated from (27) as dTH = dt (1 − λ) YH = dt (1 − λ) α L (1 − γ
                                                                                                    e).
Substituting this expression along with (31) and (33) into (24) and (23), we obtain,

             dUH                   α     dλHH    α (1 − λ)               α (1 − λ)
                         = −                   +           (κ∆ − 1) dt +           dt .            (35)
             UH                (1 − γ) θ λHH     (1 − γ) θ                 (1 − γ
                                                                                e)
                   t=0         |      {z     }   |         {z        }   |     {z   }
                                 trade volume          entry+selection        tariff rebate


The first term on the right of (35) is the effect of changes in trade volume (which is a sufficient
statistic for welfare in ACR only for the case of changes in iceberg trade costs and a single sector).
Beyond this, the second and third terms reflect changes in the entry and selection margins of the
differentiated sector and in the tariff revenue rebate, respectively.
   Looking at (35), if we are in the case where d ln UH > − (1−γ)
                                                               α
                                                                  θ d ln λHH , so that the positive
impact of the tariff rebate term overwhelms any negative impact of reduced entry, then we get the
seemingly normal result that welfare with tariffs exceeds that with iceberg transport costs, for a
given change in trade volume (i.e., the first term in (35)). But this isn’t guaranteed: if, on the other
hand, we are in the case where d ln UH < − (1−γ)
                                              α
                                                 θ d ln λHH , then we get a seemingly paradoxical
outcome that, for a given change of trade volume, the welfare effect of a tariff—with rebate—ends
up being worse than iceberg costs.
   To see whether these different cases can arise, recall that ∆ < 1 and that κ ≡ θ/(σ − 1) > 1. It
follows that the coefficient (κ∆ − 1) on the entry+selection term in (35) can take on either a positive
or negative sign. If the term is negative, then any increase in entry+selection that accompanies
a tariff reduction will further reduce the price index in (24) and will further increase the resulting
welfare gains. The magnitude of this welfare gain is sensitive to the value of γ, which indicates
the extent to which the differentiated products are used as intermediate inputs: as γ is larger,
                                          α
just as the gains via trade volumes (− (1−γ) θ d ln λHH ) get larger, so too do the gains from entry
correspondingly increase.
   The welfare impact of a change in the tariff also depends on the change in tariff revenue, the
final term on the right of (35). Notice that a reduction in the tariff directly lowers tariff revenue in
                                                         
                                               e ≡ γ σ−1
the final term, and this effect is stronger as γ      σ    is larger. In other words, just as increased


                                                  17
linkages magnify the the welfare gain from increased trade volume and entry in (35), so too the
increased linkages would lead to an offsetting fall in tariff revenue.
   If the magnitude of the second term in (35) is large enough so that it overwhelms the third term
(so the two combined terms change sign) then we will obtain the aforementioned odd outcome where
d ln UH < − (1−γ)
               α
                  θ d ln λHH , so that an increase in the tariff is worse than an increase in iceberg
costs. This condition holds if and only if [(κ∆ − 1) /(1 − γ) θ] + 1/(1 − γ
                                                                          e) < 0. Simplifying this
condition, we obtain the following result that holds in a neighborhood of the SFTE.

Theorem 2 (a) Starting from free trade, a small increase in the tariff dt in country H is worse
than a small increase in iceberg transport costs, where both lead to the same change in λHH , if
d ln UH < − (1−γ)
               α
                  θ d ln λHH . (b) A necessary and sufficient condition for this result to occur is that
[(κ∆ − 1) /(1 − γ) θ] + 1/(1 − γ
                               e) < 0, or equivalently:
                                                              
                                          σ(1 − α) + κ−1 − 1
                                   γ >1−                         .                                    (36)
                                         (σ − 1)(σ + 1 − κ−1 )

(c) Condition (36) can hold only if γ > 0 (production linkages are present) or α < 1 (the service
sector is present).

   Part (a) is obtained because even in the two-sector model that we are considering, with the
service sector nontraded, a change in iceberg trade costs has no effect on entry and the change
in welfare is d ln UH < − (1−γ)
                             α
                                θ d ln λHH , just like the one-sector finding in ACR. That result is
shown in Appendix A. Part (b) then follows immediately from the decomposition of welfare in (35),
with condition (36) obtained from simple algebra as shown in Appendix C, where part (c) is also
established. Condition (36) gives us the necessary and sufficient condition for a small increase in
the tariff to be worse than an increase in iceberg transport costs. For example, with α = 0.5 and
θ = σ = 3, then (36) becomes γ > 0.825. Experimenting with other parameter values, we get a
very clear sense that the role of intermediate inputs must be substantial in order for the increased
entry due to a tariff cut to result in welfare gains larger than − (1−γ)θ
                                                                     α
                                                                          d ln λHH , so the tariff increase
is worse than iceberg costs.
   Theorem 2 is surprising because it shows that literally throwing the iceberg trade costs into the
ocean can be preferable (for the same change in λHH ) to redistributing these resources to consumers.
Why is this counterintuitive result obtained? A clue is provided by the finding that entry into the
differentiated sector remains fixed even when iceberg transport costs are changed, as shown in
the one-sector model in ACR, and also true in the two-sector model considered here (because the
service sector is nontraded). The iceberg trade costs reduce demand for the differentiated good by
increasing its export price, but increase demand because that good is itself used as the shipping
service (i.e. when the good melts in transit). These effects just cancel in their impact on entry, so
that entry into the differentiated sector remains unchanged.
   But with tariffs applied instead to the differentiated sector, the result is different. The tariff


                                                    18
revenues are redistributed to consumers, who then increase their demand for both the differentiated
sector and the nontraded service sector. That increase in demand for the nontraded good is pulling
demand away from the differentiated sector (as compared to the case of iceberg trade costs), and
as a result, entry into that sector falls as shown in Figure 1. As we have already noted, in the
presence of a competitive, nontraded sector we expect that entry into the differentiated sector is
below the optimal level, so a further reduction due to the tariff increase lowers welfare as compared
to the case of iceberg trade costs.
   When an increase in the tariff is worse than an increase in trade costs, then it appears that
the tariff could lower welfare, meaning that the optimal tariff is actually negative. Since d ln UH <
− (1−γ)
     α
        θ d ln λHH when (36) holds, home utility falls due to a tariff dt > 0 if the home shares
rises, d ln λHH > 0. Condition (36) is neither necessary nor sufficient to reverse the conventional
(positive) optimal-tariff argument, however. Even when it does not hold, so that the second and
third terms on the right of (35) are positive for an increase in the tariff, welfare can still fall if
they are overwhelmed by the first term, that is, if the home share indeed rises enough with the
tariff. Conversely, when (36) holds then we still need an extra condition to ensure that the entire
expression (35) is negative.
   To evaluate whether the optimal tariff is negative, we now need to solve for the change in home
welfare while incorporating the change the home share d ln λHH , as we do in Appendix D. The
change in the home share will depend on many factors, one of which is the terms-of-trade gain
for the home country based on the fall in foreign wages wF . Because the resulting expressions are
complex, we focus here on a condition additional to that in Theorem 2 that will ensure a negative
optimal tariff.

Theorem 3 A small increase in the tariff dt in country H starting from free trade will reduce
welfare if (36) holds and also a polynomial denoted by f (γ) is non-negative. Provided that 0.5 ≤
λ < 1 and θ ≥ (1 − α), then f (γ) ≥ 0 for sufficiently high and sufficiently low values of γ ∈ [0, 1].
But f (γ) < 0 for some intermediate values 0 < γ ∗ < 1 when λ is close to unity.

   In Figure 2, we plot f (γ) for three cases: λ = 1, λ = 0.8, and λ = 0.5, given the parameter
values θ = 3, σ = 2.5, and α = 0.5. When λ = 1 so that the countries are in autarky, then the
polynomial f (γ) is a cubic, and it has the shape displayed in Figure 2: f (1) = 0, then f (γ) falls
below 0 for slightly lower values of γ, but become positive for very low values of γ because we know
that f (0) > 0. Now lowering λ below unity so that the countries are engaged in trade, then f (1) > 0
as illustrated for the curves for λ = 0.8 and λ = 0.5, while f (0) also remains positive but it is lower
than for λ = 1. In other words, the curve rotates in a counter-clockwise direction as illustrated in
Figure 2. For λ < 1 the curve f (γ) is no longer a cubic but becomes a higher-order polynomial;
nevertheless, it retains the basic shape of a cubic as shown in Figure 2, with the properties as
summarized in Theorem 3.
   Theorem 3 suggests that a negative optimal tariff can occur for both high and low values of γ.

                                                  19
                                   Figure 2: Condition for negative optimal tariff


                        4
                                                                                           =1
                                                                                           =0.8
                        3                                                                  = 0.5


                        2


                        1
                 f( )




                        0


                        -1


                        -2


                        -3
                             0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4    0.5   0.6     0.7    0.8     0.9       1




Note: This figure plots polynomial f (γ) for three values of λ: 1, 0.8, and 0.6. For each of these three values of λ, the
following values of model parameters were used: σ = 2.5, θ = 3, κ = 2, and α = 0.5.


But we have not yet established that outcome for low values of γ, because in that case, condition
(36) might fail to hold. To explore this case more carefully, we consider the case where input-output
linkages are absent so that γ = 0. To find whether the optimal tariff can still be negative, we focus
on high trade costs τ so that both countries are nearly in autarky, with λ close to unity. It turns
out that all the terms in (35) are proportional to (1 − λ) so they are close to zero in that case. To
determine the sign of (35) near to autarky, we divide it by (1 − λ) and take the limit as λ → 1,
obtaining the result in part (a) of the next Theorem.

Theorem 4 Consider an economy near an SFTE with zero tariffs initially, but with τ > 1. Then
for small increases in the home tariff dt > 0, the welfare change is:
    (a) For γ = 0 (no linkages):
                                                                                 
                                   1    d ln UH             α          (κ + θ)2
                            lim                           =     ακ −                + |{z}
                                                                                        α ,                        (37)
                            λ→1 (1 − λ)    dt     γ=t=0     θ        2(κ + θ) − 1    revenue
                                                                                           effect

                                       κ−(θ−1)(σ−1)
which is negative for 0 < α <            2(κ+θ)−1     < 0.5. It follows that the optimal home tariff is negative.

                                                            20
       (b) For γ → 1 (strong linkages):

                                  d ln UH              α(1 − λ)
                    lim (1 − γ)                   =−            [κσ(1 − α) + θ] +            0
                                                                                            |{z}         ,           (38)
                    γ→1              dt     t=0           2θ
                                                                                          vanishing
                                                                                        revenue effect

which is negative for all 0.5 < λ < 1 and 0 < α ≤ 1. It follows again that the optimal home tariff
is negative.

       To interpret part (a), the first terms appearing on the right of (37), before the revenue effect,
equal the sum of the first two terms on the right of (36) after dividing (1 − λ). If these first terms
on the right are negative and greater in absolute value than the revenue effect, then the optimal
tariff is negative. The condition to ensure this is stated in part (a), and because κ ≡ θ/(σ − 1) > 1,
that condition can be satisfied only for low enough values of σ.15 In that case, welfare declines with
a slight increase in the tariff, and hence the optimal tariff is negative.
       In part (b) we consider the alternative case of very strong production linkages, so that γ → 1. In
that case the model is not well-behaved, with the price elasticity d ln PH /dt approaching infinity.16
To obtain a bounded expression for welfare we consider the limit of (1 − γ) d ln UH /dt. The first
terms appearing on the right of (38) again equal the sum of the first two terms on the right of (36).
It turns out that the revenue effect in (36) is bounded as γ → 1, so when multiplying by (1 − γ) that
term become vanishingly small. It follows that in this case we obtain a welfare loss due to a small
tariff, so once again, the optimal tariff is negative.
       It is especially surprising that we obtain a welfare decline when γ → 1 and α = 1 in part
(b), since in that case the tariff has no impact on entry. To explain this result, the tariff still
creates a distortion if d ln λHH /dt > 0, so that the first term in (35) is negative for dt > 0. The
coefficient α/θ(1 − γ) on that trade volume term approaches infinity as γ → 1, but the coefficient
α (1 − λ)/(1 − γ
               e) on the tariff rebate term remains bounded since γ
                                                                  e = γ(σ − 1)/σ < 1, which explain
the negative optimal tariff.      17   We can check the sign of d ln λHH /dt with the following result.


  15
      In order for a nonempty range of α to satisfy the condition in part (a) just below (37), we must have that
κ − (θ − 1)(σ − 1) > 0. Using θ > σ − 1, this condition can satisfied only if σ < 2.62.
   16
      Melitz and Redding (2014) likewise find that the gains from trade approach infinity as the production linkages
become very strong.
   17
      These findings are not just a peculiarity of having the fixed costs in our model paid in labor, however. We have
found that similar results continue to hold even in other specifications for the fixed costs, with a negative optimal
tariff for high values of γ. We have assumed that fixed costs are paid entirely in terms of labor and do not use any
materials, which indirectly use imported inputs. In the alternative case where the fixed costs are paid in terms of the
same input bundle as variable costs, then the coefficient γ  e in the goods equilibrium condition would instead be γ, as
discussed in footnote 12. In that case, the coefficient on the tariff revenue term in (35) would be α(1 − λ)/(1 − γ),
which approaches infinity as γ → 1. With this alternative specification of fixed costs, however, we find that the
efficiency loss of the tariff is also higher, because the tariff has a direct impact on raising fixed costs and reducing
entry. It turns out that the efficiency cost of the tariff approach infinity as γ → θ/(θ + κ) < 1, in which case the tariff
revenue gain is still bounded. So once again, under this alternative specification, we find that the efficiency cost of
the tariff dominates its revenue gain when production linkages become strong enough.


                                                            21
Corollary 5 The change in the home share as the tariff increases from SFTE is:
   (a) For γ = 0 (no linkages):

                                               1    d ln λHH
                                      lim                    > 0.                                  (39)
                                      λ→1   (1 − λ)     dt

   (b) For γ → 1 (strong linkages): If ∆ ≥ 0 then,

                                                  d ln λHH
                                            lim            > 0.                                    (40)
                                            γ→1       dt


When there are no linkages in part (a), the home share always increases due to the tariff. When the
sectoral linkages are strong in part (b), then the home share also increases provided that ∆ ≥ 0. In
that case, the value of output of the differentiated sector YH (weakly) rises due to the home tariff
in (31), so it takes the rise in the home share d ln λHH /dt > 0 to create the fall in utility in (35),
resulting in the negative optimal tariff.
   Our new results deviate from conventional views. The findings are significant in that, when
welfare falls for small tariffs, then both countries can be expected to gain from a reduction in tariffs
in either country. In this setting, trade agreements are not necessary for mutual gains. To explain
this result, recall that from Lerner symmetry, the import tariff in each country is acting like an
export tax which can be expected to inhibit entry. To offset this distortion, either country would
prefer to reduce tariffs and encourage entry into the differentiated sector. The gain for the country
reducing its tariff is indicated by the sufficient conditions given in Theorem 3, and the gain for
the other country follows because it will experience a rise in its relative wage. In this scenario,
the mutual gains from tariff reductions are quite different from what is predicted by competitive
models, or even monopolistically competitive models in the absence of production linkages.
   Are these new results empirically relevant? To find out, we evaluate whether these results will
hold in a more realistic setting than our two-country, two-sector model, using our multi-country,
multi-sector quantitative model. There are several important differences between the quantitative
model and our simple illustrative model in this section. Most important, in the quantitative model
we do not treat the services sector as having no production linkages with the rest of the economy, or
as being perfectly competitive: those assumptions were made here just for convenience. Rather, we
will allow the services sector to be composed of heterogeneous firms operating under monopolistic
competition, as explained before—which, all else equal, by placing a domestic distortion in the
nontraded sector as well as in the traded sector, might be expected to bias against a finding of
negative optimal tariffs.




                                                     22
4         Data Description
In order to quantify the effects of actual, and counterfactual, tariff changes we need detailed infor-
mation on tariffs, as well as on production and trade flows for a large set of countries. Moreover,
we are interested in understanding how both high- and low-income countries have been impacted
by changes in trade policy, and this can only be done if the data have good coverage of both sets
of countries. We start this section by first describing the sources and the way we obtain tariff data,
and we then on move to explain the sources for production and trade flow data.

4.1        New Tariff Data
We build a new comprehensive, disaggregated, annual tariff dataset from the early 1980s onwards.
We obtain tariff schedules from five primary sources: (1) raw tariff schedules from the TRAINS
and IDB databases accessed via the World Bank’s WITS website as far back as 1988 for some
countries; (2) manually collected tariff schedules published by the International Customs Tariffs
Bureau (BITD), some dating back as far as the 1950s;18 (3) U.S. tariff schedules from the U.S.
International Trade Commission from 1989 onwards (Feenstra, Romalis, and Schott 2002); (4)
U.S. tariff schedules derived from detailed U.S. tariff revenue and trade data from 1974 to 1988
maintained by the Center for International Data at UC Davis; and (5) the texts of preferential trade
agreements primarily sourced from the WTO’s website, the World Bank’s Global Preferential Trade
Agreements Database, or the Tuck Center for International Business Trade Agreements Database.
         For the U.S., specific tariffs have been converted into ad valorem tariffs by dividing by the
average unit value of matching imported products. Due to the difficulties of extracting specific tariff
information for other countries and matching it to appropriate unit values, only the ad valorem
component of their tariffs are used. The vast majority of tariffs are ad valorem. Switzerland is a
key exception here, with tariffs being specific. For Swiss tariffs we use the ad valorem equivalent
tariff calculations from the TRAINS database accessed on the World Bank’s WITS website for
1990, 1993 and each year from 1995. We aggregate MFN and each non-MFN tariff program to the
4-digit SITC Revision 2 level by taking the simple average of tariff lines within each SITC code.19
         One problem is that tariff schedules are often not available in each year, especially for smaller
countries. Updated schedules are more likely to be available after significant tariff changes. Rather
than replacing “missing” MFN tariffs by linearly interpolating observations, missing observations
are set equal to the nearest preceding observation. If there is no preceding observation, missing
MFN tariffs are set equal to the nearest observation. Missing non-MFN tariff data (other than
punitive tariffs applied in a handful of bilateral relationships) are more difficult to construct for
two reasons: (i) they are often not published in a given tariff schedule; and (ii) preferential trade
agreements have often been phased in. To address this we researched the text of over 100 regional
    18
   Most tariff schedules can be fairly readily matched to the SITC classification.
    19
   Multiple preferential tariffs may be applicable for trade in a particular product between two countries. Since the
most favorable one may change over time, we keep track of each potentially applicable tariff program.


                                                         23
trade agreements and Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) programs to ascertain the start
date of each agreement or program and how the typical tariff preference was phased in. To simplify
our construction of missing preferential tariffs we express observed preferential tariffs as a fraction
of the applicable MFN tariff. We fill in missing values of this fraction based on information on
how the tariff preferences were phased in. Preferential tariffs are then constructed as the product
of this fraction and the MFN tariff. We keep the most favorable potentially applicable preferential
tariff. Punitive non-MFN tariff levels tend not to change over time (though the countries they
apply to do change). We replace missing observations in the same way we replace missing MFN
tariff observations.
       An overview of our new tariff data is shown in Figures 3 to 7. The data show, with country
coverage and disaggregated detail of a kind not seen before, the remarkable impacts of the Uruguay
Round on the levels and dispersion of tariffs around the world from the 1980s to the 2010s.
       To start, Figure 3 plots the average (mean) ad valorem tariff rates, both MFN and Preferential,
across all countries and all goods at the SITC 4-digit goods level, in each year from 1984 to 2011,
for the full sample, the Advanced economies, and the Emerging and Developing economies. At
the start of the period shown, in the 1980s, the typical sample size for the calculations of these
statistics is about 1 million distinct tariff lines. By the late 2000s, at the end of the period shown,
the sample size in a given year is well over 2 million distinct tariff lines. It is clear that both types
of tariffs fell over the period, by about 9 percentage points, with essentially all of the reductions
concentrated after 1990.20
       Given the similar trends, we focus henceforth on MFN tariffs in this section. Figure 4 plots
the median MFN ad valorem tariff rate across all goods at the SITC 4-digit level, in each year,
for the full sample, the Advanced economies and the Emerging and Developing economies. It also
plots a fan showing seven percentiles from 5th, 10th, 25th, …up to the 95th in each year to give
an idea of the dispersion of tariff rates. The median is shown by the solid red line. This figure
shows very clearly that the Uruguay Round was followed by a dramatic reduction in both the levels
and dispersion of tariff rates, with these trends being particularly concentrated in the subsample
of Emerging and Developing economies. In part this reflects the fact that these countries started
with higher levels and dispersion to begin with, and so had more scope for these kinds of policy
adjustments. In contrast, the Advanced countries had made much greater progress in this direction
during earlier GATT rounds going back to the 1940s.
       Figure 5 uses histograms and kernel density plots to show the distributions of ad valorem tariff
rates across countries and goods, for two snapshot years that we will use for our policy experi-
ments: a pre-Uruguay 1990 sample year and a post-Uruguay 2010 sample year. The histograms
  20
    Readers may wonder why the number of tariff line observations grows in the tariff database, since the number
of product categories is fixed and the number of countries only grows slightly. The key reason is that we are
only summarizing tariff observations where there is a matching trade observation, and the number of country-pair
observations with positive trade grows substantially. Because we are ignoring zero-trade observations that might have
high tariffs, this approach may lead us to understate the decline in MFN tariffs.



                                                         24
                                             Figure 3: Average MFN and Preferential ad valorem tariff rates

                               20       15
                  Ad valorem tariff (%)
                           10  5
                               0




                                              1985             1990              1995               2000                 2005            2010

                                                               MFN tariffs, mean                           Preferential tariffs, mean


               Note: Averages are taken over all 4-digit SITC level good, all countries, by year 1984–2011.




                                                 Figure 4: Distributions of MFN ad valorem tariff rates

                        All countries                                                 Advanced                                  Emerging/Developing
   80




                                                                   80




                                                                                                                    80
   60




                                                                   60




                                                                                                                    60
   40




                                                                   40




                                                                                                                    40
   20




                                                                   20




                                                                                                                    20
   0




                                                                   0




                                                                                                                    0




        1985   1990            1995           2000   2005   2010        1985   1990   1995   2000   2005     2010        1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010



Note: 4-digit SITC level data, 3 samples, by year 1984–2011 (percentiles 5/10/25/50/75/90/95). Median is red line.



                                                                                       25
Figure 5: Distributions of MFN ad valorem tariff (4-digit SITC, all countries, 1990 and 2010)

                                                    1990                                                                    2010
                                       Median:    75th:         90th:                                    Median: 75th:    90th:
                   .3




                                                                                            .3
                                       10.00      20.00         31.00                                     5.00 11.33      20.00
                   .25




                                                                                            .25
                   .2




                                                                                            .2
                   .15




                                                                                            .15
                   .1




                                                                                            .1
                   .05




                                                                                            .05
                   0




                                                                                            0

                          0     5    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50                                   0     5     10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
                          Observations = 1,056,656                                                Observations = 2,706,311
                          Truncated to values <=50                                                Truncated to values <=50
                          Percentiles shown by vertical lines                                     Percentiles shown by vertical lines




      Figure 6: MFN ad valorem tariff rates, 10 sectors, all countries, in 1990 and 2010

                                                                                                              All


                    Agriculture and Fishing : 01


                      Mining and Quarrying : 02


                           Food & Beverages : 03


              Textiles and Wearing Apparel : 04


                              Wood and Paper : 05


       Petro., Chem. and Non-Met. Minerals : 06


                               Metal Products : 07


                   Electrical and Machinery : 08


                         Transport Equipment : 09


        Other Manufacturing and Recycling : 10


                                                     0                                 10                                      20          30
                                           Trade-weighted tariff (%) in sector s, averaged over pairs ij, by type of importer

                                                                           1990                             2010




                                                                                  26
Figure 7: MFN ad valorem tariff rates, 10 sectors, all countries, in 1990 and 2010

                                                                                             Advanced


              Agriculture and Fishing : 01


                Mining and Quarrying : 02


                  Food & Beverages : 03


        Textiles and Wearing Apparel : 04


                    Wood and Paper : 05


 Petro., Chem. and Non-Met. Minerals : 06


                      Metal Products : 07


             Electrical and Machinery : 08


                Transport Equipment : 09


  Other Manufacturing and Recycling : 10


                                             0                                10                                  20    30
                                  Trade-weighted tariff (%) in sector s, averaged over pairs ij, by type of importer

                                                                  1990                        2010




                                                                                      Emerging/Developing


              Agriculture and Fishing : 01


                Mining and Quarrying : 02


                  Food & Beverages : 03


        Textiles and Wearing Apparel : 04


                    Wood and Paper : 05


 Petro., Chem. and Non-Met. Minerals : 06


                      Metal Products : 07


             Electrical and Machinery : 08


                Transport Equipment : 09


  Other Manufacturing and Recycling : 10


                                             0                                10                                 20    30
                                  Trade-weighted tariff (%) in sector s, averaged over pairs ij, by type of importer

                                                                  1990                        2010




                                                                         27
are truncated at the 50% tariff level; a small number of tariffs over this level (some well over 100%)
appear in both sample years for a few unusual goods and countries, but this right tail is not very
representative. Within the range shown, tariff peaks at certain round numbers are clearly visible
(0, 5, 10, 15, etc.), as one would expect. However, looking past those peaks, we can clearly see again
the impacts of changes in tariff policy over this period. The spike at zero rises, as more zero-tariff
rates appear across goods and countries, and in the strictly positive region mass is shifted from
the above-20% region and into the below-20% region. In 1990, a 20% tariff line was at the 75th
percentile globally; by 2010, a 20% tariff line was at the 90th percentile globally.
      Finally, Figures 6 and 7 provide sectoral detail for tariffs aggregated up to the level of 10 tradable
sectors which we use in our calibrated model.21 This figure shows clearly that the Uruguay Round
did not have a peculiar compositional impact across sectors. It lowered average tariffs pretty much
across the board in all sectors, and was not just confined to some limited areas of the tradable
economy. And again, the figure clearly shows the much larger scope for tariff reductions in the
Emerging and Developing sample, given the relatively high tariff rates they had at the start of the
period in all sectors as compared to the Advanced economies.

4.2      Production and Trade Data
To obtain production and trade data, we relied on Eora MRIO, a global multi-region IO database.
This dataset, to our knowledge, is the most comprehensive dataset available that contains infor-
mation on production, trade flows and input-output (IO) tables for 189 countries.22 Six sources
are used to construct these multi-region IO tables. The sources are: (1) input–output tables and
production data from national statistical offices; (2) IO from Eurostat, IDE-JETRO, and OECD;
(3) the UN National Accounts Main Aggregates Database; (4) the UN National Accounts Official
Data; (5) the UN Comtrade international trade database; and (6) the UN Service Trade Statistics
Database. For further information, refer to Lenzen et al. (2012; 2013). We use Eora MRIO to
obtain data on value added shares, share of intermediate inputs in production, gross output, and
total exports. These are mapped into our model concepts as explained in Appendix E.
      A key advantage of this database, compared to others, is the fact that it contains information
for a large set of countries (high- and low-income countries) and for the early years in the sample
period we wish to study. In particular we can make use of the 1990 multi-region table with
25-sector harmonized classifications. As a reference point, in comparison with the World Input-
Output Database (WIOD), we have more than three times the number of countries and account
for a number of developing countries, some of them quite small. Moreover, there is no WIOD for
the year 1990, the period immediately before the Uruguay Round tariff cuts. Having data as far
back as circa 1990 allows us to take the model to the data and evaluate the effects of every single
tariff reform after that period.
 21
      Tariffs are aggregated using trade weights as discussed in Appendix F.
 22
      Please refer to http://worldmrio.com/ for more information.



                                                          28
5    Taking the Quantitative Model to the Data
Several issues need to be dealt with in order to take the model to the data. First, we need to find a
way to infer a large set of unobservable parameters.            23   Second, we need to deal with the fact that
trade is unbalanced and that our static model cannot accommodate this feature of the data. Third,
we need estimates for parameters such as the trade and the home versus foreign input elasticities.
    To solve the first issue, we use the equilibrium conditions of the model in relative changes,
where we use the “hat” notation for the ratio of after-versus-before levels of any variable for a given
perturbation; that is, we define zb = z ′ /z for any variable z. It was first shown by Dekle, Eaton, and
Kortum (2007, 2008) that their model could be expressed conveniently using this type notation.24
As we show in Appendix E, this approach allows us to condition on an observed allocation in a given
baseline year and solve the model without needing estimates of fixed costs and other parameters
which are not directly observable. The way we solve the second issue is by first calibrating the
model with trade deficits as a residual and then use the model to net out the deficits.
    Finally, solving our quantitative model requires estimates, by sector, of the elasticity of sub-
stitution across varieties σs , the home versus foreign input elasticity ωs , and the Pareto shape
parameter θs . In order to obtain estimates for the elasticity of substitution and the Pareto param-
eter we use the estimates from CP. CP show that by triple differencing the gravity equation one
can identify the elasticities using tariff policy variation. In the context of our model the elasticity
that is estimated is given by 1 − σs θs /(σs − 1).
    In order to separately identify θs and σs we rely on estimates from the literature to obtain
θs /(σs − 1). The two most cited studies to deal with this issue are Chaney (2008) and Eaton, Kor-
tum, and Kramarz (2011). Chaney (2008) obtains the coefficient by regressing the log of the rank
of US firms according to their sales in the United States on the log of sales using Compustat data
on US listed firms. Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) use a different procedure and data on the
propensity of French firms to export to multiple markets. Chaney (2008) finds that θs /(σs − 1) ≈ 2,
while Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) find θs /(σs − 1) ≈ 1.5. We take this latter estimate and
apply it to our sectoral elasticities estimated using CP.
    The values for the elasticities that we obtain are shown in Table 1. Note that these values imply
that σs for the tradable sectors are 6.7, 9.7, and 4.4 respectively. These numbers are clearly within
the range of values estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006), where they find that a simple average
of the elasticities of substitution are 17 at a seven-digit level of goods disaggregation (TSUSA), 7
at the three-digit level (TSUSA), 12 at a ten-digit level (HTS) and 4 at a three-digit level (HTS).
  23
     Several parameters from our model are directly observable, like value added shares and input-output coefficients.
However, there are a large number of parameters, like fixed entry, production, and exports costs, that are not observed.
  24
     This idea was first advanced by Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2008) in the context of a Ricardian trade model. CP
and Ossa (2014) show that one can use this method to analyze the effects of tariff policy. CR refer to this as the
“exact hat algebra” and show how it works for a variety of trade models, including a multi-county, multi-industry
Melitz model similar to the one we use here. We show how it works with a nested CES structure and for the case of
revenue tariffs.



                                                          29
                                                   Table 1: Elasticities
Sector(s)                                                          σs θ s
                                                                   σs −1    −1                θs                        σs
Agriculture and Fishing (1 sector)                                   9.11                     8.6                       6.7
Mining and Quarrying (1 sector)                                      13.53                   13.0                       9.7
Manufacturing Sectors (all 8 sectors)                                5.55                     5.1                       4.4
Nontraded services (all 5 sectors)                                    —                       2.7                       2.8


We also need an elasticity for the service sector. Gervais and Jensen (2013) find that services have
an elasticity of substitution that is smaller than for manufacturing: about three-quarters the size
of the elasticity in manufacturing (though they obtain rather high values for both elasticities using
accounting data). Given this, we likewise adopt an elasticity of substitution in services that is below
what we use for the manufacturing sector. In particular, for services we use a value of σs = 2.8 and,
given θs / (σs − 1) = 1.5, this implies θs = 2.7. Finally, we also need an elasticity for home versus
foreign input substitution, ωs . We obtain this elasticity by calibrating the model to the baseline
year of 1990 and then solving the model after adding the actual, observed, tariff changes. We do
this for different values of ωs , while fixing all other elasticities, and choose the value of σs /ωs such
that we match the actual growth rate of imports/GDP which was 35%. We find that the best fit is
achieved with a value of ωs = σs /1.25 and in all our quantitative results below we use this elasticity.


6         A Quantitative Assessment
In this section we evaluate the trade, entry, and welfare effects of the observed change in trade
policy over the years 1990 to 2010. We take as our initial baseline the levels of tariffs in the year
1990, the year before tariffs started falling as a consequence of the Uruguay Round. We quantify
the economic effects of tariff changes by performing four different exercises, as follows.

     • We first impose on the model the actual changes in MFN tariffs from the year 1990 to the year
           2010, holding fixed the preferential tariffs (PTA) in place in the year 1990. This exercise we
           think of as informative on the effects of changes principally due to multilateral negotiations,
           i.e., the Uruguay Round, so we label this case the “Uruguay Round” experiment.25

     • We then go beyond the Uruguay Round effects on MFN tariffs, and aim to quantify the effects
           from all tariff changes, MFN together with any preferential PTA tariffs in place in the year
           2010. We refer to this last exercise as the “Uruguay Round + Preference” experiment.

     • In addition, we explore whether there are any extra gains from tariff changes by moving to a
           world with zero tariffs, what we refer as the “Free Trade” experiment.

     • Finally, starting from a free trade equilibrium of the world, we solve for the unilateral uniform
           optimal tariff across countries.
    25
         Specifically, we set the 2010 tariff equal to minimum of the 1990 preference tariff and the 2010 MFN tariff.


                                                              30
Trade Effects     We start by showing the trade effects from the change in tariffs in our experiments.
We calculate the share of total expenditure in each country on foreign goods, a model counterpart
of the trade share of GDP. Figure 8 uses smooth histograms, or kernel density plots, to show
the effects on the trade share of GDP in all countries in the world in the baseline and the three
experiments.
   The results are stark, and Uruguay Round tariff reductions generate considerable trade effects.
The distribution of trade shares in 1990 had its mass concentrated in the 0%–10% region. After
the Uruguay Round experiment this mass is more spread out in the 0%–20% region. There is little
difference between the three experiments, suggesting that most of the impact that could have been
achieved by a move towards free trade was achieved by the Uruguay Round experiment; still, the
Free Trade case shows some extra trade might be generated by the removal of all tariffs.
   Figure 9 shows the effects for Advanced versus Emerging and Developing countries. The world,
on average, became more open with a roughly twofold increase in the median trade share in both
subsamples. Interestingly, the median trade share increases slightly more for Advanced economies
relative to Emerging and Developing economies. The effects for the latter are very dispersed. Some
countries, like Hong Kong and Singapore, display a substantial increase, even from an initial high
level, while for other countries the trade share remain almost constant.
   The second takeaway from both of figures is that Uruguay Round + Preference does not generate
a large increase in world trade relative to Uruguay Round only. This is clearly seen by comparing
the median change in openness for Advanced and Emerging and Developing countries as we move
from the Uruguay Round case to the Uruguay Round + Preference. The line is flat, as it is at
almost all marked deciles. The histogram makes the same point. Finally, note that moving to zero
tariffs generates considerable trade share effects for Emerging economies, but little in the way of
extra trade share effects for Advanced economies. This result unmasks the asymmetrical impact of
further reducing tariffs for Emerging and Developing countries, where for the latter the free trade
would be a larger counterfactual change

Entry Effects     We now discuss our findings on firm entry. Figure 10 presents the distribution
of changes in entry across all countries and sectors by trade policy relative to the 1990 baseline
                                                                                            ′ /N .
(normalized to 1). Concretely, we are showing the change in entry, in hat notation N̂i,s ≡ Ni,s i,s
The histogram in Figure 10 shows that the entry margin is very active and heavily impacted by
the changes in tariffs.
   As we can see, there is mass in both tails reflecting that in some country-sector cases entry goes
up, while in others it falls. As we compare experiments it is evident that both Uruguay Round
and Uruguay Round + Preference generate very similar entry effects, while moving to Free trade
affects entry a little bit more, and mostly in the Emerging and Developing countries where again
free trade would be a larger counterfactual change. In particular, it tends to reduce entry sharply
in many cases, in part, as a consequence of increased import competition.


                                                 31
Figure 8: Trade effects from tariff changes, world, histograms, 1990–2010
                                                                                                                 Trade
                                      10
                                      8
                                      6                                        Distribution of Trade/GDP across countries, by trade policy
                          Density
                                      4
                                      2
                                      0




                                            0                                .2                                     .4                                                                    .6                                 .8
                                                                                                                Trade/GDP

                                                                                        1990 Baseline                                                                        Uruguay Round
                                                                                        Uruguay Round + Preference                                                           Free Trade




Figure 9: Trade effects from tariff changes, subsamples, detail, 1990–2010

                                                                 Trade - Advanced                                                                                            Trade - Emerging/Developing
                                      Trade/GDP: all countries, median, and 10 deciles (5-95), by trade policy                                              Trade/GDP: all countries, median, and 10 deciles (5-95), by trade policy
                                      .8




                                                                                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                HKG
                                      .6




                                                                                                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                      HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HKG


                                                                                                                                                                                                      SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                SGP
Trade/GDP relative to 1990 baseline




                                                                                                                     Trade/GDP relative to 1990 baseline




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MYS
                                                                                  MLT                    MLT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TUN
                                                           MLT                                                                                                                                                              THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      TUN                   SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SYC

                                                                                                                                                                                                      JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SVK                   BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                                 SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                 LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                MYS                   MYS
                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BGR
                                      LUX                  LUX                    LUX                    LUX                                                                     THA
                                                                                                                                                           SGP                   TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                 EST                  THA                  CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                 SVN                                       EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SVN                   CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                 JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                  LVA                 CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LVA
                                                                                                                                                           HKG                                        BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                 LTU                  HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                CYP                   PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                      EST
                                                                                                                                                                                PAN                   MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                      BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                 BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                                SYC                    BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                                SWZ                   SWZ
                                                                                                                                                           MYS                   GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                YEM
                                      BEL                  BEL                    BEL

                                                                                                          ISL
                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                           .2




                                                                                                         PRT
                                                           PRT
                                                                                                                                                           SYR
                                                                                                                                                           SVN
                                                                                                                                                           TWN
                                                                                                                                                           VNM
                                                                                                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                                                                            LBN
                                                                                                                                                           BRN
                                                                                                                                                            EST
                                                                                                                                                            LVA
                                                                                                                                                           CZE
                                                                                                                                                            BLZ
                                                                                                                                                           SWZ
                                      NLD                                                                                                                  VGB
                                                                                                                                                           GRL
                                                                                                                                                            STP
                                                                                                                                                           MUS
                                                                                                                                                           JOR
                                                                                                                                                           THA
                                                                                                                                                           KWT
                                                                                                                                                           HUN
                                                                                                                                                           VUT

                                                                                  CHE                                                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TJK
                                                           USA                    USA                   USA
                                                                                                        JPN                                                                                                                CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ETH
                                                           JPN                    JPN                   AUS                                                                      LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                 LBR                   LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LBR                  IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GUY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LBR
                                                           AUS                    AUS                                                                                           GUY                   CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GUY                   BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COD
                                      USA
                                      JPN                                                                                                                                       CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                COG
                                                                                                                                                                                GRL
                                                                                                                                                                                KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                  BDI                 CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                      MMR                  SMR
                                      AUS                                                                                                                  RWA
                                                                                                                                                           NER
                                                                                                                                                           MMR
                                                                                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                                                            NPL
                                                                                                                                                           TCD                  MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                SMR
                                                                                                                                                                                COD
                                                                                                                                                                                TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                SOM                   SMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      COD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                      TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SOM                  SOM
                                                                                                                                                            IRQ
                                                                                                                                                           BGD
                                                                                                                                                           ARG
                                                                                                                                                           KHM
                                                                                                                                                            BDI
                                                                                                                                                           PRK
                                                                                                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                                                                           GEO                  MNE                   MNE                  MNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PRK
                                                                                                                                                           MNE
                                                                                                                                                             LIE
                                                                                                                                                           GUY
                                                                                                                                                           ETH
                                                                                                                                                           MCO                  PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                SRB
                                                                                                                                                                                  LIE                 PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                        LIE                SRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LIE
                                                                                                                                                           SRB
                                                                                                                                                           ARM
                                                                                                                                                           USR                  MCO
                                                                                                                                                                                ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                USR                   MCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                      USR                  MCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           USR
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                           0




                                 1990 Baseline         Uruguay Round Uruguay Round + Preference         Free Trade                                    1990 Baseline          Uruguay Round Uruguay Round + Preference      Free Trade




                                                                                                                32
  Figure 10: Entry effects from tariff changes, world, histograms, 1990–2010
                                                                                                        Entry
                                                                 Distribution of entry across countries/sectors, by trade policy
            5
            4
            3
  Density
            2
            1
            0




                    .5                                                                                   1                                                                                               1.5
                                                                                                    Entry (Nhat)

                                                                          Uruguay Round                                      Uruguay Round + Preference
                                                                          Free Trade
                    Truncated to [0.5,1.5]




Figure 11: Entry effects from tariff changes, subsamples, histograms, 1990–2010
                                                  Entry - Advanced                                                                                  Entry - Emerging/Developing
                             Distribution of entry across countries/sectors, by trade policy                                        Distribution of entry across countries/sectors, by trade policy
                5




                                                                                                                       5
                4




                                                                                                                       4
                3




                                                                                                                       3
      Density




                                                                                                             Density
                2




                                                                                                                       2
                1




                                                                                                                       1
                0




                                                                                                                       0




                    .5                                     1                                      1.5                      .5                                     1                                      1.5
                                                      Entry (Nhat)                                                                                           Entry (Nhat)

                                     Uruguay Round                   Uruguay Round + Preference                                             Uruguay Round                   Uruguay Round + Preference
                                     Free Trade                                                                                             Free Trade
                    Truncated to [0.5,1.5]                                                                                 Truncated to [0.5,1.5]




                                                                                                        33
    Figure 11 separates the distribution of entry effects in the Advanced versus Emerging and
Developing countries. The left hand side panel shows the distribution of the change in entry for
Advanced economies while the right hand side panel presents the distribution of the change in
entry for Emerging markets. As we can see, trade policy impacts firm entry across these types of
countries in very different ways. In particular, we find that firm entry reacts more in Advanced
economies (where tariff changes were smaller) relative to Emerging economies (where tariff changes
were bigger): for all three experiments the results on firm entry are very concentrated for Emerging
markets while this is not the case for Advanced economies. These results show clearly that entry
is impacted by tariffs not only theoretically, as we discussed several times in the paper, but that it
is also affected in a quantitatively significant way by a realistic change in trade policy.

Welfare Effects        Figure 12 presents the welfare effects for the world, namely the change in welfare
relative to the base year 1990 (normalized to 1) for each of our first three experiments. Here, the
Uruguay Round accounts for much of the welfare effects from tariff changes. In fact, the average
gains across countries in our sample are +1.27% for the Uruguay Round experiment, +1.52% for
Uruguay Round + Preference, and +1.64% for Free trade. So the Uruguay Round accounts for 77%
or slightly more than three-quarters of the total welfare gains across countries, the PTAs account
for another 15% or two-thirds of the remaining gains, and the movement to Free trade for another
7% or one-third of the remaining gains.
    In addition, there is substantial heterogeneity in terms of winners and losers, as can be seen
when we split the sample according to Advanced and Emerging economies in Figure 13. The
Uruguay Round brought significant gains for some Emerging and Developing countries. These
same countries also gain notably from the movement to Free trade, but not so much from the
PTAs. The larger gains from the movement to Free trade among Emerging/Developing economies
suggests the possibility that some of these countries will continue to gain as we examine negative
tariffs, as we turn to next.

Negative Optimal Tariffs Finally, starting from a free trade equilibrium, we evaluate whether
a negative uniform unilateral tariff is optimal or not. We do so by unilaterally changing tariffs
uniformly across sectors for each of the countries in the sample one by one.26 We find that a
negative tariff is optimal in ten countries of the world in 1990.                27   Five of these are economies
that appear to enjoy strong production linkages, as suggested by the sufficient conditions for a
negative optimal tariff in Theorem 4(b): China, Hong Kong, India, Israel, and Vietnam. The
other five countries are not suggestive of strong production linkages, however, and are Emerging
or Developing economies that are mostly remote from other countries: Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda,
  26
     Concretely what we do is to evaluate the welfare effects from imposing unilateral uniform tariffs across sectors in
the range between -20% to +20%. We do this in an interval of 2.5% one country at a time.
  27
     We omitted results for the countries that the Soviet Union broke into in 1991, which appear in the EORA database
even in 1990, and for four other countries due to unreliable results as we moved from their 2010 tariffs to free trade:
Belarus, Moldova, South Sudan, and Sudan.


                                                          34
                                 Figure 12: Welfare effects from tariff changes, world, detail, 1990–2010
                                                                                                                                                Welfare
                                                                                                                For individual countries, median, and 10 deciles (5-95), by trade policy
                                                                                                                                                                                   BGD




                                                                                                          1.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MUS



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BGD
                                                                                                                                   MUS


                                                                                                                                   BGD




                                                                                                          1.2
                                                                      Welfare relative to 1990 baseline                                                                                          SGP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NGA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SGP




                                                                                                                                   NGA                                                           NGA                    LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TUN
                                                                                                          1.1
                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                   TTO                                                           TTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                 HND                   TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TTO




                                                                                                          1990 Baseline         Uruguay Round         Uruguay Round + Preference                                       Free Trade




Figure 13: Welfare effects from tariff changes, subsamples, detail, 1990–2010

                                                               Welfare - Advanced                                                                                                                           Welfare - Emerging/Developing
                                        For individual countries, median, and 10 deciles (5-95), by trade policy                                                                             For individual countries, median, and 10 deciles (5-95), by trade BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               policy
                                      1.3




                                                                                                                                                                                           1.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MUS


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MUS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BGD
                                      1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                           1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SGP



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NGA
  Welfare relative to 1990 baseline




                                                                                                                                                       Welfare relative to 1990 baseline




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SGP



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NGA                   NGA                    LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TUN
                                      1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                           1.1
                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TTO                   TTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HND                    TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TTO
                                      .9




                                                                                                                                                                                           .9




                   1990 Baseline                         Uruguay Round Uruguay Round + Preference                                        Free Trade                     1990 Baseline                         Uruguay Round Uruguay Round + Preference       Free Trade




                                                                                                                                              35
Samoa, and Sao Tome and Principe. These economies are suggestive of the sufficient conditions
for a negative optimal tariff in Theorem 4(a), which requires remoteness from other countries and
therefore a high share of expenditure on home production.
    It might be thought that with a lower elasticity in services as we have used in our quantitative
model, and therefore a higher markup than in manufacturing, the social planner would want to
expand the services sector and contract manufacturing. But that is not what we find for these ten
countries. Rather, we find that small tariffs in the manufacturing sector tend to worsen welfare
for the country applying them, so that the optimal tariffs on these industries are negative. The
reason for this result depends not only on the markups charged in different industries, but also
on the extent of their openess and production linkages. The manufacturing industries in our
quantitative model are more highly linked to the rest of economy than are the services industries.
The distortions that are present in the economy must take into account both monopolistic pricing
and these production linkages and the extent of openess, as we have shown in Theorem 4. By not
treating the services sector in our quantitative model as perfectly competitive, as we did in the
illustrative two-sector model, we are in effect “stacking the deck” against finding negative optimal
tariffs in manufacturing. Despite that, we still find that tariffs in manufacturing create a domestic
distortion that, in these ten countries, reverses the (positive) optimal tariff.


7    Conclusion
In this paper we study the trade, firm entry, and welfare effects arising from actual changes in
trade policy in the last two decades. We do so with a multi-sector heterogeneous firm model that
incorporates tariffs, traded intermediate goods, and an input-output structure that is realistic for
modern economies.
    First, we show that trade policy impacts firm entry and exit, a channel that has not been
fully explored before. We provide a theoretical characterization of the conditions under which
tariffs affect firm entry and, ultimately, welfare. We show that in a range of existing models the
forces driving firm entry are inoperative only under restrictive, unrealistic assumptions about the
tradability of goods, the production structure, or the way tariffs are modeled.
    Next, we present a new comprehensive annual tariff dataset starting in the 1980s that allows us
to measure how MFN and preferential tariffs have changed over time at a very disaggregated level.
With these new data we can perform trade policy experiments which could not be explored before
now, with many more interesting experiments left for future research.
    Finally, with our model and data, we go beyond gains-from-trade estimates based largely on
advanced economies, and use an 189-country/15-sector version of our model to quantify the effects
of trade liberalization over the period 1990–2010, including the greatest round of global tariff
elimination, the Uruguay Round. We find that the actual reductions in MFN tariffs in this period
generated large trade, entry, and welfare effects. We also find that the effects from preferential


                                                  36
tariff reductions have not contributed much to total world trade and welfare, and that meaningful
gains from future liberalization may remain on the table only for a few developing countries.
   Indeed, while some developing countries gain from the complete removal of tariffs, a number of
countries – mainly Emerging and Developing economies – would gain from going even further, to
negative (optimal) tariffs. This policy would serve to facilitate trade into these countries and would
raise welfare by more than the cost of providing the import subsidy—that is, even if consumers in
these countries paid for the import subsidy, the policy would be welfare improving. One component
of ongoing trade negotiations is to enable trade facilitation through other, non-monetary means,
such as decreasing the time spent at the border, etc. We expect that such policies would be strongly
welfare-improving in our model, through the usual channel of expanding trade and lowering prices
on the intensive margin, and also through encouraging the entry of exporters on the extensive
margin. In sum, our focus here on entry in a multi-sector, heterogeneous-firm model gives new
insights into the potential welfare gains from trade liberalization.




                                                 37
References
 [1] Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2002. Borders, Trade and Welfare. In Brook-
     ings Trade Policy Forum 2001 edited by Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik. Washington, D.C.:
     Brookings Institution, pp. 207–30.

 [2] Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2012. New Trade Models,
     Same Old Gains? American Economic Review 102(1): 94–130.

 [3] Bagwell, Kyle, and Seung Hoon Lee. 2015. Trade Policy under Monopolistic Competition with
     Firm Selection. Stanford University. Unpublished.

 [4] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2010. The World Trade Organization: Theory and
     Practice. Annual Review of Economics 2(1): 223–56.

 [5] Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2007. Do Free Trade Agreements Actually Increase
     Members’ International Trade? Journal of International Economics 71(1): 72–95.

 [6] Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2009. Estimating the Effects of Free Trade Agree-
     ments on Trade Flows using Matching Econometrics. Journal of International Economics 77(1):
     77–85.

 [7] Balistreri, Edward J., Russell H. Hillberry, and Thomas F. Rutherford. 2011. Structural Es-
     timation and Solution of International Trade Models with Heterogeneous Firms. Journal of
     International Economics 83(2): 98–108.

 [8] Blanchard, Emily J., Chad P. Bown, and Robert C. Johnson. 2015, “Global Supply Chains
     and Trade Policy,” mimeo Dartmouth.

 [9] Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. Globalization and the Gains from Variety.
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2): 541–85.

[10] Caliendo, Lorenzo, Robert C. Feenstra, John Romalis, and Alan M. Taylor. 2015. Tariff Re-
     ductions, Entry, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for the Last Two Decades. December
     2015 version of NBER Working Paper 21768, avialable at http://faculty.som.yale.edu/
     lorenzocaliendo/Caliendo_Feenstra_Romalis_Taylor_NBER.pdf.

[11] Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
     NAFTA. Review of Economic Studies 82 (1): 1–44.

[12] Chaney, Thomas. 2008. Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of Interna-
     tional Trade. American Economic Review 98(4): 1707–21.

[13] Cherkashin, Ivan, Svetlana Demidova, Hiau Looi Kee, and Kala Krishna. 2015. Firm het-
     erogeneity and costly trade: A new estimation strategy and policy experiments. Journal of
     International Economics 96(1): 18–36.

[14] Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2014. Trade Theory with Numbers: Quanti-
     fying the Consequences of Globalization. In Handbook of International Economics, volume 4,
     edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff. New York: Elsevier, pp.
     197–262.


                                               38
[15] Costinot, Arnaud, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Iván Werning. 2016. Micro to Macro: Optimal
     Trade Policy with Firm Heterogeneity. NBER Working Paper 21989.
[16] Deardorff, Alan V. 1998. Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical
     World? In The Regionalization of the World Economy edited by Jeffrey A. Frankel. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, pp. 7–32.
[17] Dhingra, Swati and John Morrow. 2019. Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
     Diversity Under Firm Heterogeneity. Journal of Political Economy 127(1): 196–232.
[18] Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2008. Global Rebalancing with Gravity:
     Measuring the Burden of Adjustment. IMF Staff Papers 55(3): 511–40.
[19] Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2011. An Anatomy of International
     Trade: Evidence from French Firms. Econometrica 79(5): 1453–98.
[20] Estevadeordal, Antoni, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. Is the Washington Consensus Dead?
     Growth, Openness, and the Great Liberalization, 1970s–2000s. Review of Economics and
     Statistics 95(5): 1669–90.
[21] Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott. 2002. U.S. Imports, Exports, and
     Tariff Data, 1989–2001. NBER Working Paper 9387.
[22] Feenstra, Robert C., Philip A. Luck, Maurice Obstfeld, and Kathryn N. Russ. 2018. In Search
     of the Armington Elasticity. Review of Economics and Statistics. March, 100(1): 135–150
[23] Felbermayr, Gabriel, Benjamin Jung, and Mario Larch. 2015. The welfare consequences of
     import tariffs: A quantitative perspective. Journal of International Economics. 97(2): 295–309
[24] Gervais, Antoine, and J. Bradford Jensen. 2013. The Tradability of Services: Geographic
     Concentration and Trade Costs. NBER Working Paper 19759.
[25] Goldberg, Pinelopi K., Amit K. Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova. 2010. Im-
     ported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 125(4): 1727–67.
[26] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Nicholas Li, Ralph Ossa, and Mu-Jeung Yang. 2016. Accounting for the
     New Gains from Trade Liberalization. NBER Working Paper 22069.
[27] Kucheryavyy, Konstantin, Gary Lyn, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2016. Grounded by Grav-
     ity: A Well-Behaved Trade Model with Industry-Level Economies of Scale. NBER Working
     Paper 22484.
[28] Lasharipour, Ahmad and and Volodymyr Lugovsky. 2019. Profits, Scale Economies, and
     the Gains from Trade and Industrial Policy. Indiana University. http://pages.iu.edu/
     ~alashkar/Lashkaripour_Lugovskyy.pdf.
[29] Lenzen, Manfred, Keiichiro Kanemoto, Daniel Moran, and Arne Geschke. 2012. Mapping the
     Structure of the World Economy. Environmental Science & Technology 46(15): 8374–81.
[30] Lenzen, Manfred, Daniel Moran, Keiichiro Kanemoto, and Arne Geschke. 2013. Building Eora:
     A Global Multi-Regional Input-Output Database at High Country and Sector Resolution.
     Economic Systems Research 25(1): 20–49.

                                                39
[31] Melitz, Marc J. 2003. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
     Industry Productivity. Econometrica 71(6): 1695–1725.

[32] Melitz, Marc J., and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano. 2008. Market Size, Trade, and Productivity.
     Review of Economic Studies 75(1): 295–316.

[33] Melitz, Marc J., and Stephen J. Redding. 2014. Missing Gains from Trade? American Eco-
     nomic Review 104(5): 317–21.

[34] Melitz, Marc J., and Stephen J. Redding. 2015. New Trade Models, New Welfare Implications.
     American Economic Review 105(3): 1105–46.

[35] Ossa, Ralph. 2014. Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data. American Economic Review
     104(12): 4104–46.

[36] Redding, Stephen J., and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. Economic Geography and International
     Inequality. Journal of International Economics 62(1): 53–82.

[37] Rose, Andrew K. 2004. Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade? American
     Economic Review 94 (1): 98–114.

[38] Spearot, Alan. 2016. Unpacking the Long Run Effects of Tariff Shocks: New Structural Impli-
     cations from Firm Heterogeneity Models. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 8(2):
     128–167.

[39] Subramanian, Arvind, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2007. The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly but
     Unevenly. Journal of International Economics 72(1): 151–75.

[40] Trefler, Daniel. 1993. Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection: An
     Economic Study of U.S. Import Policy. Journal of Political Economy 101(1): 138–60.

[41] Trefler, Daniel. 2006. The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement. Eco-
     nomics of Industry Papers 41, Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and
     Related Disciplines, LSE.

[42] Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?,” Journal
     of Political Economy, 111(1): 52–102.




                                              40
                                                APPENDIX


A Tariffs, Icebergs, Entry, and Welfare
We draw from an earlier version of this working paper (Caliendo, Feenstra, Romalis, and Taylor,
2015), to derive the impact of a change in ad valorem tariffs on entry in a one-sector Melitz-Chaney
model. Consider first the case of tariffs applied to the variable cost of imports—or ”cost” tariffs—
with no rebate of the tariff revenue to consumers. The government instead wastes the revenue
on a good with zero utility, so this case will be identical to iceberg trade costs. Assume labor in
country i is the numeraire, with wi = 1. The firm in country i selling to country j solves the
profit-maximization problem
                                                                                     
                                                          τij (1 + tij ) qij (φ)
                    πij (φ) = max       pij (φ) qij (φ) −                        − fij ,         (41)
                             pij (φ)≥0                             φ

where qij (φ) is the quantity chosen by consumers at the price pij (φ), the firm’s marginal costs
inclusive of iceberg costs τij and the ad valorem cost tariff tij are τij (1 + tij )/φ, and fij are
the fixed operating costs. We assume CES demand with elasticity σ and a Pareto distribution,
G(φ) = 1 − φ−θ , for the firm productivities, with φ ≥ 1. Then it can be shown by evaluating
the integrals below that assumption R2 of Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (ACR, 2012)
holds, namely:        Z ∞                        Z ∞
                                             σ−1
                             πij (φ) dG(φ) =            pij (φ) qij (φ) dG(φ) ,                (42)
                        φ∗ij                  σθ   φ∗ij
                      |          {z      }       |             {z           }
                       Πij ≡ profits from j           Rij ≡ revenue paid by consumers in j

where φ∗ij is the zero cutoff profit level of productivity at which πij (φ∗ij ) = 0. Note that both the
profits from j and the revenue paid by consumers in j go to the firms in country i. So summing
over all destination markets j, denoting the mass of entrants by Ni and the sunk costs of entry by
fiE , and using the free-entrycondition and equation (42), we can compute the integrals to obtain
Ni fiE = Πi = σ−1
                σθ Ri =
                          σ−1
                           σθ Li , where Li is the labor earnings in this one-sector economy coming
from the aggregate revenue of firms. It immediately follows that entry is:
                                                     σ−1 1
                                              Ni =           Li ,                                 (43)
                                                      σθ fiE

which is fixed and does not vary with iceberg trade costs or with un-rebated cost tariffs.
    Furthermore, this result of fixed entry will continue to hold if we add a nontraded competitive
sector to each country, as in our simplified model of section 3. In that case, the fraction (1 − α)
of labor will be devoted to the competitive sector, with αL remaining for the differentiated sector.
Then entry into that sector is determined by:
                                                     σ−1 α
                                              Ni =           Li ,                                 (44)
                                                      σθ fiE

which is again fixed.
    Returning to the one-sector model, now consider the realistic case of ad valorem tariffs applied
to the import revenue gross of price markups—or ”revenue” tariffs—with full rebate of the tariff
revenue to consumers. In this case, the tariff-inclusive price pij (φ) must be divided by (1 + tij ) to


                                                       41
obtain the net price pij (φ)/(1 + tij ) earned by the firm, which is used to compute net revenue of
the firm. Profits of the the firm are then
                                                                               
                                            pij (φ)           xi
                       πij (φ) = max                 qij (φ) − τij qij (φ) − fij .             (45)
                                pij (φ)≥0 (1 + tij )          φ

    Direct calculation of the integrals below shows that the analogous expression for R2, but now
in the presence of revenue tariffs, becomes
                      Z ∞                         Z ∞
                                             σ−1          pij (φ)
                             πij (φ) dG(φ) =                        qij (φ) dG(φ) .           (46)
                        φ∗ij                  σθ    φ∗ij (1 + tij )
                      |          {z      }        |              {z             }
                           Πij ≡ profits from j           Rij ≡ revenue earned by firms from j

    A clear difference between (42) and (46) is that the former uses revenue Rij paid by consumers,
whereas the latter uses revenue Rij earned by firms, and these differ when ad valorem revenue
tariffs are used.28 This difference is immaterial, however, when the tariff revenue is fully rebated.
In that case the labor earnings paid by the firm are still Li , equal to the labor endowment. Then
summing over destination markets j, firm revenue
                                                       net of tariffs is Ri = Li . It follows that entry is
determined by Ni fiE = Πi = σ−1  σθ R  i = σ−1
                                            σθ   Li , which is again fixed as in (43).
    Yet, a careful re-examination of these two cases shows that entry is not fixed under alternative
assumptions on the tariff rebate. For example, with full rebate of the revenue under cost tariffs,
we would obtain Ni = σ−1      1
                         σθ wi fiE Ri . The consumer expenditure Ri in country i is at tariff-inclusive
prices is given by Ri = wi Li + Ti , which depends on the collected tariff revenue Ti . Therefore entry
depends on the tariff, and is given by
                                                  σ−1 1
                                          Ni =               (wi Li + Ti ) .
                                                   σθ wi fiE

    Alternatively, with no rebate under revenue tariffs, then country i tariff revenue Ti is wasted.
                                                σθ wi fiE Ri , where Ri = wi Li − Ti . Therefore entry
It follows that in this case we have that Ni = σ−1   1

again depends on the tariff, and is given by
                                                  σ−1 1
                                          Ni =               (wi Li − Ti ) .
                                                   σθ wi fiE

    Table 2 fully summarizes all of the above new results, which apply to the benchmark case of
the one-sector model with Pareto productivity draws. It is worth emphasizing an important and
novel insight from these results, which is that the existence of a revenue effect coming from a tariff
rebate is neither necessary nor sufficient to generate changes in entry.
    As the table shows, given the variety of possible trade cost formulations any analysis of the
impact of tariffs on entry and welfare could in principle consider all four hypothetical tariff/rebate
configurations. But in this paper we focus exclusively on ad valorem tariffs applied to the revenue of
imports. This choice is made for two reasons. First, we note that these tariffs are the realistic choice,
since the alternative cost-based tariffs in Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) and Felbermayr,
Jung, and Larch (2015) are applied only to the variable costs of an import, and not to their full
market value (variable costs plus fixed costs plus profits). But no such a distinction between variable
  28
     In contrast, with iceberg trade costs, c.i.f. revenue paid by consumers (at c.i.f. prices but with quantity net of
iceberg costs) equals f.o.b. revenue earned by firms (at lower f.o.b. prices but with quantity gross of iceberg costs).


                                                          42
               Table 2: Operation of the entry margin under different forms of trade costs
                           No rebate                                         Rebate
                                         σ−1 1
Icebergs                   No:     Ni =   σθ fiE Li                          Not applicable
                                         σ−1 1                                                 σ−1 1
Cost tariffs               No:      Ni = σθ f E Li                           Yes:      Ni =     σθ wi fiE   (wi Li + Ti )
                                              i

Revenue tariffs            Yes:     Ni = σ−1    1
                                           σθ wi fiE   (wi Li − Ti )         No:      Ni =    σ−1 1
                                                                                               σθ fiE Li




and fixed costs and profits is made when the customs value of an import shipment is evaluated
at the border, as the well known customs rules make abundantly clear.29 But the second, more
important reason, comes from our finding above that entry is fixed in the one-sector model when
using revenue tariffs with rebate. This is a very convenient, and parsimonious, starting point for
our broader analysis of tariffs, that now builds from the earlier literature.



B      Quantitative Model - Further details

In this Appendix we present a schematic representation of the Quantitative model, the problem of
the household, and the cost minimization problems of the intermediate and finished goods produc-
ers.
     The schematic production structure of the model is shown in Figure 14, where the significant
inclusion of inter-sectoral production linkages is shown by the crossed highlighted arrows.

B.1     Households
Assume that agents consume only domestically produced nontraded finished goods with preferences
given by
                                              Y
                                              S
                                   Ui (Ci ) =   (Ci,s )αi,s ,                              (47)
                                                          s=1

where Ci,s is the consumption of a finished good with sector index s and produced in country i,
and the αi,s are standard expenditure shares.
   Demand is then given by
                                                αi,s Ri
                                         Ci,s =         ,                                 (48)
                                                 Pi,s
where Ri represents the income of the agents in country i, and Pi,s is the price of finished good s in
country i. As explained below, agents derive income from two sources, labor income and rebated
tariff revenue, and firm profits will be equal to zero by an assumption of free entry.
  29
    Under the rules of the World Trade Organization, ad valorem tariffs are applied to the ”customs value” of an
import product, which is intended to reflect the price paid between unrelated parties. Such a price should, obviously,
not exclude fixed costs or markups/profits. See: http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/cusval_e/cusval_info_e.
htm.




                                                          43
                             Figure 14: Schematic production structure of the model

                                                                                    Labor
                                                                                      Li


                           ,QWHUPHGLDWHJoods
                                Hxported
                                                    Intermediate goods                           Intermediate goods
                                                            qi ,1 (M )                                  qi , 2 (M )
                           ,QWHUPHGLDWHJoods
                                Lmported



                                                           )LQLVKHG good 1                           )LQLVKHG good 2
                                                                   Qi,1                                   Q
                                                                                                          Qi,i2,2




                                                                                         D       D
                                                                             Ui (Ci ) C i,1 C i,22




B.2     Finished goods producers
Cost minimization               The cost minimization problem of finished good firms in sector s and country
i is30
                                                   X
                                                   M               Z∞
                                           min           Nj,s             pji,s (φ) qji,s (φ) gs (φ) dφ,
                                   {qji,s (φ)}≥0
                                                   j=1        φ∗ji,s

subject to
                                                  h        ωs −1
                                                                              i ωs
                                                                         ωs −1 ω −1
                                            Qi,s = (Qii,s ) ωs + (QFi,s ) ωs    s
                                                                                    ,

where
                                                          σs                                                                                    σs
                   Z∞                                     σs −1)
                                                                                          X
                                                                                          M                Z∞                                      σs −1

                                      σs −1                                                                                  σs −1          
 Qii,s = Ni,s             qii,s (φ)    σs     dGs (φ)            ,      QFi,s =               Nj,s               qji,s (φ)    σs     dGs (φ)           ,
                  φ∗ii,s                                                                  j̸=i           φ∗ji,s


and qji,s (φ) is the demand by country i and sector s of an intermediate variety φ from country j with
the tariff-inclusive price pji,s (φ), Qi,s is the total quantity of finished goods produced, and Nj,s is the
number of entering firms in country  h    j and sector
                                                     i s. As noted above, the number of firms/products
actually sold to market i is Nj,s 1 − Gs φji,s = Nj,s φ∗−θ
                                                  ∗
                                                                ji,s . Note that qji,s (φ) > 0, and the good
                                                                     s


is produced by j for i, if and only if φ ≥ φ∗ji,s . Otherwise qji,s (φ) = 0, which accounts for the lower
limit of the integral.
  30
    Intermediate good producers are heterogeneous in their productivity levels and since a particular variety is related
to a particular productivity throughout the paper we will abuse notation and denote by φ both the productivity level
and variety of the firm.


                                                                        44
B.3    Intermediate goods producers
Cost minimization We solve the problem of the tradable intermediate variety producer in two
stages. First, we determine the minimum cost of producing a given quantity. The solution to this
problem is the variable cost function of the firm. Second, we solve the profit maximization problem
of the firm using the cost function derived in the first stage and allowing for the fixed costs.
    The cost minimization problem of tradable intermediate firms of variety φ in country i is

                                                                                                       X
                                                                                                        S
          C qi,s (φ);   wi , {Pi,s′ }Ss′ =1       =               min                   wi li,s (φ) +           Pi,s′ mi,s′ s (φ),
                                                      (li (φ), {mi,s′ s (φ)}S
                                                                            s′ =1
                                                                                  )≥0
                                                                                                        s′ =1

subject to (4), where wi denotes the wage in country i.
   The solution to the cost minimization problem yields the following variable cost function for
each producer of variety φ in country i and sector s:
                                                                           xi,s
                                              C (qi,s (φ); xi,s ) =             qi,s (φ).                                            (49)
                                                                            φ
The marginal cost of each producer is then given by
                                                                                   xi,s
                                                  M Ci,s (qi,s (φ); xi,s ) =            .                                            (50)
                                                                                    φ

C     Proofs of Theorems 1 to 4 and Corollary 5

Theorem 1 The mass of entering firms Ni is the same under free trade and prohibitive tariffs.
If and only if α < 1, then: (a) near the free trade equilibrium reducing the tariff will increase
entry; (b) near the prohibitive tariff, reducing the tariff will decrease entry; (c) entry is lower at all
intermediate tariff levels than under free trade or prohibitive tariffs.

Proof. Parts (a) and (b) have been shown already, but not part (c). The latter can be seen to
follow from (25), (28), (27), and (29), as follows. From (25) using (28) and (27) we see that
                                                                       
                                                1 + tλHH    t (1 − λHH )
                          YH = α L       1 − γ̃          −α                .
                                                  1+t           1+t

It follows from (29) that NH = (σ−1)αL/[(1 − γ̃) σfiE ] when t = 0 or λHH = 1. It then follows that
NH ≤ (σ − 1)αL/[(1 − γ̃) σfiE ] at all other tariff equilibria provided that for t > 0 and λHH < 1,
                                                                   
                    1 + λHH t               1 + λHH t         (1 − λHH )        1
                                   1 − γ̃                − αt              <          .
                      1+t                     1+t                1+t         (1 − γ̃)

Straightforward but tedious algebra shows this condition is satisfied for α < 1 regardless of the
value of γ.

Theorem 2 (a) Starting from free trade, a small increase in the tariff dt in country H is worse than
a small increase in iceberg transport costs, where both lead to the same change in λHH , if and only
if d ln UH < − (1−γ)
                  α
                      θ d ln λHH . (b) A necessary and sufficient condition for this to occur is that



                                                                    45
[(κ∆ − 1) /(1 − γ) θ] + 1/(1 − γ
                               e) < 0, or equivalently:
                                                                 
                                             σ(1 − α) + κ−1 − 1
                                 γ >1−                              .
                                            (σ − 1)(σ + 1 − κ−1 )

(c) Condition (36) can hold only if γ > 0 (production linkages are present) or α < 1 (the service
sector is present).

Proof. Part (a) is established in the main text and Appendix A. For part (b), re-write the welfare
change expression from (35) as
                                                                           
                 dUH           α     dλHH      α(1 − λ)            α(1 − λ)
                       =−                  +            (κ∆ − 1) +            dt.
                  UH        θ(1 − γ) λHH       θ(1 − γ)             1 − γ̃

Since λ < 1, for d ln UH < − (1−γ)θ
                               α
                                    d ln λHH , it is necessary and sufficient that

                                       α                  α
                                             (κ∆ − 1) +        < 0.                               (51)
                                    θ(1 − γ)            1 − γ̃

Using γ̃ = γ σ−1
              σ and re-arranging the terms we obtain the condition on γ as in (36).
   To establish part (c), note that the bracketed term on the right of (36) is less than unity if and
only if,
               σ(1 − α) + κ−1 − 1 < (σ − 1)(σ + 1 − κ−1 ) = σ(σ − κ−1 ) − 1 + κ−1 ,
or (1 − α) < (σ − κ−1 ) > 0. If we choose α = 1 then this inequality is satisfied, so in that case (36)
implies that γ > 0. Conversely, if γ = 0 then ∆ = α and so (51) becomes (α/θ)(κα − 1) + α < 0,
which can hold only if α < 1, which establishes part (c).

   The proofs of Theorems 3 and 4 use results derived in Appendix D. For Theorem 3, we prove
a more technical version here that implies the version stated in the main text.

Theorem 3 ′ A small increase in the tariff dt in country H starting from free trade will reduce
welfare if (36) holds and also a polynomial denoted by f (γ) is non-negative. If λ = 1 then f (0) > 0
and f (1) = 0, while for 0.5 ≤ λ < 1 and θ ≥ (1 − α) then f (0) > 0 and f (1) > 0. In addition,
f (γ ∗ ) < 0 for some intermediate values 0 < γ ∗ < 1 when λ is close to unity.

Proof. Consider the welfare change formula in (23), where dTH = dt (1−λ)YH = dt (1−λ)αL/(1−
e) with TH = 0 in the SFTE. From here, the necessary and sufficient condition for the negative
γ
optimal tariff is                                       
                                     dPH          1−α
                                             >             dt
                                     PH t=0       1 − γ̃
    Plugging in the solution for dPH /PH from (65) and re-arranging terms, a sufficient condition
for this inequality to hold is that (see Appendix D):

                 f (γ) ≡ a(γ 2 − γ 3 ) + b(γ − γ 2 ) + c(1 − γ) + 2(κ − 1)(1 − λ)2 γ ≥ 0.

The coefficients b and c depend on γ̃ ≡ γ σ−1
                                           σ unless λ = 1. For γ = 0, we show in Appendix D that
c > 0 provided that λ ≥ 0.5 and θ ≥ σ(1 − α). It follows immediately that f (0) > 0 and also that
f (1) > 0 provided λ < 1, with f (1) = 0 when λ = 1. The further result that f (γ ∗ ) < 0 for some
intermediate values 0 < γ ∗ < 1 is proved in Appendix D.

                                                   46
Theorem 4 Consider an economy near an SFTE with zero tariffs initially, but with τ > 1. Then for
small increases in the home tariff dt > 0, the welfare change is:
   (a) For γ = 0 (no linkages):
                                                                      
                           1    d ln UH          α          (κ + θ)2
                    lim                        =     ακ −                + |{z}
                                                                             α
                    λ→1 (1 − λ)    dt   γ=t=0    θ        2(κ + θ) − 1    revenue
                                                                                       effect
                               κ−(θ−1)(σ−1)
which is negative for 0 < α <    2(κ+θ)−1        < 0.5. It follows that the optimal home tariff is negative.
   (b) For γ → 1 (strong linkages):

                              d ln UH                 α(1 − λ)
                lim (1 − γ)                    =−              [κσ(1 − α) + θ] +        0
                                                                                       |{z}
                γ→1              dt      t=0             2θ
                                                                                     vanishing
                                                                                   revenue effect

which is negative for all 0.5 < λ < 1 and 0 < α ≤ 1. It follows again that the optimal home tariff
is negative.

Proof. Using dTH = dt (1 − λ)YH = dt (1 − λ)αL/(1 − γ
                                                    e) with TH = 0 in the SFTE in (23) , the
welfare change is,

                                  dUH                    dPH   dt(1 − λ)α
                                                 = −α        +                                         (52)
                                  UH      t=0            PH      (1 − γ̃)
When γ = 0, then γ̃ = 0, ∆ = α, and the welfare change becomes
                               dUH                      dPH
                                                = −α                + dt(1 − λ)α
                               UH       γ=t=0           PH    γ=0

   Dividing through by (1 − λ), using (66) and taking the limit as λ → 1 obtains part (a) of
Theorem 4.
   To prove part (b), multiply (52) through by 1 − γ and take the limit using expression (67) and
the fact that Γ → 1 as γ → 1.

Corollary 5 The change in the home share as the tariff increases from SFTE is:
   (a) For γ = 0 (no linkages):
                                         1    d ln λHH
                                  lim                    > 0.
                                  λ→1 (1 − λ)     dt
   (b) For γ → 1 (strong linkages): If ∆ ≥ 0 then,

                                                   d ln λHH
                                                lim         > 0.
                                               γ→1     dt

Proof. From equation (35) it follows that

                        1    d ln UH    α       1 d ln λHH  α
                 lim                 = − lim               + (κ∆ − 1) + α
                 λ→1 (1 − λ)    dt      θ λ→1 1 − λ   dt    θ




                                                         47
At the same time, part (a) of Theorem 4 states that
                                                                   
                               1    d ln UH   α          (κ + θ)2
                        lim                 =     ακ −                +α
                        λ→1 (1 − λ)    dt     θ        2(κ + θ) − 1

Combining these two equations and using ∆ = α when γ = 0, we obtain

                                1    d ln λHH             (κ + θ)2
                           lim                > 0 f or               > 1.
                         λ→1 (1 − λ)     dt            2 (κ + θ) − 1

The condition on the right is always satisfied, as can by seen by shifting the denominator of the
ratio to the right and rewriting the condition as (κ + θ − 1)2 > 0, which holds because κ > 1. This
proves part (a).
    Analogously, to proof part (b) use equation (35) to write

                                  d ln UH    α     d ln λHH   α(1 − λ)
                   lim (1 − γ)            = − lim           +          (κ∆ − 1) .
                   γ→1               dt      θ γ→1     dt        θ

Combining this with part (b) of Theorem 4, which states

                                         d ln UH    α(1 − λ)
                           lim (1 − γ)           =−          [κσ(1 − α) + θ] ,
                           γ→1              dt         2θ
we obtain the condition:
                             d ln λHH               κσ (1 − α) + θ
                           lim        > 0 f or κ∆ +                > 1.
                         γ→1     dt                        2

Noting that ∆ = 1 − σ(1 − α) when γ = 1, the above condition is rewritten as
                                                            
                          d ln λHH                  σ(1 − α)      θ
                      lim          > 0 f or κ 1 −              + > 1.
                      γ→1     dt                        2         2

If σ(1 − α) ≤ 1 then this condition is easier to satisfy then that in part (a), so it always holds. Note
that σ(1 − α) ≤ 1 is equivalant to ∆ ≥ 0, which proves part (b).


D    Two-Sector, Two-Country Model with a Change in the Home
     Tariff
We start at a symmetric free trade equilibrium, where the home country is unilaterally changing its
tariffs, so that tHF = 0 throughout while tF H = t, and the latter is zero initially but then changes
by dt. We further normalize wH ≡ 1 but determine wF endogenously. We totally differentiate all
endogenous terms starting at the symmetric free trade equilibrium (SFTE).
    Define the terms,
                                                           σ−1−θ
                                              wj (1 + tji ) σ−1
                                  Aji = Nj                         ,                             (53)
                                                   Yi
where                                                                  −θ
                                         θ          −θ+σ−1         σ
                                 Bji =       (σfji ) σ−1                      .
                                       θ+1−σ                      σ−1

                                                     48
   The costs of production are,
                                          xi = γ̄ (wi )1−γ (Pi )γ ,
with γ̄ = γ γ (1 − γ)(1−γ) . Then using Aji , Bji , xi , and (13) for the two-sector two-country case, we
obtain
                               h                                              i− 1
                         Pi = Aii Bii (xi )−θ + Aji Bji (xj τji (1 + tji ))−θ
                                                                                 θ
                                                                                   ,                 (54)

for tF H = t and tHF = 0, where the trade shares are denoted by
                                                                         −θ
                                                          xj (1 + tji )
                                      λji = Aji Bji                             .                    (55)
                                                               Pi

    We need to develop equations for dPH /PH and dPF /PF , which we can compute from (54).
Differentiating this for home and foreign, and using d ln (1 + t) = dt since t = 0 initially,

           dPH    1
               = − {λHH ( d ln AHH − θ d ln xH ) + λF H [ d ln AF H − θ d ln xF − θdt]} ,
           PH     θ
                dPF    1
                    = − {λF F ( d ln AF F − θ d ln xF ) + λHF ( d ln AHF − θ d ln xH )} ,
                PF     θ
   Then using all the above equations with λF F = λHH = λ at the SFTE, we obtain

                                                                                     
          dPH         1                      λ d ln AHH − λθ d ln xH
                  = −
          PH          θ       + (1 − λ) d ln AF H − (1 − λ) θ d ln xF − (1 − λ) θdt
                                                                                   
                                λ d ln NH − λθγ d ln PH − (1 − κ) d ln YH
                        1                                                          
                  = −             + (1 − λ) [(1 − κ) d ln wF + (1 − κ) dt]            ,
                      θ                                                            
                         −(1 − λ)θ(1 − γ) d ln wF − (1 − λ)θγ d ln PF − (1 − λ) θdt

where the second line uses dwH = 0 and dNF = 0, and with κ ≡ θ/(σ − 1) > 1. Simplifying, we
obtain,
                                                                                        
     dPH          1              λ d ln NH − (1 − κ) d ln YH − (1 − λ)θγ d ln PF
         =−                                                                                . (56)
     PH       (1 − λγ)θ    + (1 − λ) [1 − κ − θ(1 − γ)] d ln wF + (1 − λ) (1 − κ − θ) dt

   For the foreign country we have,
                                                                   
             dPF         1          λ d ln AF F − λθ d ln xF
                    = −
              PF         θ   + (1 − λ) d ln AHF − (1 − λ) θ d ln xH
                                                                               
                         1 −[λθ(1 − γ) + (1 − λ) (1 − κ)] d ln wF − λθγ d ln PF
                    = −                                                           ,
                         θ          + (1 − λ) d ln NH − (1 − λ)θγ d ln PH

where the second line uses d ln YF = d ln wF and dNF = 0. Finally we obtain,
                                                                              
                dPF             1        (1 − λ) d ln NH − (1 − λ)θγ d ln PH
                      =−                                                         .                  (57)
                 PF        (1 − λγ)θ    −[(1 − λ) (1 − κ) + λθ(1 − γ)] d ln wF

   Multiply (56) and (57) by (1−λγ)θ, take their difference, and then divide by the term appearing
on their difference, [(1 − λγ) + (1 − λ)γ]θ = [1 + (1 − 2λ)γ]θ, to obtain:


                                                      49
                                                                                         
                                               (1 − 2λ)d ln NH + (1 − κ) d ln YH       
       dPH   dPF                 1
           −           =                    +[θ(1 − 2λ)(1 − γ) − 2(1 − λ)(1 − κ)] d ln wF   .           (58)
       PH    PF          [1 + (1 − 2λ)γ]θ                                                
                                                       − (1 − λ) (1 − κ − θ) dt
                                                                                       λF H
   Now we need to solve for d ln wF . We use the trade balance condition               (1+t) YH   = λHF YF .
Totally differentiating at the SFTE, and using d ln YF = d ln wF we obtain

                             d ln wF = −d ln λHF + d ln λF H + d ln YH − dt.                            (59)

Now use (55) for λF H to solve for d ln λF H ,

                            d ln λF H = d ln AF H − θ d ln xF − θdt + θ d ln PH ,

and, given that from (53)

                        d ln AF H = (1 − κ) d ln wF + (1 − κ) dt − (1 − κ) d ln YH ,

we obtain,

                d ln λF H    = [1 − κ − θ(1 − γ)] d ln wF − θγ d ln PF + (1 − κ − θ) dt
                                  − (1 − κ) d ln YH + θ d ln PH .

Likewise, we can use (55) for λHF to find that

               d ln λHF = (∆ − 1)(1 − λ)dt − (1 − κ)d ln wF − θγd ln PH + θd ln PF .

   Substituting the above equations into (59) implies that

 [2κ−1+θ(1−γ)]d ln wF = θ(1+γ)(d ln PH −d ln PF )+κd ln YH −[κ + θ + (∆ − 1)(1 − λ)] dt. (60)

   Now we can substitute (58) into the above expression along with (31) and (33), and simplify to
obtain,

    [2κ − 1 + θ(1 − γ)] d ln wF     = [(∆(κ − 1) + 1)(1 − λ) − κ − θ] dt
                                      (1 + γ)(1 − λ)
                                                      [(1 − 2λ)(∆ − 1) + (1 − κ)∆ − 1 + κ + θ] dt
                                       1 + (1 − 2λ)γ
                                          (1 + γ)
                                                     [2(κ − 1)(1 − λ) + (1 − 2λ)(1 − γ)θ] dwF .
                                      1 + (1 − 2λ)γ

   Multipying by [1 + (1 − 2λ)γ], we obtain:

                                          Cd ln wF = (1 − λ)Ddt,                                        (61)

where,
                                  C ≡ 2λ [(κ + θ)(1 − γ) − 1] + (1 + γ),                                (62)




                                                     50
and,
                                                  
                                            κ+θ
        D ≡ [1 + (1 − 2λ)γ] ∆(κ − 1) + 1 −           + (1 + γ) [(2λ + κ − 2)(1 − ∆) + θ] .                             (63)
                                           (1 − λ)

   Now that we have solved for the change in foreign wages dwF , we still need to obtain the
expression for the change in the home price index dPH . Substitute (57) into (56) and define
Γ ≡ [(1 − λ)γ]/(1 − λγ) to obtain

                                                                                                  
                                          λ d ln NH − (1 − κ) d ln YH                             
        dPH
(1−λγ)θ     =−   +Γ {(1 − λ) d ln NH − (1 − λ)θγ d ln PH − [(1 − λ) (1 − κ) + λθ(1 − γ)] d ln wF }   .
        PH                                                                                        
                           + (1 − λ) [1 − κ − θ(1 − γ)] d ln wF + (1 − λ) (1 − κ − θ) dt
                                              h             i
                                                     (1−λ)γ
Note that (1 − λγ)θ − Γ(1 − λ)γθ = (1 − λγ)θ 1 − Γ (1−λγ)     = (1 − λγ)θ(1 − Γ2 ) = (1 − λγ)θ(1 −
Γ)(1 + Γ), and also that (1 − λγ)θ(1 − Γ) = (1 − γ)θ. Then we have

                                                                                              
                                         [λ + Γ (1 − λ)] d ln NH − (1 − κ) d ln YH            
               dPH        1
       (1 + Γ)     =−            + {(1 − Γ) (1 − λ) (1 − κ) − [Γλ + (1 − λ)] θ(1 − γ)} d ln wF   .                     (64)
               PH     (1 − γ)θ                                                                
                                                    + (1 − λ) (1 − κ − θ) dt

   Finally, substitute (61) into (64), and also use (31) and (33), to obtain:

                                                                                                              
       dPH       (1 − λ)dt                    [λ + Γ (1 − λ)] (∆ − 1) − (1 − κ) ∆ + (1 − κ − θ)
           =−                                                                                                      .   (65)
        PH    (1 + Γ)(1 − γ)θ            + {(1 − Γ) (1 − λ) (1 − κ) − [Γλ + (1 − λ)] θ(1 − γ)} (D/C)


   Notice that when γ = 0 then Γ = 0 and ∆ = α and so using (62) and (63),
                                                                      
                            1   d ln PH         1           (θ + κ)2
                     lim                      =     −ακ +                .                                             (66)
                    λ→1 (1 − λ)    dt   γ=t=0   θ         2(θ + κ) − 1
   Also, when γ = 1 then Γ = 1 and (1 − ∆) = σ(1 − α), and so,

                                             d ln PH              (1 − λ)
                               lim (1 − γ)                   =            [κσ(1 − α) + θ] .                            (67)
                               γ→1              dt     t=0           2θ
   With this, in Appendix C we can now take the final steps to prove Theorem 4 in the main text.
   To prove Theorem 3′ , notice that from (23), using dTH = dt (1 − λ)YH = dt (1 − λ)αL/(1 − γ  e)
with TH = 0 in the SFTE, the necessary and sufficient condition for the negative optimal tariff is
                                                         
                                     dPH          1−α
                                             >              dt
                                      PH t=0       1 − γ̃

   Using (65) and re-arranging terms, this condition can be re-stated as
                                                                                                                                
d ln wF       [λΓ + (1 − λ)] θ + [(1 − λ)(κ − 1)/(1 − γλ)]                1−λ          1−λ              [(Γ − 1)(1 − λ) + κ] (1 − ∆)
                                                                  >              −                   −
   dt                           (1 + Γ)θ                                  1 − γ̃   (1 + Γ)(1 − γ)             (1 + Γ)(1 − γ)θ
                                                                                                                       (68)



                                                             51
                        (1−λ)γ
   Recall that Γ ≡       1−λγ    and γ̃ = γ σ−1
                                             σ and further simplify (68) to obtain
                                                                                           
                        d ln wF        θγ                                    θγ
  (θ + κ − 1) (1 − γ)           >            + (1 − ∆) (1 − λ)(1 − γ) −             + κ(1 − ∆) (1 − λγ) (69)
                           dt       (1 − γ̃)                              (1 − γ̃)σ

                d ln wF       (1−λ)D
   From (61),      dt     =      C   ,   which is convenient to re-write as

                                                   d ln wF   E 1
                                                           =   − ,
                                                      dt     C  2
where E ≡ −2γλ(1 − λ)∆κ + [(1 − λ)(1 − ∆) − 0.5] [2λ − (1 + γ)] . Using this expression in (68),
the necessary and sufficient condition for the negative optimal tariff becomes:
                                                                                        
     E       1       1            θγ                  (1 − λγ)        θγ
    − <− +                               + κ(1 − ∆)            −            + (1 − ∆) (1 − λ) .
     C       2 θ+κ−1           (1 − γ̃)σ                1−γ        (1 − γ̃)

   If condition (36) holds, then a sufficient condition for the negative optimal tariff is
                                                       h                i
                           E    1               γ
                                                           θγ
                                                          1−γ̃ + (1 − ∆)  
                        − < + (1 − λ)                 −                     .
                           C    2            1 − γ          θ+κ−1        

Multiplying through by C > 0 and simplifying using 1 − ∆ =                     1−α
                                                                               1−γ̃   we reach the following sufficient
condition
                                                                                                               
                                                         (θ + κ − 1) [λ(1
                                                                        h − γ) + (1 + γ)(1 − λ)]i               
                                         
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
                                         
                                                        +(θ + κ − 1) 2(1−λ)
                                                                                2
                                                                                γ
                                                                                  + 2λ(1 − λ)γθ                 
                                                                                                                
                                                                          1−γ                                  
                             1
 0 < λ(θ + κ − 2)(1 − γ) +                          + 1−γ̃ [(1 − α)(θ + κ − 1) [2λγκ + (2λ − 1)γ − 1]]
                                                      1−λ                                                           . (70)
                           θ+κ−1 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
                                 
                                                   − 1−λ  [(1 − α)(2λ − 1)(1 − γ) − (1 − α)2(1 − λ)]           
                                                                                                                
                                 
                                                     1−γ̃                                                      
                                                                                                                
                                             − 1−λ
                                               1−γ̃
                                                    [θγ(θ + κ − 1)2λ(1 − γ) − θγ(2λ − 1)(1 − γ) − θγ2(1 − λ)]

   To further simplify this condition, we re-write the right-hand side expression as a sum of three
terms and find the condition under which each of the terms is positive.
   Consider the first term
                                                       
                                 2(1 − λ)2 γ     1−λ
                               θ             −            θγ2(1 − λ).
                                    1−γ          1 − γ̃
Since γ̃ > γ, this expression is always positive.
   Next, consider the following grouping of terms from the right-hand side of the above inequality:
                                                                    1−α
                                               (1 + γ) + 2λγθ −            ,
                                                                    1 − γ̃

and multiply it though by σ(1 − γ̃). For the resulting expression to be positive, we need:

                                 (1 + γ (1 + 2λθ)) (σ(1 − γ) + γ) > (1 − α) σ.

   Simplifying this condition we obtain a simple quadratic (in γ) inequality:

                                 γ 2 (1 + 2λθ) (1 − σ) + γ (1 + 2σλθ) + ασ > 0.


                                                            52
    This expression achieves its maximum at γ ∗ = 12 (σ−1)(1+2λθ)
                                                       (1+2σλθ) , at which the value of the quadratic
inequality is positive. Hence, since the above inequality is satisfied for both γ = 0 and γ = 1, it is
positive for all γ ∈ [0, 1].
    Finally, combining the remaining terms on the right-hand side of (70) gives

                                                         2(1 − λ)2 γ
                      0 ≤ (θ + κ − 1) λ(1 − γ) + (κ − 1)             +
                                                            1−γ
                                                                             
                                   (1 − α)(θ + κ − 1) [2λγκ + (2λ − 1)γ] 
                            1−λ
                                       −(1 − α) [(2λ − 1)(1 − γ) + 2(1 − λ)]
                            1 − γ̃                                           
                                       −θγ [(θ + κ − 1)2λ + (2λ − 1)] (1 − γ)

Further simplification and cancellation of terms results in the following condition that guarantees
that (70) is satisfied:

                                                                 
                               1−λ
 0 ≤ (1 − γ) (θ + κ − 1)λ +           (1 − α) − θγ ((θ + κ)2λ − 1)
                               1 − γ̃
                                                                  
    1−λ
+          [(1 − α)(θ + κ − 1)γ(2λκ + 2λ − 1) − (1 − α)2(1 − γλ)] + (κ − 1)2(1 − λ)2 γ/(1 − γ).
    1 − γ̃

   Re-arranging the terms, we get the following polynomial on the right-hand side of this inequality,
which we denote as f (γ):

                  f (γ) ≡ a(γ 2 − γ 3 ) + b(γ − γ 2 ) + c(1 − γ) + 2(κ − 1)(1 − λ)2 γ ≥ 0,         (71)

where
    a ≡ θ [(θ + κ)2λ − 1]
        1−λ
    b≡         (1 − α) [(θ + κ − 1)(2λκ + 2λ − 1) + (2λ − 1)] − θ [(θ + κ)2λ − 1] − (θ + κ − 1)λ
        1 − γ̃
                         1−λ
    c ≡ (θ + κ − 1)λ −          (1 − α).
                         1 − γ̃

   Notice that both b and c depend on γ̃ ≡ γ σ−1  σ unless λ = 1. When λ = 1, then b and c are
constants and f (γ) is a proper cubic polynomial with f (0) = c > 0 and f (1) = 0. For λ < 1,
however, that f (γ) or more precisely f (γ)(1 − γ̃) is a higher-order polynomial. Also note that in
order to have c > 0 when γ = 0, we require

                                          (θ + κ − 1)λ > (1 − λ)(1 − α).

Since κ ≡ σ−1
            θ
               > 1 and λ ≥ (1 − λ) because λ ≥ 0.5, a sufficient condition for c > 0 is θ ≥ (1 − α).
   We now investigate values of γ such that f (γ) > 0 or f (γ) < 0, to prove Theorem 4. First,
consider the change in f (0) and f (1) when λ decreases from unity:

                  f (0)         − f (0)         = −(θ + κ − 1)(1 − λ) − (1 − α)(1 − λ) < 0,
                          λ<1             λ=1

                  f (1)         − f (1)         = 2(κ − 1)(1 − λ)2 > 0.
                          λ<1             λ=1




                                                          53
Notice that both f (0)           and f (1)           are positive, which follows directly from (71):
                           λ<1                λ<1


                                        f (0)          = c > 0 for θ > (1 − α),
                                                λ<1

                                        f (1)          = 2(κ − 1)(1 − λ)2 > 0.
                                                λ<1

Therefore, when λ goes down from unity, f (0) decreases but remains positive, while f (1) increases
from zero to a strictly positive number.
    What remains to show to prove Theorem 4 is that f (γ ∗ ) < 0 for some intermediate value
0 < γ ∗ < 1 provided that λ is sufficiently close to unity. This result follows from differentiating
(71) to obtain: limλ→1 f ′ (1) = 0 and limλ→1 f ′′ (1) < 0. The latter result follows from taking the
second derivative of (71) and its limit when λ → 1:

                                                             1   θ+κ−1
                            lim f ′′ (γ) < 0 ⇔ γ >             −             ∈ (0, 1/2) .
                            λ→1                              2 θ(θ + κ)2 − 1

Because limλ→1 f (1) = 0 with limλ→1 f ′ (1) = 0 and limλ→1 f ′′ (1) < 0, it follows that f (γ) must
fall below zero for γ slightly below unity, provided that λ is sufficiently close to unity.


E    Equilibrium conditions of the model in relative changes
To gain traction with the model when taking it to the data, we express the equilibrium conditions in
relative terms using “hat” notation for the ratio of after-versus-before levels for a given perturbation,
that is, zb = z ′ /z for any variable z. As shown below, the equilibrium conditions of our model can
be expressed as follows, where the change in the price of the input bundle is given by
                                                                S 
                                                                Y                 γi,s′ s
                                           x̂i,s ≡ (ŵi )γi,s            P̂i,s′              ,                        (72)
                                                                s′ =1

the change in the price index
                                     h                                              i− 1
                              P̂i,s = (λii,s )1−ξs Λ̂ξiis + (1 − λii,s )1−ξs Λ̂ξjis
                                                                                      ξs θs
                                                                                            ,                         (73)

                                                              P
                                                              S P
                                                                M            h                        i−θs
where ξs ≡          (σs −1)(1−ωs )
             −θs (σs −ωs )+(σs −1)(1−ωs ) ,   and Λ̂ji ≡                            τ ji,s (1\
                                                                        λji,s x̂j,s b        + tji,s )     Âji,s .
                                                             s=1 j̸=i
    The change in trade shares is given by
                                                    !−θs              !−θs 1−ωs
                                                                             1−σs
                                            x̂i,s            P̂ii,s
                          λ̂ii,s =                                                   Âii,s ,                         (74)
                                           P̂ii,s            P̂i,s
                                       "                              #−θs                !−θs 1−ωs
                                                 τ ji,s (1\
                                           x̂j,s b                                   F           1−σs
                                                          + tji,s )               P̂i,s
                          λ̂ji,s =                      F
                                                                                                        Âji,s ,
                                                     P̂i,s                        P̂i,s




                                                                54
                  ξs σsσ−1−θs                   ξs
                                                                        ξs σsσ−1−θs                      1−ω
                                                                                                            ξs
                         −1          Λ̂ii        1−ωs        F = P̂            −1               Λ̂ji             s
where P̂ii,s = P̂i,s     s
                                     λii,s              , P̂i,s     i,s
                                                                                 s
                                                                                               1−λii,s               , and,

                                                                                                 ! σsσ−1−θs
                                                                       ŵj (1\
                                                                                                       −1s
                                                                             + tji,s )
                                              Âji,s ≡ N̂j,s                                                    .                                  (75)
                                                                                 Ŷi,s

    The remaining equilibrium conditions are,

                                             X
                                             S                  X
                                                                M
                                                                       λ′ij,s′                                   
                                  ′
                                Yi,s   =             γ̃ i,ss′                     Y′ ′       + αi,s wi′ L′i + Ti′ ,                                (76)
                                                                      1+   t′ij,s′ j,s
                                             s′ =1              j=1

with tariff revenue given by
                                                                X
                                                                S X
                                                                              t′ji,s
                                                      Ti′   =                                  ′
                                                                                       λji,s Yi,s ,                                                (77)
                                                                            1 + t′ji,s
                                                                s=1 j̸=i

trade balance
                                        X
                                        S X
                                          M
                                                           λ′ji,s       X
                                                                        S X
                                                                          M
                                                                              λ′ij,s
                                                                     ′
                                                                   Y =                Y′ ,                                                         (78)
                                                         1 + t′ji,s i,s     1 + t′ij,s j,s
                                        s=1 j=1                                      s=1 j=1

and the final condition for firm entry,
                                                                      PM \
                                                                         λij,s
                                                                           j=1 1+tij,s Yj,s
                                                            N̂i,s ≡                                 .                                              (79)
                                                                                     ŵi
    As we can see, by expressing the model in this way we can analyze the effects of tariff changes
without needing information of fixed entry and operating costs which are, in general, difficult to
estimate in the data, especially at the necessary disaggregation. The only identification restriction
we will impose is that these fixed have not changed over time. The above system of equations can
then be used to study the impact of a change in tariffs (1\      + tji,s ) (as well as the change in iceberg
costs, b
       τ ji,s ).
    To justify this set of equations, we return to the equilibrium conditions in the main text. The
                                                                        E , γ , and γ
parameters of the model are αi,s , σs , ωs , fii,s , τij,s , θs , δ, fi,s     i,s       i,ss′ , subject to the
               PS               PS
constraints s=1 αi,s = 1 and s′ =1 γi,ss′ + γi,s = 1. The equilibrium conditions to solve the model
are then as follows: M × M × S ZCP conditions (10),
                                                                        1                            ωs −1
                                   σs                 σs wi fii,s         σs −1      xi,s        Pii,s       σs −1
              φ∗ii,s    =
                                 σs − 1                  Yi,s                        Pii,s       Pi,s
                                                                        1                                         σs             ! ωs −1
                                                                                                                               F       σs −1
                                   σs                 σs wi fij,s         σs −1      xi,s τij,s (1 + tij,s ) σs −1            Pj,s
              φ∗ij,s =                                                                                                                         ;
                                 σs − 1                  Yj,s                                      F
                                                                                                 Pj,s                         Pj,s

M × S goods market equilibria (18),

                                σs − 1 XS           XM     λij,s′
                       Yi,s =            ′
                                             γi,ss′                 Yj,s′ + αi,s (wi Li + Ti ) ;
                                  σs    s =1         j=1 1 + τij,s′




                                                                            55
M × S sectoral prices (13),
                                                                1
                                                           F 1−ωs 1−ωs
                                   Pi,s = (Pii,s )1−ωs + Pi,s

where
                                                                    1−σs ! 1−σ
                                                                               1
                                                                                 s
                                                       σs xi,s
                Pii,s =      φ∗ii,s −θs Ni,s
                                                     σs − 1 φ̃ii,s

                             XM                                                                        1−σs ! 1−σ
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                    s
                                                                 σs xj,s τji,s (1 + tji,s )
                  F
                Pi,s =                   φ∗ji,s −θs Nj,s                                                                ;
                                  j̸=i                         σs − 1        φ̃ji,s

M × M × S expenditure shares (15),
                                                                         1−σs    
                                                      σs       xi,s            Pii,s 1−ωs
                 λii,s =    φ∗ii,s −θs Ni,s                                               ,
                                                    σs − 1 φ̃ii,s Pii,s        Pi,s
                                                                                 !1−σs       !1−ωs
                                                                                           F
                                                                                        Pi,s
                                                      σs τji,s xj,s (1 + tji,s )
                 λji,s = φ∗ji,s −θs Nj,s                                                           ;
                                                    σs − 1              F
                                                               φ̃ji,s Pi,s              Pi,s

M × S free entry conditions (11),

                                         X
                                         M
                                                                     θs − σ s + 1 E
                                               fij,s φ∗ij,s −θs =                fi,s ;
                                                                        σs − 1
                                         j=1

M × S input bundle costs (5),

                                                                Y
                                                                S
                                                                                         γi,s′ s
                                  xi,s ≡ (wi /γi,s )γi,s                Pi,s′ /γi,s′ s              ;
                                                                s′ =1

and M trade balances (17),
                        XS        XM             λji,s          XS X M     λij,s
                                                         Yi,s =                    Yj,s .
                            s=1      j=1       1 + τji,s         s=1 j=1 1 + τij,s

      We now show how we can express the model in relative changes. Consider the impact of a
change in iceberg costs τji,s and/or tariffs tji,s . Denote equilibrium prices and allocations under
policy vector (τ , t), by the vector y and equilibrium prices and allocations under policy vector
(τ ′ , t′ ), by the vector y ′ . In the hat notation, we let ŷ = y ′ /y denote the relative change in
equilibrium prices and allocations after a change               in policy, for any element y of the vector y.
Similarly, b             ′                 \                   ′
               τ ji,s = τji,s /τji,s and (1 + tji,s ) = 1 + tji,s / (1 + tji,s ).
      Using input bundle costs (5) before and after a change in policy, we can easily obtain (72). We
then proceed to solve for the change in sectoral prices. First we solve for prices after a change in
policy using equation (13),
                                                      h                         i
                                          ′ 1−ωs           ′              ′F 1−ωs
                                        Pi,s        = Pii,s  )1−ωs + (Pi,s


                                                                56
                                                                                    !1−σs  1−σ
                                                                                               1

                                                                   σs x′i,s
                                                                                                 s
                                −θs ′
                   ′
                 Pii,s = φ∗′      Ni,s                                                    
                           ii,s
                                                                 σs − 1 φ̃′ii,s
                                                                     1−σs  1−σ
                                                                                   1
                                                         ′ ′         ′               s

                       F′      XM ∗ ′−θs ′  σs τji,s xj,s 1 + tji,s         
                     Pi,s    =      φ     Nj,s                                       .
                                 j̸=i ji,s        σs − 1     φ̃′ji,s


Next we use the definition of expenditure shares before the change in policy (15), and multiply and
divide each expression in the summation by (15),
                                         1−σs  P             1−ωs                  σs −1−θs
                                                                          = λii,s φd
                                                         ii,s                      ∗
                                 P̂ii,s                                            ii,s           N̂i,s (x̂i,s )1−σs                               (80)
                                                     Pi,s
                                          !1−ωs
                    1−σs         F
                                 Pi,s                    XM                       σs −1−θs                               1−σs
                F
             P̂i,s                                   =                 λji,s φd
                                                                              ∗              N̂j,s  bτ     x̂
                                                                                                       ji,s j,s (1\+ tji,s )      ,                (81)
                                                                              ji,s
                                 Pi,s                           j̸=i

                                     b̃ ji,s . Now solve for the ZCP conditions (10) in relative changes,
                           c∗ ji,s = φ
where we use the fact that φ
                                                             !     1                           ! ωs −1
                                                                 σs −1                           σs −1
                                                     ŵi                  x̂i,s       P̂ii,s
                              φd
                               ∗
                               ii,s =                                                                    ,                                         (82)
                                                     Ŷi,s               P̂ii,s        P̂i,s
                                                             !     1                                         σs                  ! ωs −1
                                                                               τ ji,s (1\
                                                                 σs −1                           σ −1                     F        σs −1
                                                     ŵj                 x̂j,s b        + tji,s ) s                    P̂i,s
                              φd
                               ∗
                               ji,s        =                                                F
                                                                                                                                                   (83)
                                                     Ŷi,s                               P̂i,s                         P̂i,s

and substitute it into (80) and (81) to obtain
                                                                                                                  !    ξs
                                                            ξs σs −1−θs           λii,s [x̂i,s ]−θs Âi,s             1−ωs

                                           P̂ii,s =      P̂i,s σs −1                                                         ,
                                                                                           λii,s

                                                                             h                                   i−θs               1−ω
                                                                                                                                       ξs
                                                             PM
                                                                                        τ ji,s (1\
                                                                                                                                           s
                                       ξs σs −1−θs              j̸=i λji,s       x̂j,s b        + tji,s )               Âji,s 
                           F
                        P̂i,s =     P̂i,s σs −1                                                                                              ,
                                                                                       (1 − λii,s )

where we define
                                                                    (σs − 1) (1 − ωs )
                                               ξs ≡
                                                           −θs (σs − ωs ) + (σs − 1) (1 − ωs )
                                                                       ! σs −1−θs
                                                                           σs −1
                                                                  ŵi
                                             Âi,s       ≡ N̂i,s                  .
                                                                 Ŷi,s
                                                                                  ! σsσ−1−θ s
                                                                 ŵj (1\+ tji,s )      s −1

                                            Âji,s       ≡ N̂j,s                              .
                                                                       Ŷi,s




                                                                                  57
and after combining terms using
                                                            1−ωs                                       !1−ωs
                                 1−ωs             Pii,s                                          F
                                                                                                 Pi,s                       1−ωs
                                                                                   1−ωs                                 F
                          P̂i,s           =                            (P̂ii,s )          +                          P̂i,s           ,
                                                    Pi,s                                         Pi,s

we obtain (73)
                                                                                         − 1
                                    P̂i,s = (λii,s )1−ξs Λ̂ξiis + (1 − λii,s )1−ξs Λ̂ξjis
                                                                                            ξs θs



                                                    P
                                                      M      h                        i−θs
and where Λ̂ii = λii,s [x̂i,s ]−θs Âi,s , and Λ̂ji =               τ ji,s (1\
                                                        λji,s x̂j,s b        + tji,s )     Âji,s .
                                                                             j̸=i
   Expenditure shares in relative changes are solved in a similar way. Start from solving for the
expenditure share after a change in policy using (15)
                                                                                         1−σs
                                                                 τ ′ x′      1 +   t ′
                                                      ′  σs      ji,s j,s           ji,s
                                                                                            
                              λ′ji,s   = φ∗ji,s ′−θs Nj,s                ′ φ̃′                    ,
                                                          σs − 1       Pi,s   ji,s


                                                                 !1−σs              !1−ωs
                                            σs
                                         −θs ′        x′i,s                      ′
                                                                              Pii,s
                 λ′ii,s     =      φ∗′      Ni,s                                          ,
                                    ii,s
                                          σs − 1 φ̃′ii,s Pii,s
                                                            ′                     ′
                                                                               Pi,s
                                                                              1−σs         !
                                                  τ ′ x′          1 +   t ′                 ′F 1−ωs
                               ∗′ −θs ′  σs        ji,s    j,s           ji,s            Pi,s
                λ′ji,s      = φji,s Nj,s                                                           ;
                                                                                            ′
                                           σs − 1          φ̃′ji,s Pi,s
                                                                     ′F                   Pi,s

take the ratio of this expression relative to the expenditure share before the change in policy,
                                                                                   !1−σs                   !1−ωs
                 λ′ii,s                        σs −1−θs                  x̂i,s                  P̂ii,s
                             =          φd
                                         ∗
                                         ii,s                  N̂i,s
                 λii,s                                                    P̂ii,s                  P̂i,s
                                                                                                           !1−σs                !1−ωs
                 λ′ji,s                        σs −1−θs                  τ̂ ji,s x̂j,s (1\
                                                                                           + tji,s )                       F
                                                                                                                        P̂i,s
                             =          φd
                                         ∗
                                         ji,s                  N̂j,s                     F
                                                                                                                                         .
                 λji,s                                                                P̂i,s                             P̂i,s

   Now use the ZCP condition in relative changes (82) and combine terms to obtain the expenditure
shares in relative changes (74),
                                                 "            #−θs               !−θs 1−ωs
                                                                                          1−σs
                                                     x̂i,s              P̂ii,s
                              λ̂ii,s =                                                            Âi,s
                                                     P̂ii,s              P̂i,s
                                                 "                                  #−θs                 !−θs 1−ωs
                                                           τ ji,s (1\
                                                     x̂j,s b                                        F         1−σs
                                                                    + tji,s )                    P̂i,s
                              λ̂ji,s =                             F
                                                                                                                      Âji,s
                                                                P̂i,s                            P̂i,s

The goods market equilibrium conditions (76) and the trade balance equilibrium conditions (78)
are given by (17) and (18) at policy (τ ′ , t′ ).
    Finally, to solve for the change in entry, note that, from the free entry condition (11) and



                                                                             58
imposing trade balance (17), we obtain

                                                     Eii,s + Ei,s
                                           Ni,s =                   ,
                                                        E     θs σ s
                                                    wi fi,s   σs −1

and expressing this in relative terms we end up with (79).



F    Domestic Sales, Expenditure Shares and Final Good Shares
In this Appendix we show how using information on tariffs, trade flows, production and with
the estimated trade elasticities we can solve for the model domestic sales, expenditure shares and
finished good shares. We then show how to aggregate tariffs in a model consistent way.

Domestic Sales To calculate domestic sales (Eii,s ) by country and sector, we need data on gross
                                                P               P       λij,s
production (GOi,s ), and total exports (Ei,s ≡     j̸=i Eij,s =   j̸=i 1+tij,s Yj,s ). Recall that gross
                                         PM λij,s
production in sector s is given by σsσ−1
                                       s   j=1 1+tij,s Yj,s . We want to solve for Eii,s = λii,s Yi,s .
Therefore, domestic sales are given by
                                                    σs
                                        Eii,s =          GOi,s − Ei,s .
                                                  σs − 1

Expenditure Shares Denote by Yij,s the total expenditure of country j on sector s goods from
country i. Total expenditure includes tariffs, therefore in order to calculate Yij,s we take imports
and multiply by tariffs. We do this at the sectoral level, namely Yij,s = Eij,s (1 + tij,s ). Note that
Yii,s = Eii,s . We then calculate expenditure shares as
                                                     X
                                       λij,s = Yij,s     Yij,s ,                                   (84)
                                                                 i
        P
where    i Yij,s   = Yj,s is total expenditure.

Finished goods consumption shares To calculate final consumption share, αi,s we take the
total expenditure of sector s goods, subtract the intermediate goods expenditure and divide by
total final absorption. Namely
                                                        PS
                                               Yi,s −    s′ =1 γi,ss′   GOi,s′
                                      αi,s =                                     ,
                                                        wi Li + Ti
                                                                                     PS     P
where wi Li is total value added and Ti tariff revenue which we calculate as Ti =     s=1   j̸=i tji,s Eji,s .


Tariff aggregation from the good level An important task is to find a model consistent
procedure to aggregate goods-level tariffs at a fine level to the correct sectoral-level equivalent at a
coarser level.
   We make the assumption that in country j and sector s there are Gj,s goods indexed by g.
Our goal is to solve for a sectoral tariff tji,s such that the change in this sectoral tariff (1 + tji,s )


                                                        59
is equivalent to the effect of the observed changes in tariffs at a goods level 1 + tji,s (g), for g =
1, ..., Gj,s .
     We calculate λij,s (g), namely the expenditure share on g goods as
                                                                    X
                              λij,s (g) = Eij,s (g) (1 + tij,s (g))    Yij,s .                     (85)
                                                                                           i

 Note that the expenditure share from country i on all Gi,s goods from country j has to equal to
the total expenditure on sector s goods from country j, therefore

                                                       X
                                                       Gj,s
                                                               λji,s (g) = λji,s .
                                                       g=1

Then the trade balance condition (17) can be re-written by adding the summation over goods g as

                        X
                        S XG
                           Xj,s
                                  λji,s (g)
                                                     S XX
                                                     X  Gi,s
                                                               λij,s (g)
                                              Yi,s =                       Yj,s .                                            (86)
                                1 + tji,s (g)                1 + tij,s (g)
                        s=1 j̸=i g=1                                      s=1 j̸=i g=1

In order for (86) to be equivalent to (17), it is apparent that the tariffs must satisfy

                                                     λji,s     X λji,s (g)
                                                                   Gj,s
                                                             ≡                .                                              (87)
                                                   1 + tji,s    1 + tji,s (g)
                                                                   g=1

   Using (84) , (85) and some manipulation we obtain a tariff aggregation formula:
                                P
                                G j,s                                                          P
                                                                                               G j,s
                                        Eji,s (g) (1 + tji,s (g))                                      Eji,s (g) tji,s (g)
                                g=1                                                            g=1
               (1 + tji,s ) =                                               ⇐⇒       tji,s =                                 (88)
                                           P
                                           G j,s                                                       P
                                                                                                       Gj,s
                                                   Eji,s (g)                                                  Eji,s (g)
                                           g=1                                                         g=1


    In other words, when aggregating over a finer set of goods g to a coarse sector level, the sectoral
aggregate tariff factor 1 + tji,s should be computed as a trade-weighted mean of the tariff factors
across the various goods g. The analogous condition must hold for computing 1 + t′ji,s in the
new equilibrium, evaluating the shares λ′ji,s (g)/λ′ji,s in this new equilibrium. Clearly, if there is a
uniform change in the goods-level tariffs 1 + tji,s (g) then the new shares would equal their initial
values λji,s (g)/λji,s , and in that case it is obvious from the above that the change in 1 + tji,s (g)
would equal the change in 1 + tji,s , i.e., the change in the sectoral tariff just equals the uniform
change in the goods-level tariffs.




                                                                    60
