                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  EXPLAINING CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY WITH NEAR-RATIONALITY:
           EVIDENCE FROM LARGE PREDETERMINED PAYMENTS

                                         Lorenz Kueng

                                      Working Paper 21772
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21772


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2015




I thank David Card, Josh Hausman, Lee Lockwood, David Matsa, Brian Melzer, Jonathan Parker
(discussant) and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2016 EF&G Research
Meeting, NBER Public Economics 2015 Fall Meeting, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, Northwestern University, George Washington University, University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, New Economic School, and the Empirical Macro Workshop for useful
comments. I am grateful to Laura Achee at the APFC for providing archival data and for patiently
answering many questions about the fund. Ryan Pfirrmann-Powell at the BLS provided expert
assistance with the confidential CE data. All remaining errors are mine. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Lorenz Kueng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Explaining Consumption Excess Sensitivity with Near-Rationality: Evidence from Large Predetermined
Payments
Lorenz Kueng
NBER Working Paper No. 21772
December 2015, Revised August 2016
JEL No. D12,D14,D91,E21,H31

                                         ABSTRACT

Using new transaction data I find that consumption is excessively sensitive to salient,
predetermined, large and regular payments from the Alaska Permanent Fund, with a large average
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of 30% for nondurables and services. This excess
sensitivity is very heterogeneous: The deviation from the standard consumption model is largest
for households for whom the loss from failing to smooth consumption is smallest in terms of
equivalent variation. The estimated MPCs are monotonically decreasing in the loss and increasing
in income for households with sufficient liquidity. I show that the economically and statistically
significant excess sensitivity is consistent with households following near-rational alternative
plans. For macroeconomic policies, such as an economic stimulus program, these near-rational
alternatives might represent the more relevant behavior than the standard consumption model.


Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                  1

    Aggregate consumption constitutes more than two-thirds of gross domestic product in al-
most all developed economies and is thus a major component of the business cycle. Under-
standing how consumers respond to cash flows is therefore fundamental for designing economic
stabilization programs, such as active fiscal policies and automatic stabilizers. The perma-
nent income life-cycle hypothesis (PILCH), the workhorse model of intertemporal consumption
choices used in one form or another in most of the literature, predicts that in the absence
of financial frictions, households will adjust their consumption plans only when they receive
new information about their life-time resources. Under this benchmark model, a household’s
optimal consumption plan should smooth out predictable changes in cash flows.
    I combine new transaction-level financial data from a personal finance website with the
repeated quasi-natural experiments provided by the large annual payments from the Alaska
Permanent Fund, the state’s sovereign wealth fund, to test this prediction. The fund invests
the proceeds from the state’s oil revenue in broadly diversified financial and real assets and uses
the cash flows from assets to pay out the Permanent Fund Dividend (PFD) annually in early
October to almost every person in Alaska.
    This paper makes two main contributions. First, it shows that despite the favorable charac-
teristics of the dividend payments for the benchmark model (i.e., predetermined, large, regular
and salient), household spending substantially deviates from the model’s prediction with an
average marginal propensity to consume (MPC) on non-durables and services of 30%.1 While
this deviation from the model is consistent with a large body of previous research, most of these
studies use cash flows that are substantially smaller, are often one-time payments, and while in
principle predictable in advance might not be very salient in practice. Finding large MPCs in
this context also differs from previous studies that have looked at payments of similar size and
regularity, such as Browning and Collado (2001) and in particular Hsieh (2003), who studies
the same experiment using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE). Both studies do not find
excess sensitivity in household spending in response to large predictable income changes, which
has been interpreted as evidence that excess sensitivity only occurs in response to small or
irregular payments.
    Second, and more importantly, this paper finds that the average spending response to the
dividend payments is largely driven by higher-income households. I document that most of
these households hold sufficient amounts of liquid assets and cash-on-hand to income ratios
such that they would in principle be able to smooth spending throughout the year. Therefore,
liquidity constraints and precautionary saving, which have previously been used as the main
explanation for excess sensitivity, fall short of explaining the behavior of these households.
Instead, I show that near-rationality explains the cross-sectional heterogeneity in spending
responses well. Near-rational plans deviate from the optimal smooth consumption plan of the
benchmark model while also respecting the intertemporal budget constraint, but they only lead
   1
     Strictly speaking, the model predicts smoothing of consumption instead of spending (or more precisely
of expected marginal utility), and most papers therefore call the degree of excess sensitivity the marginal
propensity to consume (MPC) out of predictable income changes instead of the marginal propensity to spend
(MPS). Spending and consumption might be different for more durable or storable goods, especially at higher
frequency, a point I discuss below. Nevertheless, I follow the previous literature and will mostly use the term
MPC.
           CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                           2

to small utility costs in terms of equivalent variation.
    While near-rationality has been mentioned as a potential explanation for excess sensitivity
in previous research, this paper is the first one to rigorously show evidence of near-rationality
relying on micro data from only one (repeated) experiment. Deviating from consumption
smoothing in response to the dividend payments is potentially costly for a significant fraction
of Alaskan households. For instance, the dividend in 2010 was $1,281 per person, and since
the dividend is paid lump-sum to every person in the household, including children born in
the previous year or earlier, it provides substantial cross-sectional variation in the potential
cost of failing to smooth consumption. In particular, the dividend is relatively more important
for lower-income households as a fraction of annual income. Hence, the experiment has also
economic power to reject the benchmark model.
    To quantify the cost of suboptimal behavior, I derive the money-metric loss in wealth
of deviating from the optimal plan (c∗ ) which fully smoothes consumption over time. The
potential ex-ante loss of following the specific deviation (chtm ), which spends the entire dividend
upon arrival (i.e., hand-to-mouth) while also satisfying the intertemporal budget constraint, is
monotonically increasing in the relative size of the payments ( P Fc D ) as a fraction of total annual
consumption (c),
                                                             2
                                          htm ∗         PFD
                                   Loss(c , c ) ∝                 .
                                                          c
    Importantly, this potential loss can be calculated ex-ante before the arrival of the payment
and can therefore be used as a predetermined predictor of excess sensitivity, in addition to other
predictors such as measures of credit constraints that have previously been used in the literature.
Sorting households by predetermined potential loss, I find that potential losses explain most of
the heterogeneity in MPCs across households that are not liquidity constrained. For instance,
moving from the lowest loss quintile to the highest quintile reduces the MPC from 85% to 15%,
and this result is robust to conditioning on liquid assets (both levels and cash-on-hand ratios),
income, and age, all of which have previously been used to explain excess sensitivity.
    To assess whether the estimated MPCs across potential loss quintiles are consistent with
near-rational behavior, I calculate the ex-post loss that households actually incur given the
fact that most household do not fully spend the dividend. While the potential losses increase
steeply from less than 0.1% in the lowest quintile to over 3% in the highest quintile, the actual
realized losses are very small (less than 0.1%) and similar across all quintiles. Households with
standard preferences would gain less than a day of consumption per year by fully smoothing
the dividend. The responses observed in the data are therefore consistent with near-rational
behavior, i.e., with small deviations from the standard model in terms of equivalent variation,
even though the observed actions deviate substantially from full consumption smoothing.
    While it might be intuitive that the relative size of the payments should predict excess
sensitivity, near-rationality also has implications that are perhaps more surprising. For instance,
I show that the MPCs are larger for higher-income households than for lower-income households,
and this relationship is monotonic, even after conditioning on liquid wealth. Of course, this is
precisely what one would expect since the dividend payments are a much smaller fraction of
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                         3

higher-income households’ budgets.
    The result that the MPC is increasing in income and decreasing in the size of the potential
welfare loss is particularly striking since it provides a new source of heterogeneity in MPCs
in addition to traditional liquidity constraints and precautionary saving motives. To show
this, I reproduce the standard finding that lower-income households with little liquid wealth
have high MPCs, higher than similar households with sufficient liquid assets. Importantly, this
result holds even after conditioning on income or the relative size of the payment and hence
provides an additional explanation of excess sensitivity for a different segment of the population.
Therefore, there are two groups of households that have high MPCs: low-income, low buffer-
stock households that seem likely to be liquidity constrained, and high-income households with
low utility losses from failing to smooth their dividend payments. MPCs in turn are lowest for
lower- and middle-income households who have sufficient amounts of liquid assets.
    The finding that the loss from failing to fully smooth consumption is small for most house-
holds does not mean that near-rational behavior is not relevant for macroeconomics. The
reason is that those small deviations from the standard model are correlated across households
and can therefore add up to large aggregate demand shocks. In fact, many active macroeco-
nomic policies have relatively small direct impacts on most households’ budgets, such as the
widely studied fiscal stimulus payments in 2001 and 2008 for example, but nevertheless provide
substantial economic stimulus. Hence, even though the associated individual welfare costs of
those deviations are small by definition, the observed actions can substantially deviate from
the predicted actions under the benchmark model.
    Why are the results different from Hsieh (2003), which was the first study to examine
spending responses to the Permanent Fund Dividend? That study, which uses the CE sample
from 1980 to 2001 finds a small and insignificant response. The main specification regresses
changes in log spending on the dividend payments normalized by current family income. Income
in the CE survey, however, suffers from substantial measurement error, which attenuates the
estimated spending response. To show this, I replicate the small and insignificant spending
responses reported in Hsieh (2003) using the same confidential data available at the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). I show that one can use total expenditures—which are more precisely
measured in the CE—to instrument for current income, resulting in a statistically significant
spending response that is quantitatively similar to the one reported in this paper.
    Several characteristics of the PFD make this experiment particularly useful for testing the
basic theory and, importantly, for ruling out or at least limiting previous explanations of excess
sensitivity. First, the dividend payments are highly salient and predictable. They are fully
predetermined at least one month before the payment when the annual dividend amount is
officially announced in September. They are highly predictable well before September, with
most of the relevant information being released several quarters or even years in advance. The
high predictability is due to the fact that the payments are based on a public formula which uses
the fund’s current and previous four annual incomes. Hence, most of the information necessary
for predicting the next dividend is already known the day after the last dividend has been paid
out. Second, since the payments are large, local media report on the likely size of the next
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                        4

dividend throughout the year well before it is paid out in October. Hence, households do not
have to predict the next dividend on their own; instead, they can rely on reasonable forecasts
provided by the local media. To assess these forecasts I perform a narrative analysis of all local
newspapers since the mid-1980s and I also directly calculate forecasts of the next dividend using
publicly available data released by the fund. Both series predict the next dividend well and
the average forecast error is orders of magnitude smaller than the dividend payments. Third,
the payments are repeated every year, further limiting surprise as an explanation of excess
sensitivity.
     Precautionary saving motives do not describe the observed behavior of higher-income house-
holds well. The substantial amounts of liquid assets held by most households in the sample
(both in levels and as a fraction of permanent income, i.e., the cash-on-hand ratio) and the
modest amount of income uncertainty introduced by the dividend payments limits precaution-
ary saving as a reasonable explanation of the observed excess sensitivity. Precautionary saving
motives are also inconsistent with both the cross-sectional heterogeneity in MPCs and the ob-
served dynamic response. First, precautionary saving motives predict that the MPCs would be
decreasing in income or liquid wealth and hence compete with liquidity constraints. However,
estimated MPCs are increasing in income and also in liquid wealth for high levels of wealth
where near-rationality effects dominate credit constraints. Second, as the narrative analysis
shows, uncertainty about the size of the dividend decreases throughout the fiscal year as more
and more relevant information is released, and the dividend is finally completely known at least
one month in advance. Despite this reduction in uncertainty, we do not see any corresponding
increase in spending in the months leading up to the payments in October.
     The results are also not driven by wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers and consumption
commitments or by rational inattention and optimization frictions. First, I use liquid assets to
measure liquidity constraints—cash-equivalent bank account balances—instead of potentially
illiquid net worth, which would also include housing wealth. Second, models of consumption
commitments, rational inattention and optimization frictions cannot explain why household
spending responds to fully predetermined cash flows rather than to new information about
those future cash flows. Moreover, as discussed above, the size of new information about future
PFDs is much smaller than the dividend itself. Therefore, even if households did rebalance or
update only infrequently and only at dates at which dividends are paid out, they should still only
react to the new information they received since the last time they changed their consumption
plans. However, the observed MPCs are orders of magnitude larger than what one would expect
if households only responded to new information about the dividend. Moreover, consumption
should as likely decrease as increase on those dates and need not necessarily be related to the
nominal amount of the dividend, since forecast errors due to new information are both positive
and negative as shown by the narrative analysis. Instead, households respond to the entire
dividend amount, not just the news component.
    The new transaction data help to address a number of additional concerns that naturally
arise when interpreting the spending responses to predictable income changes. For instance,
since the website automatically tracks a household’s income and spending after it has linked its
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                        5

credit card and other financial accounts, household expenditures recorded in the transaction
data are measured with substantially less error than in survey data, particularly for disaggre-
gated spending categories. Since many nondurables and services do have a durable or storable
component, especially when looking at frequencies higher than annual, so that spending does
not necessarily reflect consumption and the standard model would not necessarily be rejected,
the high quality of the spending data allows me to look at more narrowly defined nondurable
spending. Focusing on more disaggregated spending shows that spending significantly increases
across many categories in response to the dividend, including strictly nondurable categories that
have previously been used to address this issue, such as spending on groceries or restaurants.
    Similarly, the high frequency of the data allows me to trace out the dynamics of the excess
sensitivity and test for anticipation effects. These dynamics reveal two important findings.
First, households do not move their nondurable spending forward to the months prior to the
payments, even households with sufficient liquid wealth that would not have to borrow against
the future dividend. Hence, even though the payments are preannounced, the spending re-
sponse resembles that of a typical event study. Second, households adjust their spending on
nondurables and services within the first three months after receiving the lump-sum payments,
and much of the response occurs in the initial month. The cumulative effect of this additional
spending is stable after the first three months and there is no evidence of reversal due to in-
tertemporal consumption shifting. The lack of a decline in spending on nondurables in later
periods is additional evidence that potential timing differences between spending and consump-
tion, which would be consistent with models of optimal liquidity management, do not explain
the large excess sensitivity.
    One important limitation of the transaction data is that it is not a nationally representative
or a random sample. To address concerns about the external validity of the results, I compare
the average MPC based on the new transaction data to similar estimates obtained using the
CE which covers many fewer Alaskan households per period but spans the entire period since
the first dividend was paid out in 1982. After accounting for differences in sample composition
and the fraction of Alaskans that do not receive the dividend, I find that the spending response
to the dividend payments is similar in the two datasets.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 derives the approximate economic loss of
failing to fully smooth consumption. Section 2 describes the micro data and the Permanent
Fund Dividend. Section 3 shows non-parametric and parametric evidence of excess sensitivity.
Section 4 uses the economic loss statistic to predict heterogeneity in MPCs among households
with sufficient liquid assets. Section 5 shows that credit constraints help predict high MPCs for
lower-income households with low levels of liquid assets. Section 6 performs a thorough robust-
ness analysis of the excess sensitivity results and extends the analysis along several dimensions,
including the external validity check using the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Section 7 con-
cludes.
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                     6

1 Near-Rationality and Excesss Sensitivity
    Many studies have used quasi-experiments to document excess sensitivity of household con-
sumption; see e.g., Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010) for a recent survey. The insight that excess
sensitivity in consumption could be related to near-rational behavior goes back at least to
Cochrane (1989) who surveys early excess sensitivity tests based on aggregate time series,
while Browning and Crossley (2001) and Fuchs-Schuendeln and Hassan (2015) survey more
recent tests based on micro data.
    This paper is one of the first to provide direct evidence at the household level that near-
rationality predicts excess sensitivity using a single source of income, i.e., using variation within
the same research design. The only other studies I am aware of that analyze whether payment
size can explain excess sensitivity in the cross-section using a single income source are Kreinin
(1961), Souleles (1999), and Scholnick (2013), all of which use a quadratic function of the level
of payments and find mixed or inconclusive results due to a lack of statistical power.2 However,
in this section I show that the loss from suboptimal behavior is a monotone function of the
relative size of the payment scaled by household consumption instead of the level of the cash
flows. This distinction is not only conceptually important, but it turns out to be also empirically
relevant. Using the unscaled squared size of the dividend in levels instead of the relative size of
the cash flows, I find that the coefficient on the quadratic term is statistically insignificant and
also economically small, while the linear term—the average excess sensitivity—is unaffected by
adding the quadratic term and remains economically and statistically significant.

1.1 Loss from Sub-Optimal Consumption Plans
    To derive a loss statistic from following a sub-optimal consumption plan, we need to define
the optimal plan under the nominal benchmark model. Denote this optimal consumption plan
given wealth w and prices p (interest rates) by c∗ , such that c∗w = arg maxc {U (c) s.t. p0 c ≤ w},
with p0 c∗ =
             P −t ∗                                          P t           3
                t R ct = w and life-time utility U (c) =        t δ u(ct ).  Following Gabaix and
Laibson (2002), consider a deviation c̃w from this optimum, which also has to satisfy the
intertemporal budget constraint, p0 c̃w = w. Using the envelope theorem, i.e., combining the
   2
      Parker (1999) also analyzes near-rationality as an explanation for excess sensitivity, but instead focuses on
differences in MPCs across different types of goods with different degrees of durability, as they imply different
costs from failing to smooth spending.
    3
      Anticipating the empirical findings I abstract from precautionary saving motives and dividend uncertainty.
First, precautionary saving motives would predict that households with low cash-on-hand ratios (cash-on-hand
divided by permanent income) would have higher MPCs than unconstrained households. However, I find
that higher-income households with high cash-on-hand ratios have higher MPCs than the average household.
Sections 4 and 5 analyze the role of precautionary saving motives and liquidity constraints in more detail.
Second, assuming perfect foresight of the next dividend is a reasonable approximation based on the analysis
of expected dividends in the companion background paper (Kueng (2015a)). While households do obtain new
information about the next dividend also within the current year, they already start out with an expected
dividend that is fairly close to the next dividend because the size of the PFD depends on the fund’s income over
the past five years, not just its current income. Therefore, the dividend can typically be well predicted more
than a year in advance. Section 2.1 provides a detailed discussion of the dividend’s predictability.
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                         7

first-order conditions to simplify the second-order approximation of U (c) around c∗w , we obtain
                                                                                               2
                                              1 X t ∂ 2 u(c∗t )                    c̃t − c∗t
                                                                               
                    U (c∗w )   − U (c̃w ) ≈ −     δ ·           · (c∗t )2 ·                         .           (1)
                                              2 t      ∂c2                             c∗t

                               ∗   0                                                                        ∗
The first-order term ∂U∂c    (cw )
                                   (c̃w −c∗w ) is zero because the first-order conditions imply ∂U∂c
                                                                                                  (cw )
                                                                                                        = λ·p
      0         ∗
and p (c̃w − cw ) = 0, since both consumption plans satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint.
    To quantify the money value of the loss due to local deviations from the optimal plan,
we can calculate the amount of wealth necessary to keep the household at the same utility
level under the suboptimal plan c̃w as under c∗w . We know that under standard preferences,
a proportional change in wealth leads to a proportional change in the optimal consumption
profile, i.e., d ln(c∗s ) = d ln(w) ≈ w̃−w  w
                                                 = ∆ww
                                                        ∀s. Taking a first-order approximation of the value
                                                   ∗
function around the initial optimum, c , we obtain

                                                              ∆w X t ∂u(c∗t ) ∗
                                   U (c∗w ) − U (c∗w̃ ) ≈ −        δ ·       · ct ,                             (2)
                                                               w t     ∂c

where c∗w̃ is the optimal consumption plan given alternative wealth w̃ in a neighborhood of
w. Combining (1) and (2), evaluating U (c∗w̃ ) at U (c̃w ), and assuming an iso-elastic flow utility
u(x) = x1−γ /(1 − γ) yields the money-metric proportional wealth loss of the sub-optimal plan,
                                                                               2
                                                                     c̃t − c∗t
                                                                   
                                                     ∆w   γX
                               Loss(c̃w , c∗w )   ≡−    ≈     ωt ·                ,                             (3)
                                                      w   2 t            c∗t

                                         ∂u(c∗ )  P ∂u(c∗ )       δ t u(c∗ )
with “utility-annuity” weights ωt = δ t ∂ct c∗t / j δ j ∂cj c∗j = U (c∗t) , because ∂u(c)
                                                                                     ∂c
                                                                                          · c = (1 −
γ)u(c).
    To apply this expression of the loss to the setting of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend,
we need to specify the alternative behavior c̃. A natural (although extreme) alternative is
to assume households are hand-to-mouth consumers (htm); see e.g., Campbell and Mankiw
(1989) or Card, Chetty and Weber (2007) who also compare the standard permanent-income
model to this alternative benchmark. Specifically, let’s consider a deviation from the optimal
consumption plan that fully responds to the PFD payments at the time the dividend is paid
out (i.e., a MPC of 1), but otherwise fully optimizes along all other dimensions.4
    Next, we need to take into account that the PFD is paid repeatedly once every year. There-
fore, let’s divide the household’s finite horizon H into h equal intervals of length T , e.g., four
quarters in the empirical analysis below. To simplify the analytical expressions, let’s also as-
sume no discounting and zero interest rates (δ = R = 1) such that c∗t = c∗ in the benchmark
PIH model under certainty. The alternative consumption plan, which spends the entire PFD
   4
     In other words, this is a local deviation from the standard model’s optimal consumption plan c∗ . Households
behave according to the standard model along all other dimensions. For instance, they smooth all other cash
flows like paychecks, social security payments, etc.
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                   8

amount in the period in which it is paid out,5 is defined as
         
         chtm           = c∗ − P FT D                in periods without dividend payments,
  chtm
   t   =
         chtm + P F D = c∗ + (1 − 1 ) · P F D in periods with dividend payments.
                                                 T


    The alternative plan chtm is related to the optimal plan c∗ by the fact that both have to
satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint, hence t chtm     = t c∗t = H · c∗ . Consumption is
                                                     P           P
                                                          t
higher than the optimum when the dividend is paid out, but in turn has to be lower during
the other T − 1 periods in the interval in order to satisfy the intertemporal budget constraint.
Therefore, relative deviations from the optimal plan are given by
                           
                htm
               ct − ct∗    − P F D        in periods without dividend payments,
                               T ·c∗
                    ∗
                        =
                   ct      (T − 1) P F D
                                        ∗  in periods with dividend payments.
                                          T ·c


Hence, the potential loss from fully spending the dividend payments in period T (e.g., in the
fourth quarter) is
                                                  2
                                  htm ∗       PFD       γ
                            Loss(c , c ) ≈             · · (T − 1),                       (4)
                                               cT       2
where PcFTD is the relative size of the dividend as a fraction of total consumption during the
interval T , cT = T · c∗ = Tt=1 chtm
                          P
                                 t   , i.e., annual consumption.
    This loss can be calculated ex ante as it does not depend on any behavioral response to the
dividend. The actual ex-post loss on the other hand depends on the household’s degree of excess
sensitivity to the dividend payments. This behavioral response—the marginal propensity to
consume (MPC) out of predetermined cash-on-hand—can be estimated by regressing changes
in spending on the amount of PFD payments received by a household for different subsamples
of households with similar ex-ante potential losses. Therefore,

                                  Lossex−post = M P C 2 · Loss(chtm , c∗ )                                  (5)

is the actual ex-post loss that households in these subsamples incur by not fully smoothing
the dividend payments. The observed consumption behavior is near-rational as defined by
Akerlof and Yellen (1985) if it deviates from the optimal plan but this deviation only leads to
small wealth-equivalent losses, which in turn depend on the size of the PFD, the household’s
characteristics (γ and “permanent income” cT ), and the degree of excess sensitivity (MPC).6

2 Data and Experiment
   The strength of the empirical analysis builds both on new high quality expenditures and
income micro data—in particular for higher-income households—and the large dividend pay-
   5
     P F D denotes the total amount of dividend payments the household receives in a year.
   6
     It also depends on T , which measures how fast the household spends the dividend, i.e., how concentrated
the excess sensitivity is. In the empirical analysis below I find that households spend their excess amount over
three months on average. Hence, setting T = 4 is reasonable.
             CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                       9

ments that provide substantial cross-sectional variation in the size of the potential losses from
exhibiting excess sensitivity.

2.1 The Permanent Fund Dividend
    Since 1977, the State of Alaska invests the royalty income it receives from the oil extraction
in the state-owned North Slope region in a sovereign wealth fund called the Permanent Fund.
This fund, which is managed by the Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation (APFC), has grown
considerably over time and had a market value of $53 billion as of November 2015; see Goldsmith
(2001) for a historical account of the fund. The fund’s assets are broadly diversified in domestic
and international financial and real assets so that the cash flows generated by the fund are
unaffected by local economic conditions. At the end of each fiscal year on June 30, roughly
10% of the fund’s generated cash flows over the current and four previous fiscal years is set aside
to be paid out by the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend Division (APFDD) based on a public
formula set in state law.7 The dividend is paid out to every person who has been a resident of
Alaska for the previous year and indicates an intention to remain an Alaskan resident. The rest
of the fund’s income is typically reinvested in the fund, although the legislature has in principle
the authority to use the fund’s remaining earnings for any public purpose. Previous attempts
by politicians to appropriate more earnings for government funding have resulted in significant
public backlash so that reinvesting the fund’s earnings has become the implicit norm.
    Since the dividend is a significant source of income for many Alaskan households, changes
in the expected next dividend are frequently discussed in the local media. The annual dividend
amount, which is based on data that is largely known at the end of June of each year, is officially
announced by mid-September or earlier, before the first payments are made in early October.
Since the mid-1990s, all information necessary to estimate the dividend is published on the
APFC’s website. Moreover, monthly changes in the expected dividend are orders of magnitude
smaller than the dividend itself since only one fifth of the annual distribution depends on the
fund’s income in the current fiscal year.
    A companion background paper (Kueng (2015a)) documents these facts with both an exten-
sive narrative analysis of all major Alaskan newspapers starting in the early 1980s and with a
series of expected dividends based on new historical data of the fund’s monthly income starting
in the mid-1990s, which I obtained from the APFC’s archive. Section 6.5 provides a summary
of this complementary study. For convenience, Figure 1 shows the two measures of the ex-
pected PFD. Uncertainty about the next dividend is typically largest in November right after
the previous dividend has been distributed because next year’s income is still largely unknown.
Throughout the fiscal year, this uncertainty gradually declines with each new monthly report
of the fund’s earnings. The main source of uncertainty about the size of the next dividend that
remains between the end of the fiscal year in June and the official announcement in Septem-
                                                                     Pt
   7
     The public formula for the dividend distribution is 21 × 21% × ( s=t−4 SN Is − Adjustmentst ), where SN I
is the fund’s statutory net income in the current (s = t) and previous four (s = t − 4, ..., t − 1) fiscal years. This
sum is adjusted for prior year obligations, operating expenses, designated state expenses, and reserves for prior
year dividends. The dividend per person is obtained by dividing the total distribution by the number of eligible
applicants.
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                      10

ber concerns the number of eligible applicants. However, annual changes in the number of
eligible applicants are small and can be reasonably well predicted based on state population
forecasts. Therefore, additional precautionary saving motives due to uncertainty about the sizes
of the dividend cannot account for the substantial average excess sensitivity that I document
in the next section, and definitely not for the large MPCs among higher-income households
who have sufficient buffers of liquid assets. Moreover, since uncertainty gradually decreases
toward September, precautionary dissaving motives should be largest in the months before the
dividend payments and should be lowest in October when the dividend is known for certain.
The dynamic household spending response discussed below however shows the exact opposite:
spending does not increase leading up to September but dramatically increases in October when
the dividend is paid out.

2.2 New Transaction Micro Data from Financial Accounts
    The main analysis uses new transaction data from accounts at a large personal finance
website (PFW) from 2010 to 2014. The micro data is at the user account level, which I will
refer to as the household.8 In the robustness section 6.7 I show that the excess sensitivity
results are not driven by differences between the number of users per online account and the
number of family members. Households can link up their credit card accounts, bank accounts,
brokerage accounts and any other major account related to their balance sheet, giving them a
systematic overview of their personal finances. The data and its advantages and shortcomings
relative to previous data sources are explained in more detail in Baker (2014) who was the first
to use this data.
    This paper complements the analysis of the data quality in Baker (2014) in an important
way by also implementing the same research design in the CE (discussed below), which is the
standard data source used in previous studies. Therefore, the fact that I find similar results
using both data sets—after accounting for differences in sample composition and the fraction
of Alaskans that do not receive the dividend—provides an external validity check of this new
data source.

Identifying Dividend Receipts The timing of the dividend is exogenous for households
that receive the dividend within two business days of the official disbursement date set by the
APFDD, or within five business days for the few households that receive the dividend as a
check in the mail. The timing of delayed direct deposits could however be endogenous since it
could be caused by incorrect applications or applications that have to be further investigated
by the APFDD. Identification of the dividend receipt is more difficult for mailed checks than
for direct deposits since check transactions often lack an informative transaction description
   8
     More precisely, the concept of a user account is closer to the concept of a family as defined by the U.S. Census
Bureau: “A family consists of two or more people (one of whom is the householder) related by birth, marriage,
or adoption residing in the same housing unit. A household consists of all people who occupy a housing unit
regardless of relationship. A household may consist of a person living alone or multiple unrelated individuals or
families living together.” The concept of a family is also closer to the “consumer unit” concept used by the CE.
Nevertheless, following convention in the literature I will refer to both user accounts in the PFW and consumer
units in the CE as “households.”
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                  11

which typically only states “deposit.” I identify PFD check deposits as those that have the
“deposit” label and match the exact amount of the dividend in the 12 months from October
to September of the next year. Using this algorithm, 81% of Alaskans in the PFW sample
receive a dividend. This number is consistent with aggregate take-up statistics based on data
from the APFDD. 96% of dividends are received via direct deposits, the rest via check deposits.
This number is higher than the 83% reported by the APFDD. The difference is probably due
to the fact that more PFW users use e-banking (and hence direct deposits) and the fact that
payments via checks are more difficult to identify and the algorithm might miss some.
    97% of direct deposits in turn occur within two business days. This is the sample used for
the main analysis since the timing of the dividends is exogenously set by the APFDD for these
users and because they receive the dividends at the beginning of October which simplifies the
interpretation of the dynamic response (anticipation effects and lagged responses). I analyze
the effect of including check deposits and late direct deposits in the robustness section 6.7.
    While other Alaskan households that do not (yet) qualify for the dividend might in principle
be a good control group (setting aside concerns about general equilibrium effects affecting
such households), the new transaction data does not cleanly identify them for several reasons.
Alaskans that do not receive a dividend payment in the PFW sample could either not have
qualified for the dividend but could also have had their entire dividend garnished,9 could have
instructed the APFDD to directly donate the full dividend amount,10 or the dividend payment
was not identifiable from the transaction description and the transaction amount.11 Such
households might be very different than the treatment group for which I identify receiving the
dividend and hence are potentially a bad control group. However, in the robustness section 6.7
I show that including these Alaskan households in the control group does not affect the results.
    Since the dividend amount is sensitive to the household size I drop observations with self-
reported family sizes above 8 or that receive more than 7 dividends, which corresponds to the
top 1% in both cases. Accounts where the absolute difference between the number of dividends
and the self-reported family size is larger than four in any period are also dropped. Section 6.7
discusses this issue in more detail.

Addressing Potential Issues First, one might be worried that the size of the dividend
can be manipulated by households or that a sudden change in family size coincides with a
surprise in the dividend amount received, which in turn could be correlated with changes in
spending. However, in order to qualify for the dividend, an individual must have been an Alaska
resident for the entire calendar year preceding the application date and intend to remain an
Alaska resident indefinitely at the time of the application. New residents, such as newborns or
   9
     Since 1989 PFD recipients are banned from assigning (pledging) dividends for any legal contract, including
loans. However, federal, state and local governments have the right to garnish up to 100% of the dividend (e.g.,
for outstanding federal income taxes, local parking tickets, tuition, etc.) and courts can garnish up to 80% of
the dividend (e.g., in personal bankruptcy).
  10
     Since 2009 Alaskans can instruct the APFDD to donate all or part of their dividend to a charitable
organization that participates in the Click.Pick.Give program; see www.pickclickgive.com.
  11
     For instance, if the household received a partially garnished dividend in form of a check. When it then
deposits the check it is impossible to infer the source of this income from the transaction amount, which does
not match the full dividend amount, or from the transaction label, which is typically missing for check deposits.
           CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                               12

migrants therefore need to live in Alaska for about a year before they become dividend eligible.
Similarly, an Estate Application can be filed in the year in which a family member deceased.
Hence, the size of the dividend income is given by the size of the PFD per person and the
number of eligible household members, where the latter is predetermined at least one year in
advance. Hence, even sudden changes in family size should not lead to surprises in the amount
of dividend income received in that year.
    Second, note that strictly speaking, this analysis estimates a marginal propensity to spend
out of cash received (i.e., “cash-on-hand”), not income. Dividend income can differ from the
actual amount of cash received both because of voluntary and involuntary deductions. Alaskans
can ask the APFDD to contribute part or all of their dividend to charity (see footnote above)
or up to 50% to the University of Alaska College Saving Plan. Involuntary deductions on the
other hand can occur since the government can garnish up to 100% of the dividend to cover
outstanding liabilities (e.g., unpaid taxes, parking tickets, etc.) and courts can garnish up to
80% of the dividend payment, for instance in personal bankruptcy. In the PFW sample, 86%
of Alaskans that receive a dividend (via direct deposit or check and at any time) receive the full
dividend. 11% contribute part of their dividend directly via the APFDD. Of these voluntary
deductions, 50% contribute exactly half of their dividend. I therefore identify voluntary deduc-
tions as dividend payments that are half of the total dividend in that year or as dividend income
that is reduced by multiples of $25 (e.g., by $25, $50, $75, etc.) which are the most common
donation amounts. Finally, 3% have part of their dividend garnished and many garnished divi-
dend amounts cluster around the 80% maximum for private garnishments. Section 6.7 analyzes
the effect of these different sources of variation in payments on the estimated excess sensitivity.
Note that this algorithm misses individuals that donate the full dividend to charity or that
have their full dividend garnished by the government as I do not observe a financial transaction
in those cases.
    Third, since I cannot use non-qualifying Alaskans as a control group I instead use a sample
of 2,191 households from the State of Washington, which is geographically closest to Alaska
and also has similar seasonality and industry composition. Spending on nondurable goods
and service as well as durables are defined to match the National Income and Product Ac-
counts as closely as possible; the detailed mapping is provided in Table A.1 of the appendix.
To estimate the total impact of the dividend payments on household spending I also include
other expenditures (e.g., mortgage and rent, car loan payments, uncategorized expenditures)
as well as durable purchases that are paid for with a credit card (e.g., clothes, newspaper and
magazines, electronics and software) and hence are typically smaller than say a car purchase.
These additional categories together with spending on nondurables and services define total
expenditures.

Summary Statistics Table 1 provides summary statistics of the main variables used in
the analysis. All nominal amounts are expressed in dollars of 2014 using the local CPI for
Alaska and the U.S. CPI for Washington, respectively.12 The average size of the dividend
  12
    The BLS calculates the local CPI for Alaska (more precisely for Anchorage) only semi-annually instead of
monthly. Hence, I use the annual CPI to deflate nominal variables for both groups.
           CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                              13

per family equals $2,000 and is therefore much larger than the one-time tax rebate of $300 to
$600 per households in 2001, which has been studied extensively in the literature. Hence, even
in this sample of higher-income households, the annual dividend still represents 3-5% of the
annual budget depending on whether it is measured as a fraction of annual income or spending.
Moreover, contrary to the tax rebate, the dividend is paid regularly once every year.
    Households in Alaska and Washington are very similar along most other dimensions, in-
cluding income, demographics, and expenditures. While average household income in the data
is high, median Alaskan income is similar to median household income of $70,000 in the 2013
American Community Survey (ACS).13 The average Alaskan household in the PFW sample
has much more larger bank balances (savings and checking accounts) than the average Alaskan
household in the CE, $41,000 vs. $23,000. To be conservative, I define liquid wealth narrowly
by only including cash-equivalent bank account balances, such as savings, checking, money
market accounts, and certificates of deposit. Other financial assets can potentially also be
easily exchanged for cash, in particular assets in taxable brokerage accounts outside of tax-
deferred retirement and college savings accounts. Including these balances as part of liquid
wealth would therefore strengthen the case made below against liquidity constraints being the
main explanation for the observed excess sensitivity.
    Median liquid wealth in the PFW data is much lower than average liquid wealth but is still
much higher than in the general population. For comparison, median bank balances of Alaskan
households in the CE are only $4,000, which is similar to median bank balances in the Survey
of Consumer Finances (SCF).
    Finally, the typical household in Washington has substantially more financial assets than the
typical Alaskan household. However, note that this measure excludes the present value of future
Permanent Fund Dividends for Alaskan households. Given the average (median) PFD payments
received by Alaskans in the sample, the observed average (median) difference in total financial
assets of $102,000 ($45,000) is consistent with the present value of this perpetuity assuming
an expected return above expected dividend growth rate (r − g) of 2-4%. Alternatively, given
Alaska’s population of 737,625 in 2015, the Permanent Fund’s market value per person was
$72,000 in 2015, which is similar to the observed gap in total financial assets.


3 Average Excess Sensitivity to the Dividend
   Under the life-cycle permanent income hypothesis, households should smooth consumption
over time, which implies that the level of consumption should be independent of the timing of
predictable cash flows. Since spending should not be sensitive to predictable income, finding
systematic differences in spending patterns in response to predetermined events such as the
Permanent Fund Dividend payments is evidence for so-called excess sensitivity of spending to
predictable income changes.

  13
     I use the ACS instead of the CE to assess the representativeness of household income in the PFW sample
since the CE is not designed to be representative at the state level, only at the national level.
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                  14

3.1 Nonparametric Evidence
    Figure 2(a) shows strong non-parametric evidence of such excess sensitivity by comparing
average monthly per capita spending changes on nondurables and services of Alaskans with
that of individuals from Washington, the other nearest state.14 The average monthly changes
for the two states are fairly similar except in October when the dividend is paid out, and in the
month thereafter. This shows that households in Washington who do not receive the dividend
payments are a good control group for seasonal consumption patterns, i.e., their spending
follows a similar trend in the absence of the dividend. Similarly, Figure 2(b) shows that per
capita income excluding the dividend does not differentially increase in October in Alaska
relative to Washington. This strongly suggests that the spending increase in October shown in
Figure 2(a) is caused by the Permanent Fund Dividend payments.
    Using the summary statistics in Table 1 we can turn these numbers into non-parametric
MPC estimates, which can then be compared with the parametric MPCs below. The average
dividend payment per capita is $961 (i.e., $1,999/2.08) and the average excess spending on
nondurables and services of Alaskans relative to Washingtonians in October is $112 with a t-
statistic of 5.6. Hence, the MPC in the first month after dividends are paid is 12%.15 Similarly,
relative per capita spending drops by only $78 the next month (t-statistic of 3.8), which is
8% of per capita dividends thus adding an additional 4% to a cumulative MPC of 16%. This
cumulative MPC is 22% one quarter after most dividends have been paid out. These non-
parametric MPCs are very similar to the parametric estimates shown below.
    Finally, note that spending changes are slightly lower on average among Alaskan households
in all other months relative to households in Washington, consistent with the alternative behav-
ior specified in section 1, although these differences are not individually statistically significant.
Since there might be aggregate shocks that this approach does not fully control for, I include
full time fixed effects (year-by-month or year-by-quarter) instead of only month or quarter fixed
effects in all regressions to account for such aggregate conditions.

3.2 Parametric Evidence
   The previous analysis uses differences in the time series of average spending changes between
households in Alaska and Washington to provide non-parametric evidence of excess sensitivity.
Next, I instead use household-level variation in the dividend payment size while controlling for
aggregate effects. Following the previous literature, the main estimating equation is
                                 X
                        ∆cit =        βs · P F Di,t−s + αt + Alaskai + λ0 xit + εit .                        (6)
                                  s

  14
     Per capita figures are calculated by using the OECD household equivalence scale to adjust for differences
in family size, which assigns a value of 1 to the first household member, and adds 0.7 for each additional adult
and 0.5 for each child below the age of 16. I calculate average daily per capita spending multiplied by 30 to
take into account differences in the number of days per month. Figure A1 in the appendix shows similar results
for median changes in monthly spending.
  15
     Similarly, the nonparametric median MPC is 11%, which is calculated based on the median spending
increase of $78 in October (see Figure A1) divided by median per capita dividend income of $709 (i.e., $1,417/2).
           CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                        15

cit measures expenditures during period t by household i, P F Dit denotes the dollar amount
of Permanent Fund Dividend payments received by all household members at the beginning of
period t; s denotes periods since receiving the dividend (i.e., allowing for leads and lags, such as
anticipation effects and delayed responses); αt are time fixed effects (year-by-month dummies)
controlling flexibly for any aggregate effects and seasonality in spending patterns; Alaskai is
an indicator of whether a household is a resident of Alaska; xit captures family size and other
household characteristics for robustness checks; and εit are changes in spending not explained
by either the dividend or the controls. The β coefficients measure the excess sensitivity of
spending to receiving predetermined PFD income (s ≥ 0) and possible spending effects in
advance of the payments due to households anticipating the next dividend (s < 0).

Anticipation Effects Figure 3 shows the dynamic response of monthly household spending
on nondurables and services to the PFD payments by estimating the baseline specification of
equation (6), which controls for the main effects of the treatment, i.e., Alaska and time fixed
effects and family size. Figure 3(a) plots the regression coefficients including 6 monthly leads
and 8 monthly lags of the dividend payments, s = −6, −5, . . . , 8, or two quarters of leads and
three quarters of lags.
    Importantly, even though the dividend is completely predetermined at least by September,
and there is substantial speculation in the media throughout the year about the likely size
of the next dividend, Figure 3(a) shows no evidence of any anticipation effects. The point
estimates of all leads are close to zero and reasonably precisely estimated for the month prior
to the dividend, for example ruling out any announcement effect larger than 2 cents at a 95%
confidence level.

Excess Sensitivity While there is no evidence of anticipation effects, spending strongly
responds to the arrival of the dividend payments. On average, spending on nondurables and
services increases by 12 cents for each dollar of PFD received in October (s = 0), and this
increase is highly statistically significant (t-statistic of 5.9). Spending in November (s = 1) is
only 7 cents lower than in the previous month, hence the dividend has a delayed spending effect
of another 5 cents relative to September, the month before the dividend payments, and another
7 cents in December relative to November. These are the net or marginal effects of the dividend,
which is largest and most precisely estimated in the month of the dividend payment. The point
estimates of all subsequent net effects after December are small and not statistically significant.
Figure 3(b) cumulates the net effects to provide the dynamic cumulative MPC together with
two standard error bands. It highlights that the MPC stabilizes within one quarter of the
dividend receipt, and the effect remains statistically significant up to a lag of six months.

Robustness Overall, Figure 3 documents an economically large and statistically significant
response of household spending on nondurables and services to the Permanent Fund Dividend
payments and there is no evidence of anticipation effects. The response is concentrated in the
month in which dividend payments are transferred via direct deposits, and most of the effect
occurs within the first quarter after the arrival of the cash flows. In the following, I therefore
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                               16

aggregate the data to quarterly observations and restrict the analysis to the spending response
within the first quarter of receiving the dividend (i.e., setting s = 0). Therefore, setting T = 4
in (4) is appropriate when calculating the potential loss statistic. Column 1 of Table 2 repeats
the analysis at quarterly frequency.16
     Column 2 estimates a quantile regression for the median to show that the excess sensitivity
results are not driven by outliers. While the previous analysis uses households from Washington
as well as Alaskans in periods without dividend payments as a control group, column 3 uses only
variation in dividend payments of Alaskans that do receive a dividend in October. Given the
time fixed effects, the identifying variation is coming from differences in the number of checks
received per household, including periods without dividend payments, and variation coming
from voluntary and involuntary deductions, i.e., differences between dividend income and cash-
on-hand. While the precision drops substantially, the point estimate does not change much. In
section 6.7 I analyze these different sources of variation in more detail. Column 4 adds controls
xit , which include liquid assets (bank balances), income, family size, and fixed effects for age,
education, residential ZIP code, homeownership status, marital status, and occupation. The
estimated excess sensitivity is unaffected by these controls, in particular by the amount of liquid
assets. Hence, liquidity constraints cannot explain the average spending excess sensitivity to
the dividend payments for households in the PFW sample.
     While the standard specification used in the literature to test for excess sensitivity uses first
differences as in equation (6), column 5 instead estimates an individual fixed effects model.
The point estimate remains largely unchanged, but the precision increases as fixed effects
estimators are typically more efficient than first differences. Finally, column 6 shows that adding
controls such as household demographics, income and liquid assets does not change these results.
Importantly, it also shows that changes in household characteristics, in particular changes in
family size, do not affect the results as the fixed effects specification only uses within-household
variation.

4 Near-Rationality and Higher-Income Household MPCs
     The high average response documented in the previous section is striking for several reasons.
First, the nature of the dividend payments should in principle favor the standard model. After
all, those cash flows are highly predictable, occur regularly every year, are salient to households
living in Alaska, and are fairly large. Second, the typical household in the sample has a
substantial amount of liquid assets and relatively high income as shown in Table 1. Since
the standard explanations of excess sensitivity, such as liquidity constraints or precautionary
saving, do not seem to sufficiently account for the behavior of these households, I use the ex-ante
money-metric proportional wealth loss of deviating from perfect consumption smoothing to test
whether potential losses can explain the high MPCs among those higher-income households, in
particular whether the MPCs are falling in the relative size of the dividend cash flows.

  16
     The small difference in the point estimates is due to the fact that using 6 leads and 8 lags at monthly
frequency in Figure 3 drops more observations than using first differences at quarterly frequency in column 1
of Table 2.
           CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                     17

4.1 Relative Size of Cash Flows and MPC Heterogeneity
    Equation (4) shows that the potential loss is a function of two main factors, the relative
size of the dividend as a fraction of household consumption (P F D/c) and the curvature of
the flow utility function (γ).17 Since I cannot measure differences in time preferences across
households, I will abstract from potential heterogeneity in γ and focus on heterogeneity in
P F D/c. However, since theory suggests that binding liquidity constraints might be related to
differences in time preferences, I study this issue in more detail in the next section by focusing
on the subset of households with low levels of liquid wealth.

MPC Heterogeneity in Potential Losses The relative size of the dividend payment is
therefore a sufficient statistic of the costs of sub-optimal behavior. To test the predictive
power of the potential loss statistic, I modify the baseline specification of equation (6) and
interact the constant and the dividend payments with the quintiles of the relative dividend
size, q = 1, 2, ..., 5. The relative dividend is calculated by dividing the dividend payments
received by a household in a year by the household’s average total expenditures per year,
where average spending is taken over all observations of a household. On average, the relative
dividend size for Alaskan households in each quintile is 1.8%, 2.8%, 3.9%, 5.7%, and 11.7%,
respectively. Assuming an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of one half (γ = 2), these
numbers translate to potential relative wealth losses of 0.09%, 0.24%, 0.46%, 0.97%, and 4.19%
(see Figure 4(a), right axis). Hence, the potential losses range from 8 hours to more than two
weeks of consumption per year. The corresponding regression that estimates cross-sectional
heterogeneity in MPCs is
                     5                                5
                           βq · P F Dit × 1(qit ) +         ηq 1(qit ) + αt + Alaskai + λ0 xit + εit .
                     X                                X
            ∆cit =                                                                                       (7)
                     q=1                              q=1


1(qit ) equals one if household i is in the qth shock size quintile and zero otherwise. αt is
again a full set of time fixed effects, which are year-by-quarter time dummies since the data is
aggregated to quarterly frequency.
    Figure 4(a),left axis, shows that the MPC indeed falls significantly with the increase in the
predicted loss. Households in the lowest quintile for whom the dividend is a small fraction of
annual spending and hence a less important source of (permanent) income have an estimated
MPC of 84%, substantially higher than the MPC of 16% for households in the highest relative
dividend size quintile, for whom the dividend is a much more substantial income source. More-
over, the MPC declines steadily as we move from lower to higher quintiles, while the precision
of the estimates increases because the relative dividend explains a larger fraction of spending
for households in higher quintiles.
  17
     As mentioned above, I set T = 4 based on the dynamic response of monthly spending. Also note that the
loss would depend on the time distance between news about future dividends and the actual dividend payments,
which I abstracted from by assuming perfect foresight. However, as shown in Figure 1, this news component is
very small. Moreover, since the local media report frequently on the expected dividend throughout the year,
heterogeneity in the expected dividend across households is probably small.
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                        18

   Column 2 of Table 3 documents that these results (reported in column 1) are robust to
controlling for other potential mechanisms. In particular, the sharp decrease in MPCs as a
function of the relative size of the dividend is robust to controlling for liquid assets (bank
balances), income, age, and other household characteristics.

Near-Rationality of Observed Behavior What are the actual economic losses that house-
holds incur by deviating from full consumption smoothing? Given the potential losses in each
quintile and the separate MPCs estimated in Table 3, we can calculate the actual average ex-
post losses in each quintile using equation (5). The economic losses across the quintiles are
0.07%, 0.09%, 0.08%, 0.07%, and 0.11%, respectively as shown in Figure 4(a), right axis. The
actual economic losses are thus both similar and very small. Households with standard prefer-
ences would be willing to give up less than half a day of consumption per year to fully smooth
the dividend. Hence, the observed behavior is consistent with small, near-rational deviations
from the standard model.

Using Squared instead of Relative Dividend Payments Column 3 shows that measur-
ing the potential costs using the relative size of the dividend instead of the squared dividend
in levels, as previously done in the literature (e.g., Souleles (1999) and Scholnick (2013)), is
important. The coefficient for the squared dividend payments is both economically and statis-
tically insignificant. Moreover, including the squared term does not affect the coefficient on the
relative size of the dividend compared to only using the linear term, the average MPC, which
is reported in the bottom row.
    Therefore, these results provide strong evidence that the relative size of the cash flow is an
important factor for explaining excess sensitivity, and in particular for explaining the dispersion
of excess sensitivity in the cross-section of households with sufficient liquid assets.

4.2 Income Per Capita and MPC Heterogeneity
    Figure 4(b) makes the same point using a different dimension of cross-sectional heterogeneity
in potential welfare losses. If near-rationality explains excess sensitivity, then we would expect
the MPC to be larger for high-income households for whom the dividend is only a small fraction
of annual income. Indeed, Figure 4(b) shows that the MPC is increasing in after-tax income per
capita. Households in the top income quintile have an average MPC of 61% compared with an
MPC of only 12% for households in the lowest quintile, for whom the dividend is a substantial
source of total family income. The average Alaskan income per household equivalent in each
quintile is $16,000, $30,000, $41,000, $58,000, and $104,000, respectively.
    The fact that the MPC is steeply increasing in income is robust to including various controls
as shown in column 5 of Table 3. Importantly, the income gradient is preserved when controlling
for the relative dividend quintiles used in columns 1 and 2. Hence, the two sources of variation—
income and the relative size of the cash flows—provide strong evidence of the predictive power
of the potential-loss statistic. Interestingly, these findings are consistent with results reported
in Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006) who also find that the highest-income tertile has a
larger MPC than the middle-income tertile, although they do not discuss potential reasons for
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                19

this result. Finally, note that the slope of the MPC is steeper in the relative dividend than in
income per capita. This is presumably due to the fact that average annual spending is a better
measure of permanent income and hence of the intertemporal budget constraint than current
annual income.
    While this result might appear obvious after realizing that income is inversely related to the
costs from failing to smooth the dividend, it is noteworthy that it stands in contrast to results
in many other studies who use income as an alternative measure of liquidity constraints. This
is typically necessary since liquid assets tend to be poorly measured in expenditure surveys.
The next section shows that low liquid wealth (both in levels and as a fraction of permanent
income) indeed also predicts higher MPCs, although the predictive power is lower than that of
the potential-loss statistic.

5 Liquid Wealth and MPC Heterogeneity
    Credit constraints and/or precautionary saving are the main explanation of excess sensitiv-
ity proposed in the literature.18 For instance, households might want to borrow against future
income, but in the case of the Permanent Fund Dividend a law implemented in 1989 prevents
individuals from assigning the dividend to any third party other than the government. The
dividend can therefore not be used as legal collateral for any debt contract. Therefore, house-
holds need to have sufficient amounts of liquid assets to move PFD-related spending forward
in time.

Using the Cash-on-Hand Ratio To quantify whether and how much liquidity constraints
and precautionary saving can help explain the cross-sectional heterogeneity in MPCs, I use the
cash-on-hand to permanent income ratio to measure a household’s amount of relative liquidity
as suggested by theory; see Carroll (2001). In particular, I use a household’s cash-equivalent
bank account balances as a fraction of average quarterly total spending, which proxies for
unobserved permanent (quarterly) income. Note that this is the same normalization used for
calculating the relative dividend size in columns 1 and 2 of Table 3 and hence provides an
apples-to-apples comparison of the two mechanisms, liquidity constraints/precautionary saving
and near-rationality.
    Column 6 of Table 3 shows that the MPC is indeed falling across quintiles of the cash-on-
hand ratio as predicted by the standard buffer stock model, with an MPC of 37% in the lowest
quintile of cash-on-hand ratios and 23% in the highest quintile. However, this profile is not
very steep and not strictly monotone. At higher levels of liquidity, the potential welfare-cost
effect seems to dominate the liquidity effect.
    While the MPC of 37% seems small for the most constrained households in the lowest
quintile, the MPC of 23% for households in the highest quintile on the other hand, who are most
likely unconstrained, is large from the standard buffer stock model’s perspective, but consistent
  18
     I analyze models with wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers, which are related to models of consumption
commitment, in section 6.6. Note that in this section I measure potential liquidity constraints using liquid
assets (“cash-on-hand”), not net worth which also contains illiquid assets, such as real assets or tax-deferred
accounts.
           CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                               20

with the near-rational behavior shown above. Moreover, column 7 shows that controlling for
the measures of potential welfare losses (income-per-capita and potential-loss quintiles) does
not change the liquidity profile of the MPC. The reason is that households with low levels of
liquid assets also tend to spend less on average. Hence, many lower-income households end up
in the upper quintiles of the cash-on-hand ratio distribution. The MPC in those quintiles is
therefore close to the average MPC in the sample.

Comparing Near-Rationality and Liquidity Constraints How much of the MPC het-
erogeneity can the potential-loss statistic (i.e., near-rationality) and precautionary saving mo-
tives explain jointly? To answer this question I sort households according to both measures,
by potential loss quintile (q loss ) and by cash-on-hand-ratio quantiles (q̃ liq ) at the same time,

                       5
                                    βq̃,q · P F Dit × 1(qitloss ) × 1(q̃itliq )
                      XX
           ∆cit =                                                                                                  (8)
                       q̃    q=1
                            5
                                  ηqloss 1(qitloss ) +        ηq̃liq 1(q̃itliq ) + αt + Alaskai + λ0 xit + εit .
                            X                            X
                      +
                            q=1                          q̃


    Column 1 of Table 4 splits the potential-loss quintiles by the median cash-on-hand ratio.
Both mechanisms contribute to explaining the heterogeneity in MPCs. The relative shock size
however has a larger effect on the MPC than the cash-on-hand ratio for these households,
consistent with the results in Table 3. Jointly, the two mechanisms can fully account for the
heterogeneity in MPCs across households. Moving from the lowest potential-loss and liquidity
cell to the highest reduces the MPC from an economically and statistically significant 82% to an
insignificant 4% (two-sided p-value of equality of MPCs is 0.2%). Moreover, except for the low-
est potential-loss quintile, which has almost identical MPCs, the MPC is higher for households
with below-median liquidity but the same potential-loss. As we move to higher potential-loss
quintiles, this difference becomes more significant both economically and statistically. The dif-
ference in MPCs in the highest potential-loss quintile, in which we would expect the standard
buffer stock model to perform the best, we indeed see a statistically significant difference in
MPCs of 20% between potentially constrained and presumably unconstrained households. The
one-sided test that the MPC is higher for below-median liquidity households in the highest
potential-loss quintile has a one-sided p-value of 1.2%.
    Pushing the data even more, column 2 sorts the potential-loss quintiles by liquidity quartiles.
Again, moving from the cell with the lowest potential-loss and liquidity to the cell with the
highest potential losses and highest cash-on-hand ratios reduced the MPC by a factor of 15 from
95% to 6% (two-sided p-value of 0.5%). Importantly, we see that the MPC is steeply declining
and monotone in the potential-loss quintile for each liquidity quartile separately. While the
standard errors increase substantially due to the fewer observations in each cell, in each case we
can reject the hypothesis that the MPC in the lowest potential-loss quintile is larger than the
MPC in the highest potential-loss quintile (one-sided p-values of 0.8%, 7.5%, 5.4%, and 0.1%,
respectively). Hence, Table 4 shows (i) that the potential-loss statistic maintains its predictive
             CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                 21

power even after conditioning on liquid assets and (ii) that MPCs are decreasing in the amount
of liquid assets that households hold as predicted by the standard buffer stock model, especially
when the economic stakes are high.

6 Extensions and Robustness
    In this section I address a number of concerns that typically arise in the literature, and
I discuss a couple of extensions of the main analysis, in particular an external validity check
using the Consumer Expenditure Survey.

6.1 Consumption vs. Spending
    Many nondurables and services do have a durable component, especially when looking at
frequencies higher than annual, so that spending does not necessarily reflect consumption. One
is therefore concerned that households might time the purchase of such goods to the arrival of
the dividend cash flows while spreading the consumption of the goods (or more precisely the
marginal utility) evenly over the year as predicted by the standard model.
    To address this concern I take advantage of the high quality of the expenditure transaction
data, especially for disaggregated categories, compared to traditional expenditure surveys. In
Table 5 I follow Lusardi (1996) and show that strictly nondurable goods, i.e., goods that
arguably have a low durable component, also strongly respond to the dividend payments.19
Column 1 documents that spending on groceries substantially increases in the first quarter
after the dividend is paid out. The magnitude is in line with previous research, such as Broda
and Parker (2014) for example, who estimate the spending responses to the smaller economic
stimulus payments in 2008 using the Nielsen Consumer Panel. Column 2 shows that households
also spend a significant amount on dining out, which is clearly nondurable. Column 3 uses
expenditures on a service item—children’s activities—to make the same point.
    Columns 4 and 5 show that households also use the dividend to service their debts, such as
student and car loans (column 5) and mortgages (column 6). These payments can change for two
main reasons, either because households are more likely to make the typically fixed payments
on time in the quarter they receive the PFD payments, or because they use the dividend to
take out new loans or to refinance existing loans. The fact that rental payments, which are also
fixed, do not systematically increase in response to the dividend payments (column 7) suggests
that households use the dividend mostly for (re)financing.
    Focusing on more disaggregated data therefore shows that spending significantly increases
across many categories in response to the dividend, including strictly nondurables. Moreover,
the absence of a reversal of the response of nondurables shown in Figure 3 strongly suggests
that the excess sensitivity of spending on nondurables cannot be explained by intertemporal
substitution of expenditures while smoothing the consumption of the service flows.

 19
      To increase precision when analyzing disaggregated spending I use individual fixed effects estimators.
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                       22

6.2 Response of Durables and Total Expenditures
    For policy questions such as the effectiveness of an economic stimulus program, we might
also be interested in the total effect of the dividend payments on household spending. I therefore
analyze the response of durable expenditures to the dividend payments. However, it is worth
pointing out that changes in durables spending do not necessarily provide evidence against the
standard model because those changes might not reflect changes in the consumption of the
service flow from those durables; see the discussion in the previous section.
    Figures 5(a) and 5(b) show the dynamic response of household spending on durables that
are purchased with a credit card and hence can be classified accordingly. While the overall
pattern is similar to that of nondurables and service consumption in Figure 3, there are some
notable differences. First, the effect is slightly smaller both on impact (8%) and after one
quarter (15%), which is due to the fact that those transactions only capture smaller durables
purchases. Second, there is strong evidence of intertemporal substitution of spending (but not
necessarily of consumption). Figure 5(a) shows that purchases of smaller durables fall slightly
in September (−3%), presumably in anticipation of the dividend payments, and this dip is
marginally significant with a t-statistic of 2.2. Figure 5(b) shows that the MPC of smaller
durables is hump-sharped. Both results suggest that Alaskan households time the purchase
of durables (but not of nondurables) to the predictable arrival of the dividend cash flows.
Column 7 of Table 5 provides the corresponding quarterly MPC.
    Finally, column 8 uses all forms of spending; see Table A.1. The average MPC of total
expenditures is 78%, which is very large. However, one should keep in mind that a substantial
fraction of this response reflects intertemporal substitution.

6.3 External Validity using the Consumer Expenditure Survey
    To provide external validity of the excess sensitivity results presented above, I use the
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE), which is the standard data set used in previous research.
The CE sample spans the entire period since the first dividend was paid out in 1982 up to
2013, but covers fewer Alaskan households per period and follows them only for at most four
quarters.
    Since the CE does not ask Alaskan households directly whether they received the Permanent
Fund Dividend and how large the payment was, the payment has to be imputed based on family
size, state of residence, calendar year, and the fraction of households in any year that do not
receive the dividend at all or in full either as a check or direct deposit. This fraction can be
calculated for each year based on aggregate statistics provided by the APFDD. Because the
state identifier for Alaska is suppressed in the public-use CE sample before 1996, I use the
confidential data at the BLS. As is standard in the literature, I add up expenditures for each
household-interview to “three-monthly” aggregates. Spending on nondurables and services is
defined to be comparable to the concept used for the PFW sample, which in turn approximates
the NIPA definition; see Table A.1.
    Column 1 of Table 6 shows that Alaskan household in the CE also exhibit excess sensitivity
to the dividend payments, with a statistically significant MPC of 8%. This MPC however is
           CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                            23

substantially smaller than the one using which uses PFD transactions identified in the PFW
sample, shown in column 2. In order to make these two estimates comparable I apply two
adjustments to the PFW sample. First, I apply the same dividend imputation procedure in
the PFW sampel as in the CE, since the survey does not ask whether households received PFD
payments and how much. Specifically, in the CE I impute the dividend payments based on
family size, state of residence, and calendar year, thereby ignoring the information about the
exact size of the payments.20 Column 3 shows that the added measurement error reduces the
MPC from 28% to 18%.
    Second, I take into account the difference in sample compositions. While the CE is designed
to be representative for the entire U.S., it is not representative for subpopulations such as single
states. Hence, neither the CE sample nor the PFW sample is a representative sample of the
population of Alaskan households. In particular, Alaskan households in the CE have a lower
average family income ($63,000 in local dollars of 2014) compared to households in the PFW
sample ($100,000). Since the MPC is increasing in income as shown above, these differences in
sample composition matter. Column 7 adds an interaction term of the dividend with after-tax
family income to the specification used for column 2. The point estimate implies that for each
$100,000 of income, the MPC increases by about 20 percentage points. Evaluating this linear
function at the average Alaskan family income in the CE predicts an average MPC of 8%,
thereby matching the point estimate obtained from the CE sample.
    Measurement error introduced by the necessity to impute dividend payments in the CE can
therefore explain about half of the difference between the response estimated in the PFW and
CE samples, and the other half is explained by composition effects, the fact that both samples
represent different segments of the population. As a final step, column 5 uses the observed
dividend transactions from column 2 as an instrument for the imputed dividend payments
in column 3. The fact that the IV estimate is almost identical to the estimate in column 2
shows that the large drop in the coefficient when going from column 2 to 3 is indeed due to
measurement error.

6.4 Comparison with Hsieh (2003)
   The CE sample also allows me to reconcile these new results with the estimates provided
by Hsieh (2003), who was the first to use this quasi-natural experiment to test the standard
consumption model. His analysis found no response of spending to the dividend payments
using the CE. One difference is that throughout this paper I estimate the effect of the PFD
on changes in spending (i.e., MPCs), while his analysis estimates the effect on log-changes in
spending (i.e., an elasticity). In order to estimate an elasticity, the previous study divides the
PFD payments by self-reported family income per quarter leading to the following regression,

                                          P F Dt × F amilySizei
                        ∆ln(cit ) = β ·                         + γ 0 xit + εit .
                                             F amilyIncomei
  20
     This approach follows the idea used in a series of papers by Romer (1986b,a, 1991) who compares pre-
and post-WWII macroeconomic time series by making the cleaner post-war data as noisy as the pre-war data.
Here, I make the cleaner dividend income measure in the PFW sample as noisy as the imputed income in the
CE.
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                      24

F amilySizei is the number of household members in the first interview, which are assumed to
be eligible for the dividend.
    Another companion background paper (Kueng (2015b)) replicates his estimate of the spend-
ing elasticity to the PFD payments as closely as possible using his shorter CE sample from 1980
to 2001 and then extends the sample to 2013. This section briefly discusses the main findings
from this companion paper, summarized in Table 7. For convenience, column 1 of panel A
reproduces the previous estimate (Hsieh (2003), Table 2, column 3) and column 2 of Table 7
closely replicates this result.
    While normalizing the dividend by income is reasonable, family income in the CE suffers
from substantial measurement error and under-reporting as shown in the companion paper,
which leads to substantial attenuation bias. To show this, column 3 uses total expenditures as
an alternative less-noisy measure of (permanent) income to scale the dividend instead of the
more noisy family income. This alternative normalization substantially increases the response
from 0 to 12%, reflecting the substantial measurement error contained in self-reported family
income. Column 4 adds a time fixed effect which is another main effect of the relative dividend
variable besides family size. The point estimates are largely unaffected although the precision
decreases. Column 5 uses all quarters, including those without dividend payments, and uses
non-Alaskan households as a control group to increase the precision. While the point estimates
remain largely unchanged (especially in the longer sample in panel B), the precision of the
estimates more than doubles. Column 6 adds the inverse of total expenditures, which is the
last main effect of the relative dividend size. Column 7 takes into account that take-up of the
dividend is not complete and varies from year to year. Using an attenuation factor to inflate the
dividend payments by the inverse probability that a member received the dividend turns the
intention-to-treat effect into an average treatment-on-the-treated effect which is comparable
to the estimates based on the PFW sample. Finally, column 8 shows that one can obtain
an unbiased estimate of the spending response as a fraction of self-reported family income by
using the less noisy measure of the relative dividend normalized by total expenditures used in
column 7 as an instrument for the more noisy relative dividend normalized by family income
used in column 2. The corresponding elasticity using this larger income base is 8% in the
extended sample, respectively 5% in the shorter sample, confirming that measurement error
largely explains the previous non-result, which is attenuated completely toward zero. Also note
that the elasticity of 7.6% is almost identical to the MPC of 7.9% in column 1 of Table 6.
Hence, differences in the results are not driven by using logs instead of levels.
    Measurement error in family income explains 70% of the difference between the previous
estimated elasticity of 0 and the elasticity of 14% estimated using total household expenditures
to normalize PFD payments, an alternative measure of (permanent) income that is more pre-
cisely quantified in the CE. The other 30% of the difference is due to the fact that the latter
is based on a longer sample from 1980 to 2013, which contains the much larger variation in
annual dividend payments during the 2000s, while the dividend grew almost linearly from 1983
to 2001.
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                       25

6.5 Anticipation Effects
    In order to obtain a complete picture of the impact of the PFD on household behavior, we
need to assess what households do with the part of the dividend that they do not spend. One
possibility is that they respond to news about future dividends before the dividends are paid
out. Although there is no systematic response to leads of the dividend payments at any horizon,
this does not fully rule out anticipation effects. Instead, under the rational-expectation version
of the standard model, households would rationally only respond to new information about the
dividend, and such news shocks should in fact not be systematically related to any predictable
variable, in particular not to the calendar month or any lead of the actual dividend.

Narrative Analysis and Market-Based PFD Expectations I quantify the amount of
new information released throughout the fiscal year about the next PFD in an companion back-
ground paper (Kueng (2015a)) using two approaches, (i) an extensive narrative analysis of all
major Alaskan newspapers and local media starting in the early 1980s and (ii) the construc-
tion of a market-based time series of expected Permanent Fund Dividends applying the public
formula described in section 2.1 to new historical data of the fund’s monthly income starting
in the mid-1990s obtained from the APFC’s archive. The following two excerpts reproduce two
representative results of the narrative analysis, both predicting the 2010 dividend of $1,281,
which was distributed on October 7, 2010.
     Juneau Empire, May 28, 2010: DIVIDEND LOOKS SECURE
         “Based on the current value of permanent fund earnings and projections for
         the remainder of the fiscal year, the permanent fund will likely provide nearly
         $812 million for dividend payments this year. That comes out to an esti-
         mated $1,171 per dividend check for 2010, down a bit from last year’s $1,305,
         according to Empire calculations based on likely dividend applications.”

     Anchorage Daily News, July 31, 2010: PFD EXPECTED TO BE SIMILAR TO
     LAST YEAR’S – $1,250 TO $1,320: INVESTMENT PROFITS WERE ANNOUNCED
     FRIDAY
         “The Permanent Fund dividend payment this fall could be very close to last
         year’s $1,305. The size of the payment for qualified Alaska residents will
         likely fall between $1,250 and $1,320, according to a Daily News estimate.
         [...]. The Daily News estimate is based in part on Friday’s announcement that
         $858 million in investment profits from the state’s oil-wealth savings account
         will be available for dividends this year. It also factors some assumptions,
         such as how many people will be eligible for the dividend this year. The
         state will announce the actual size of this year’s dividend in September. The
         state plans to pay this year’s dividend to more than 600,000 Alaskans on
         Oct. 7. The distribution of roughly $1 billion to Alaskans each fall juices
         the state’s economy as people spend the money with retailers, remodeling
         companies, airlines, brokerage houses and even bankruptcy attorneys.”
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                26

   Figure 1 plots both series of the expected PFD resulting from this study. The figures
show that changes in expected dividends using either measure are orders of magnitude smaller
than the dividend itself. Hence, we would not expect households with rational expectations to
change their consumption much in the months prior to the dividend based on these news shocks.
Moreover, the forecast errors are of course positive and negative, contrary to the actual dividend
payment and any of its leads or lags. Therefore, anticipation effects should not systematically
be positive and hence cannot explain the observed excess sensitivity. Moreover, the figure shows
that uncertainty about the next dividend declines during the fiscal year. Hence, the additional
precautionary (dis)saving motives introduced by the decreasing uncertainty about the dividend
should increase spending until September, but not in October when uncertainty is lowest.

Residual Income Analysis An alternative way to assess how much households could on
average respond in advance to the payments is to estimate how much of the dividend is left after
taking into account both the amount spent when receiving the dividend (the excess sensitivity
of total expenditures) and the additional amount of federal income taxes due in the next year.
    Although the PFD is a program run by the state of Alaska, the dividends for adults are
fully taxable for federal income tax purposes, and depending on the amount of the dividend,
children’s dividends may be taxable too. I estimate the average marginal tax rate (AMTR)
paid by Alaskan households on the marginal dollar of dividends received by regressing tax
expenditure transactions in the current year on the previous year’s dividend, P F Ditlag , fully
interacted with calendar month fixed effects,
                           12
                           X                                        12
                                                                      X
                   Tit =         τm · monthm ×   P F Ditlag       +         monthm + uit ,        (9)
                           m=1                                        m=1


where T are the household’s tax payments (or refunds) in period t, monthm are the 12 month
fixed effects, and τm is the AMTR paid in month m. Adding up all 12 tax rates τm over the
year yields the AMTR paid on one dollar of additional Permanent Fund Dividend income.
    Figure 5(c) shows the monthly marginal tax rates τm from estimating (9). I restrict the
sample of Alaskans to households who receive the full potential dividend amount in form of a
direct deposit. This makes sure that they did not elect to have federal taxes withheld from their
dividend checks, which would induce a downward bias. Since Alaska does not have a state or
local income tax, the federal AMTR is all we need. Although the individual coefficients are not
very precisely estimated, we see that households pay 8 cents of additional federal income taxes
in February for each additional dollar of PFD received, and another 5 cents in both March and
April. The response in all other months is small and statistically insignificant, consistent with
the pattern of federal income tax revenues from aggregate statistics.
    Adding up the coefficients of the federal marginal taxes across all calendar months yields a
point estimate for the federal AMTR of 22.5%, with a standard error of 10.3%. This estimate
is similar to independent estimates provided by Mertens (2013), who extends the estimates in
Barro and Redlick (2011), finding an AMTR across all tax units in the U.S. between 22.1%
and 23.5% in 2010.
            CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                                  27

   Combining the estimated AMTR with the estimated MPC of total expenditures of 78%
(Table 3, column 8) leaves little room for large anticipation effects, consistent with the direct
evidence provided in Figures 3(a) and 5(a).

6.6 Consumption Commitments and Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth Users
    Models with consumption commitments offer an additional interpretation of excess sensi-
tivity. Households have to commit ex-ante to purchasing the stock in order to consume the
service flow from durable goods such as housing (e.g., Chetty and Szeidl (2007)). Durable
assets are illiquid and involve a transaction cost to turn them into liquid assets (e.g., Kaplan
and Violante (2014)). Therefore, households optimally tolerate deviations from the frictionless
optimum in more flexible consumption goods, such as spending on nondurables, in response to
smaller income shocks.
    Consistent with these predictions, I find that homeowners have on average a 24 percent
point larger MPC than non-homeowners (34% vs 10%, with a standard error of 7%. More
importantly, consumption commitments interact with the expected size of the income shock
such that homeowners’ tolerate predictable changes in flexible consumption (nondurables and
services), but respond less to larger shocks. Therefore, a central prediction of these models
is that the relative difference in excess sensitivity between homeowners and non-homeowners
should decrease as the size of the shock increases.21 To test this prediction, I interact home-
ownership status with quartiles of the relative size of the dividend in order to analyze how the
differential responses change as the relative size of the dividend payments increases. Figure 5(d)
shows that the estimated difference in the response is indeed declining in the relative size of
the dividend, consistent with the theory, although the power is low.
    While these results are consistent with models of consumption commitments and wealthy
hand-to-mouth consumers, there are two important caveats. First, the typical homeowner in
this sample has sufficient money in his bank accounts, a median value of $28,000, so that he
does not appear to be credit constrained. This is also the case for each of the relative dividend
size quartiles, in which median bank balances range from $35,000 in the lowest quartile to
$9,000 in the highest quartile. Consequently, conditioning on liquid assets and income does not
substantially affect the results. Therefore, other frictions that differentially affect homeowners,
either economic frictions or behavioral biases, probably also play an important role.
    Second, an important limitation of optimization-based models of excess sensitivity—which
in addition to consumption commitment models also include models of rational inattention
(e.g., Reis (2006) and Luo (2008)) and optimization frictions (e.g., Chetty (2012))—is that
they cannot explain why household spending responds to fully predetermined cash flows rather
than to new information about those future cash flows. In those models, a household’s optimal
response typically smoothes consumption between dates at which he rebalances his portfolio
(consumption commitments), updates his information set (rational inattention), or pays the
fixed cost of re-optimization (optimization frictions), which is inconsistent with the large MPCs
  21
     This is a distinct prediction for excess sensitivity relative to models with habit formation; see Chetty and
Szeidl (2016).
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                       28

estimated in this paper. Moreover, the size of new information about future PFDs is much
smaller than the dividend itself, because the size of the dividend is highly predictable and
hence rational forecast errors are small. Therefore, even if households did rebalance or update
only infrequently and only at dates at which dividends are paid out, they should still only react
to the new information they received since the last time they changed their consumption plans.
However, the observed MPCs are orders of magnitudes larger than what one would expect if
households only responded to new information about the dividend. Moreover, consumption
should as likely decrease as increase on those dates and need not necessarily be related to
the nominal amount of the dividend, because forecast errors due to new information are both
negative and positive. Instead, households respond to the entire dividend amount, not just the
news component.

6.7 Additional Robustness Checks
    Table 8 presents additional robustness checks of the baseline results in column 4 of Table 2,
which are reproduced for convenience in column 1. For reasons described in section 2.2, the
baseline sample restricts Alaskan households to those who receive the dividend as a direct
deposit within two business days. Column 2 relaxes this restriction by including delayed PFD
direct deposits as well as dividends identified from check deposits. The point estimate increases
slightly which could be due to the fact that these additional recipients often have their dividend
partially garnished, although we cannot reject that it is smaller than the baseline effect. To
investigate this possibility, column 3 restricts the sample of dividend recipients to those that
only receive a partial dividend; i.e., they have their dividend reduced due to involuntary or
voluntary deductions as discussed in section 2.2. The point estimate is not larger than in column
2 suggesting that these households do not behave differently than households that receive the
full dividend amount. To show this, column 4 restricts the analysis to such households that
receive the full amount of the PFD, yielding a similar MPC. Column 4 then uses the entire
sample of Alaskan households, including those for whom I do not observe a dividend receipt.
The point estimate is again similar to the baseline estimate with a slight increase in precision
due to the additional observations.
    Column 6 shows that controlling for family size non-parametrically does not affect the
baseline result much. Note that even with family size fixed effects the model is still identified
since the identifying variation comes from the interaction of family size with time effects and
also includes a control group of households in Washington that do not receive the dividend.
Furthermore, there is variation in the amount of cash-on-hand received even among families
of the same size in the same period due to voluntary and involuntary deductions. Column 3
shows that this identifying variation also yields a similar estimate of the average MPC.
    One concern with the new PFW data is that family size and the number of users per
online account might be very different. This can be for two main reasons. First, it is possible
that family members have different accounts but share a common household. Second, most
users provide the demographic information when they first sing up for a new account and this
information is only infrequently updated, if ever. Hence, family size and the number of users
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                        29

can diverge over time. Note however that it is a priori not clear whether such a discrepancy
should bias the estimated MPC and in what direction. To address this issue, column 7 restricts
the sample of Alaskans to households whose self-reported family size equals the number of
dividend checks received. The estimated MPC is similar to the baseline estimate in column 1,
although less precisely estimated due to the smaller sample.
    Finally, I link the external validity checks of sections 6.4 and 6.3 by estimating the same
regression in log-differences as in Table 7 but now using the PFW instead of the CE sample.
As in section 6.3 I divide the PFD payments by quarterly family income averaged over all
household observations to estimate an elasticity that is comparable to the baseline specification
in level differences. Column 8 shows that the estimated elasticity of 34% is again very similar
to be baseline MPC of 28%. Hence, specifying the model in absolute vs. percentage differences
does not affect the finding of significant excess sensitivity to the dividend payments.

7 Conclusion
    This paper finds significant evidence of consumption excess sensitivity in response to salient,
predetermined, and nominally large cash flows. The potential loss from failing to smooth
consumption and instead consuming the entire predictable cash inflow varies systematically
across households. This potential loss is shown to be monotonically increasing in the relative size
of the cash flow as a fraction of permanent income, measured as annual household consumption.
The realized loss on the other hand is endogenous and depends on the response of each household
to the cash flow.
    Sorting households according to their potential loss shows that households for whom the loss
would be the largest violate the basic PIH model the least, while households for whom the loss is
trivial violate the standard model’s prediction the most. Consistent with households following
near-rational alternatives, the actual loss taking into account these behavioral responses is
small and similar across households. Therefore, near-rational behavior can explain most of the
heterogeneity in MPCs across households that are not borrowing constrained. Low levels of
liquid assets on the other hand continue to predict high MPCs for lower-income households, in
addition to the predictive power of the potential loss statistic.
    Hence, the statistically significant deviation of household consumption from the theory’s
main prediction shown in this paper does not imply a significant deviation in terms of wealth-
equivalent losses. The potential loss of deviating from the nominal model—which in the case of
the PIH model is captured by the relative size of the predetermined payments—can therefore
be used as a measure of economic power of a research design for testing the nominal model’s
predictions in the spirit of Varian (1990).
    This paper is among the first to use a single income source to show that the relative size
of the payment and hence the potential loss from not smoothing out this cash flow is a crucial
statistic for explaining excess sensitivity in household consumption. The relative size of the cash
flows together with liquidity constraints and precautionary saving motives could therefore help
to reconcile the large literature that tests for excessively sensitive in household consumption.
    Finally, while the failure of the standard theory documented in this paper is not econom-
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                      30

ically significant for individual households, it has important implications for policy. Many
policies have a large predictable component, such as economic stimulus programs, automatic
stabilizers, and many more. According to the standard model, one would expect unconstrained
households to adjust their spending only to the news about such policies, and only if it affects
their permanent income or life-time budget constraint. However, not smoothing out those cash
flows has trivial costs for most households and for most policies. Therefore, gaining a better
understanding of the near-rational alternatives that households follow in response to such rel-
atively small payments is important in order to design effective and robust policies. At the
same time, the fact that the deviations from the standard model documented in this paper are
consistent with households following near-rational alternatives implies that optimization-based
extensions of the standard model might have limited economic power and thus might not be
very robust. Modelling near-rational behavior in a parsimonious and robust way thus remains
an important challenge for future research.

References
Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Yellen, “A Near-Rational Model of the Business Cycle, with
  Wage and Price Inertia,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1985, 100 (Supplement), 823–838.
Baker, Scott R., “Debt and the Consumption Response to Household Income Shocks,” working
  paper, 2014.
Barro, Robert J. and Charles J. Redlick, “Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases
  and Taxes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126, 51–102.
Broda, Christian and Jonathan A. Parker, “The economic stimulus payments of 2008 and the
  aggregate demand for consumption,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2014, 68, S20–S36.
Browning, Martin and Dolores Collado, “The Response of Expenditures to Anticipated Income
  Changes: Panel Data Estimates,” American Economic Review, 2001.
   and Thomas F. Crossley, “The Life-Cycle Model of Consumption and Saving,” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 2001, 15 (3), pp. 3–22.
Campbell, John Y. and Gregory N. Mankiw, “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Rein-
  terpreting the Time Series Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989.
Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber, “Cash-On-Hand and Competing Models of In-
  tertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2007, 122 (4), 1511–1560.
Carroll, Christopher D., “A Theory of the Consumption Function, With and Without Liquidity
  Constraints,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2001, 15 (3), 23–45.
Chetty, Raj, “Bounds on elasticities with optimization frictions: A synthesis of micro and macro
  evidence on labor supply,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (3), 969–1018.
   and Adam Szeidl, “Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 831–877.
   and , “Consumption Commitments and Habit Formation,” Econometrica, 2016, 84 (2),
  855–890.
Cochrane, John H., “The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal Allocation of Consumption
  to Near-Rational Alternatives,” American Economic Review, 1989, 79 (3), 319–337.
          CONSUMPTION EXCESS SENSITIVITY AND NEAR-RATIONALITY                    31

Fuchs-Schuendeln, Nicola and Tarek A. Hassan, “Natural Experiments in Macroeconomics,”
  working paper, 2015.
Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson, “The 6D bias and the equity-premium puzzle,” NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual, 2002.
Goldsmith, Scott, “The Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend Program,” working paper, 2001.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, “Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence from the
  Alaska Permanent Fund,” American Economic Review, March 2003, 93 (1), 397–405.
Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, “The Consumption Response to Income Changes,” Annual
  Review of Economics, 2010, 2, 479–506.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Household Expenditure and
  the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1589–1610.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L Violante, “A model of the consumption response to fiscal stimulus
  payments,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1199–1239.
Kreinin, Mordechai E, “Windfall income and consumption: Additional evidence,” American
  Economic Review, 1961, pp. 388–390.
Kueng, Lorenz, “Expected Permanent Fund Dividends: New Measures Based on a Narrative
  Analysis and Archival Data,” working paper, 2015.
  , “Revisiting the Response of Household Spending to the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend
  using CE Data,” working paper, 2015.
Luo, Yulei, “Consumption dynamics under information processing constraints,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics, April 2008, 11 (2), 366–385.
Lusardi, Annamaria, “Permanent Income, Current Income, and Consumption: Evidence from
  Two Panel Data Sets,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 1996, 14 (1), 81–90.
Mertens, Karel, “Marginal Tax Rates and Income: New Time Series Evidence,” working paper,
  2013.
Parker, Jonathan A., “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in
  Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4).
Reis, Ricardo, “Inattentive Producers,” Review of Economic Studies, July 2006, 73 (3), 793–
  821.
Romer, Christina D., “Is the Stabilization of the Postwar Economy a Figment of the Data?,”
  American Economic Review, 1986, pp. 314–334.
  , “Spurious volatility in historical unemployment data,” Journal of Political Economy, 1986,
  pp. 1–37.
  , “The cyclical behavior of individual production series, 1889-1984,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1991, pp. 1–31.
Scholnick, Barry, “Consumption Smoothing after the Final Mortgage Payment: Testing the
  Magnitude Hypothesis,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (4), 1444–1449.
Souleles, Nicholas S., “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,”
  American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 947–958.
Varian, Hal R., “Goodness-of-Fit in Optimizing Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 1990, 46
  (1), 125–140.
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                     State of Alaska                    State of Washington
                                            Mean         Median      St.Dev.        Mean       Median     St.Dev.
Permanent Fund Dividend:
- annual payments (real $2014)              1,999        1,417       1,357            --          --          --
- per annual income                         2.8%         2.1%        2.8%             --          --          --
- per annual total expenditures             4.7%         3.6%        3.9%             --          --          --

Quarterly Expenditures:
- nondurables and services                 8,441         7,179       5,858          8,049       6,531        6,103
- durables (paid for with a credit card)   3,116         2,235       3,036          2,971       2,074        3,019
- other items in total expenditures        13,017        8,651       15,607         12,849      8,229       16,060

Income:
- annual after-tax income                  99,716        82,294      74,056         97,074      77,419      77,267

Net Financial Assets:
- bank accounts ("cash-on-hand")            40,903       11,715      85,484         61,234      21,911     107,198
- taxable (brokerage) accounts             150,708       8,751      461,182        229,808     28,021      599,532
- tax-deferred accounts                    164,086      33,952      366,360        164,686     42,666      327,013
- total net financial assets               366,055      108,034     770,065        468,000     153,332     870,699

Demographics:
- family size                               2.80           2         1.37           2.61          2         1.37
- OECD household equivalence scale          2.08           2         0.74           1.99         1.7        0.77
- age                                       32.18          31        10.67          30.93        31         10.27
- education (years of schooling)            15.34          16        2.22           16.03        16         2.12

Number of households                        1,379                                   2,167

Notes: Nominal variables are in local dollars of 2014 and, expect for annual dividend payments, are winsorized at 1%.
Income is after deductions and tax withholding and includes the Permanent Fund Dividend payments.
Table 2: Average Excess Sensitivity
                                                        first differences estimator                           fixed effects estimator
Dep. var.: ∆cit or cit, quarterly
nondurables and services             average MPC median MPC          Alaskans only    adding controls    household FE     adding controls
                                          (1)        (2)                  (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)

PFD payments                            0.277***        0.267***        0.238***         0.282***           0.256***         0.246***
                                        (0.044)         (0.032)         (0.060)          (0.045)            (0.033)          (0.035)

- Time FE (year-by-quarter)               YES            YES              YES              YES                YES              YES
- Alaska FE                               YES            YES                               YES
- Household FE                                                                                                YES              YES
- Family size                                                                              YES                                 YES
- Income                                                                                   YES                                 YES
- Liquid assets                                                                            YES                                 YES
- Other household characteristics                                                          YES                                 YES

Observations                             44,577         44,577           16,012           44,577            47,788            47,788

R-squared                                0.106           0.068           0.116            0.108              0.670             0.679
Notes: PFD payments sum all cash flows received by a household from the Permanent Fund Dividend Division in a quarter. Income is
household income after deductions and income tax withholding. Liquid assets are the household's net cash-equivalent bank balances (cash-
on-hand). Other household characteristics include fixed effects for age, education, residential ZIP code, homeownership status, marital
status, and occupation. Expenses totaling the exact amount of the annual dividend are excluded in order to avoid any mechanical effects
due to misclassified transactions. For robustness, the dependent variable is winsorized at the 1% level, except for the median regression
(2). Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-household correlations and
heteroskedasticity.
Table 3: MPC Heterogeneity and Near-Rationality
                                                                   near-rationality                                    liquidity constraints
Dep. var.: ∆cit, quarterly                 by potenital-loss        with squared      by income per capita           by cash-on-hand ratio
nondurables and services                quintiles (relative PFD)        PFD                 quintiles                      quintiles
                                            (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)               (6)           (7)


PFD payments x 1st quintile              0.839***      0.849***                        0.118**      0.122**           0.368***      0.378***
                                         (0.182)        (0.187)                        (0.052)      (0.052)            (0.058)      (0.060)

PFD payments x 2nd quintile              0.599***      0.593***                         0.093        0.102            0.260***      0.279***
                                         (0.130)        (0.133)                        (0.068)      (0.071)            (0.068)      (0.069)

PFD payments x 3rd quintile              0.425***      0.414***                       0.291***      0.303***          0.316***      0.326***
                                         (0.097)        (0.099)                        (0.071)      (0.073)            (0.099)      (0.101)

PFD payments x 4th quintile              0.269***      0.270***                       0.407***      0.422***          0.192**       0.206**
                                         (0.080)        (0.082)                        (0.106)      (0.109)            (0.097)      (0.100)

PFD payments x 5th quintile              0.159***      0.167***                       0.611***      0.631***          0.230**       0.243**
                                         (0.046)        (0.048)                        (0.108)      (0.110)            (0.096)      (0.098)

PFD payments                                                           0.278***
                                                                       (0.099)

(PFD payments/100) 2                                                    0.027
                                                                       (0.201)

- Time FE (year-by-quarter)                YES           YES             YES            YES           YES               YES           YES
- Alaska FE                                YES           YES             YES            YES           YES               YES           YES
- Potential-loss quintile FE               YES           YES             YES                          YES                             YES
- Income per capita quintile FE                          YES             YES            YES           YES                             YES
- Cash-on-hand ratio quintile FE                         YES             YES                          YES               YES           YES
- Family size                                            YES             YES                          YES                             YES
- Other household characteristics                        YES             YES                          YES                             YES

Observations                             44,577         44,577          44,577         44,577        44,577            44,577       44,577

R-squared                                 0.107          0.108          0.107           0.107        0.108             0.106         0.108

Average MPC for comparison               0.285***      0.290***        0.290***       0.278***      0.290***          0.277***      0.290***
                                         (0.044)       (0.045)         (0.045)        (0.044)       (0.045)           (0.044)       (0.045)

Notes: PFD payments sum all cash flows received by a household from the Permanent Fund Dividend Division in a quarter. Shock size in
columns 1 and 2 is the amount of PFD payments received per year by a household divided by the household's annualized total spending,
where total spending is averaged over all household years. Per capita income for the quintiles in columns 4 and 5 is calculated using the OECD
household equivalence scale. The cash‐on‐hand ratio in columns 6 and 7 is computed as net cash‐equivalent bank balances divided by
average total spending per quarter averaged over all household years. Other household characteristics include fixed effects for age,
education, residential ZIP code, homeownership status, marital status, and occupation. Expenses totaling the exact amount of the annual
dividend are excluded in order to avoid any mechanical effects due to misclassified transactions. For robustness, the dependent variable is
winsorized at the 1% level. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within‐
household correlations and heteroskedasticity.
Table 4: Near-Rationality vs Liquidity
                                                 by median liquidity                      by liquidity quartiles
Dep. var.: ∆cit, quarterly                        below           above          1
                                                                                   st
                                                                                             2nd             3rd       4th
nondurables and services                                    (1)                                      (2)

                   st
PFD payments x 1 potential‐loss quintile         0.823***         0.863***    0.946***     0.723**         0.557*    1.114***
                                                  (0.240)         (0.249)      (0.281)     (0.336)         (0.334)   (0.328)

PFD payments x 2nd potential‐loss quintile       0.631***         0.559***    0.724***     0.539*          0.487*    0.606***
                                                  (0.193)         (0.167)      (0.235)     (0.296)         (0.261)   (0.212)

PFD payments x 3rd potential‐loss quintile       0.524***          0.264      0.536***    0.510***         0.178      0.340
                                                  (0.109)         (0.163)      (0.122)     (0.168)         (0.162)   (0.261)

PFD payments x 4th potential‐loss quintile       0.336***          0.208      0.392***     0.271**         0.248      0.147
                                                  (0.079)         (0.131)      (0.084)     (0.129)         (0.179)   (0.168)

PFD payments x 5th potential‐loss quintile       0.246***          0.042      0.258***    0.234***         0.015      0.067
                                                  (0.050)         (0.083)      (0.065)     (0.072)         (0.081)   (0.138)

- Time FE (year-by-quarter)                               YES                                       YES
- Alaska FE                                               YES                                       YES
- Family size                                             YES                                       YES
- Potential-loss quintile FE                              YES                                       YES
- Cash-on-hand ratio quantile FE                          YES                                       YES
- Income per capita quintile FE                           YES                                       YES
- Other household characteristics                         YES                                       YES

Observations                                            44,577                                     44,577

R-squared                                               0.109                                      0.109

Notes: PFD payments sum all cash flows received by a household from the Permanent Fund Dividend Division in a quarter.
The potential loss uses the rative dividend size, which is the amount of PFD payments received per year by a household
divided by the household's annualized total spending, where total spending is averaged over all household years. Liquidity is
measured using the cash‐on‐hand ratio, i.e. the ratio of net cash‐equivalent bank balances to average total spending per
quarter averaged over all household years. Per capita income uses the OECD household equivalence scale. Other household
characteristics include fixed effects for age, education, residential ZIP code, homeownership status, marital status, and
occupation. Expenses totaling the exact amount of the annual dividend are excluded in order to avoid any mechanical
effects due to misclassified transactions. For robustness, the dependent variable is winsorized at the 1% level. Robust
standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within‐household correlations
and heteroskedasticity.
Table 5: Disaggregated Spending Response to the Permanent Fund Dividend Payments
                                              food              kids        student and     mortgage               durables with     total
Dep. var.: c it, quarterly spending    at home     away       activities   auto loan int.   payments     rent       credit cards expenditures
                                          (1)       (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)           (8)

PFD payments                           0.067***    0.020***    0.007**        0.016*        0.057***    0.001        0.144***       0.783***
                                       (0.009)     (0.005)     (0.003)        (0.009)       (0.018)    (0.003)       (0.023)        (0.137)

- Time FE (year-by-quarter)              YES         YES         YES           YES            YES       YES            YES            YES
- Household FE                           YES         YES         YES           YES            YES       YES            YES            YES
- Family size                            YES         YES         YES           YES            YES       YES            YES            YES
- Income                                 YES         YES         YES           YES            YES       YES            YES            YES
- Liquid assets                          YES         YES         YES           YES            YES       YES            YES            YES
- Other household characteristics        YES         YES         YES           YES            YES       YES            YES            YES

Observations                            47,788      47,788     47,788         47,788         47,788    47,788         47,788         47,788

R-squared                               0.691       0.639       0.526          0.416         0.661      0.504          0.540          0.665
Notes: PFD payments sum all cash flows received by a household from the Permanent Fund Dividend Division in a quarter. (1) is spending
on groceries; (2) is spending on restaurants, fast food, coffee shops and bars; (3) is spending on kids activities and babysitting expenses; (7)
sums durable spending paid for with a credit card and hence identifiable as durables expenses from the transaction label; (8) sums non-
durables, services, durables and other expenses (see Table A1). Income is household income after deductions and income tax withholding.
Liquid assets are the household's net cash-equivalent bank balances (cash-on-hand). Other household characteristics include fixed effects for
age, education, residential ZIP code, homeownership status, marital status, and occupation. Expenses totaling the exact amount of the annual
dividend are excluded in order to avoid any mechanical effects due to misclassified transactions. For robustness, all dependent variables are
winsorized at the 1% level. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-
household correlations and heteroskedasticity.
Table 6: External Validity using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE)

                                                                                     PFW Sample
Dep. var.: ∆cit, quarterly                               using the        using the      dealing w/ sample   IV imputed with
nondurables and services               CE Sample
                                                       observed PFD     imputed PFD        composition        observed PFD
                                           (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)

PFD payments                                              0.276***
                                                          (0.042)

PFD x family size                        0.079**                           0.184***           -0.044             0.283***
                                         (0.036)                           (0.031)            (0.048)            (0.044)

PFD x family size x income/$100,000                                                           0.201***
                                                                                              (0.046)

predicted MPC at average CE income                                                           0.082***
                                                                                             (0.029)
- Time FE (year-by-quarter)               YES               YES              YES               YES                YES
- Alaska FE                               YES               YES              YES               YES                YES
- Family size                             YES               YES              YES               YES                YES
- Income                                  YES               YES              YES               YES                YES
- Liquid assets                           YES               YES              YES               YES                YES
- Other household characteristics         YES               YES              YES               YES                YES

Observations                             385,800           50,210           50,210            50,210             50,210

R-squared                                 0.006            0.107            0.107              0.109              0.107
Notes: PFD payments sum all cash flows received by a household from the Permanent Fund Dividend Division in a quarter.
PFD x family size imputes the dividend payments using the full annual dividend per person (PFD) multiplied by family size.
Income is household income after income tax withholding (CE sample) and after additional deductions (PFW sample). Liquid
assets are the household's net cash-equivalent bank balances (cash-on-hand). Other household characteristics include fixed
effects for age, education, residential ZIP code (PFW sample only), homeownership status, marital status, and occupation.
The predicted MPC in (4) uses the two coefficients listed to evaluate the linear MPC function at the average after-tax income
of Alaskan households in the CE. (5) instruments the imputed (noisy) dividend with the observed dividend used in (2) based
on transaction labels. Expenses totaling the exact amount of the annual dividend are excluded in order to avoid any
mechanical effects due to misclassified transactions. For robustness, the dependent variable is winsorized at the 1% level.
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-household
correlations and heteroskedasticity.
Table 7: Comparison with Hsieh (2003)

                                                                 Alaskans in 4th quarter only                                  All household-quarters
                                                     Hsieh's specification
                                                                  replication
Dep. var.: ∆ln(cit), quarterly                                                  normalize w/ control for       using rest of control for all attenuation IV curr inc w/
                                                  Hsieh (2003)       and
nondurables and services                                                        total expend. aggr. effects   U.S. as contol main effects       factor     perm inc
                                                                  extension
                                                      (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)

Panel A: Sample Period 1980-2001
PFD x family size x Alaska / before-tax income      -0.003         -0.003                                                                                   0.052**
                                                    (0.033)        (0.005)                                                                                  (0.025)
PFD x family size x Alaska / total expenditures                                     0.123         0.124          0.090**         0.091**       0.107**
                                                                                   (0.086)       (0.112)         (0.036)         (0.036)       (0.043)

Number of observations (rounded)                      806            800             800           800           315200          315200        315200       281500
Number of Alaskan obs. (rounded)                      806            800             800           800            4300            4300          4300         3800
Number of clusters (rounded)                           --             0              800           800           117000          117000        117000       103400
Number of Alaskan CUs (rounded)                       806            800             800           800            1700            1700          1700         1500
R-squared                                              --           0.009           0.013         0.038           0.009           0.009         0.009        0.010


Panel B: Sample Period 1980-2013
PFD x family size x Alaska / before-tax income         --          -0.001                                                                                   0.076***
                                                       --          (0.004)                                                                                  (0.023)
PFD x family size x Alaska / total expenditures                                    0.116*        0.134*          0.113***        0.113***     0.136***
                                                                                   (0.060)       (0.077)         (0.027)         (0.027)      (0.032)

Number of observations (rounded)                                    1400            1400          1400           559400          559400        559400       458000
Number of Alaskan obs. (rounded)                                    1400            1400          1400            7100            7100          7100         5900
Number of clusters (rounded)                                          0             1400          1400           206200          206200        206200       166000
Number of Alaskan CUs (rounded)                                     1400            1400          1400            2800            2800          2800         2300
R-squared                                                           0.004           0.007         0.032           0.007           0.007         0.007        0.009

- Other household characteristics                    YES             YES            YES           YES              YES            YES           YES           YES
- Family size                                        YES             YES            YES           YES              YES            YES           YES           YES
- Time (year-by-quarter) FE                                                                       YES              YES            YES           YES           YES
- Alaska FE                                                                                                        YES            YES           YES           YES
- Inverse total expenditures                                                                                                      YES           YES           YES
Notes: To maintain confidentiality, sample sizes are rounded to the nearest hundred. PFD is the annual Permanent Fund Dividend per person. (1)-(4) use only Alaskan
households. For comparison, (3)-(4) use the same smaller sample as in (1)-(2) that excludes households with zero self-reported family income, which are droped when
normalizing the dividend payments. Other household characteristics include quarterly changes in the number of children, adults, and seniors, and a quadratic in the age
of the reference person. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the household level in (3)-(8), thereby adjusting for arbitrary within-household
correlations and heteroskedasticity; OLS standard errors are used in (1)-(2).
Table 8: Robustness of Excess Sensitivity Results

Dep. var.: ∆cit or ∆ln(cit), quarterly                all PFDs, incl.    only partial      only full     incl. Alaskans   family size    family size   using
                                         baseline   checks & delayed    PFD received     PFD received     without PFD        FE         = # of users   ∆ln(cit)
nondurables and services
                                           (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)          (6)             (7)         (8)

PFD payments                             0.282***       0.305***          0.304***         0.282***         0.304***       0.288***      0.314***
                                         (0.045)        (0.044)           (0.093)          (0.048)          (0.042)        (0.045)       (0.057)

PFD payments / family income                                                                                                                           0.339***
                                                                                                                                                       (0.095)

- Time FE (year-by-quarter)               YES             YES               YES              YES              YES            YES           YES          YES
- Alaska FE                               YES             YES               YES              YES              YES            YES           YES          YES
- Income                                  YES             YES               YES              YES              YES            YES           YES          YES
- Liquid assets                           YES             YES               YES              YES              YES            YES           YES          YES
- Other household characteristics         YES             YES               YES              YES              YES            YES           YES          YES
- Family size                             YES             YES               YES              YES              YES                          YES          YES
- Family size FE                                                                                                             YES

Observations                             44,577          45,407            32,540           41,454           50,210         44,577        35,046       44,577

R-squared                                 0.108          0.108              0.104            0.107           0.107          0.108          0.107        0.211
Notes: PFD payments sum all cash flows received by a household from the Permanent Fund Dividend Division in a quarter. Income is household income after
deductions and income tax withholding. Liquid assets are the household's net cash-equivalent bank balances (cash-on-hand). Other household characteristics
include fixed effects for age, education, residential ZIP code, homeownership status, marital status, and occupation. The dependent variable is spending changes
in (1)-(7) and changes in log spending in (8). Family income used to normalize dividend payments in (8) is quarterly income averaged across all household years.
Expenses totaling the exact amount of the annual dividend are excluded in order to avoid any mechanical effects due to misclassified transactions. For
robustness, the dependent variable is winsorized at the 1% level respectively at 5% for the log changes, which restricts quarterly log spending changes to 100%
in absolute value. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-household correlations and
heteroskedasticity.
                       Figure 1 – Expected vs. actual Permanent Fund Dividend
                                         (a) narrative-based expected dividend


                                  Actual Permanent Fund Dividend (PFD)
            3000                  Expected PFD (narrative−based)


            2500


            2000


            1500


            1000


             500


                0
                      1985m1         1990m1        1995m1         2000m1        2005m1         2010m1         2015m1

                                          (b) market-based expected dividend




            2000




            1500




            1000




             500


                                  Actual Permanent Fund Dividend (PFD)
                                  Expected PFD (marked−based)
                0
                1990m1             1995m1            2000m1             2005m1             2010m1             2015m1

Notes: This figure shows the nominal Permanent Fund Dividend amount (blue dashed line), which is paid out in early October
(marked by the blue dots), as well as the expected dividends from the companion background paper (Kueng (2015a)), which are
based (a) on a narrative analysis of all major Alaskan newspapers and (b) on the public dividend formula applied to monthly
income from the fund’s asset obtained from the archives and the website of the APFC. Panel (a) includes the additional one-time
Alaska Resource Rebate of $1,200 in 2008. This special payment was introduced by Governor Sarah Palin and added on top of the
regular dividend of $2,069, which is the dividend predicted by the market-based approach in Panel (b).
                                              Figure 2 – Non-parametric evidence of spending excess sensitivity
                                                                                      (a) spending per capita




                                                 150
 difference in monthly per capita spending changes
                                50       100                                                                                 112




                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                      19               20
                                                                                              14
                      0




                                                                                                             −4      −6
                                                              −21            −22
                                         −29
                                                                                                     −39
          −50




                                                                                                                                     −73
−100




                                                        jan     feb    mar      apr    may     jun     jul     aug     sep     oct     nov    dec


                                                                           (b) income per capita (excluding dividend)
                                                  400
    difference in monthly per capita income changes
                                        200




                                                                                                             121
                                                                                       70                                     58
                                                                                                                                             37
                                                                      23
                                                                4
                           0




                                                                             −20             −21     −33                             −20
                                         −58                                                                         −71
−400        −200




                                                        jan     feb    mar      apr    may     jun     jul     aug     sep     oct     nov    dec



Notes: These figures show the average (median) difference in monthly household per capita spending
changes of nondurables and services (income per capita) between households in Alaska and Washington.
The Permanent Fund Dividend is paid out at the beginning of October. Per capita spending and income
are calculated using the OECD household equivalence scale. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 3 – Parametric evidence of excess sensitivity: average MPC of nondurables and services
                                                             P
                                     (a) βs from ∆cit =          s   βs P F Di,t−s + αt + Alaskai + λFamilySizeit + εit




              0.15
                                                                                   0.12
              0.10
              0.05




                                                                                                                                            0.04
                                                                                                                         0.03
                                                                                                   0.02
              0.00




                                     0.00   0.00                 0.00                                             0.01
                                                   −0.01 −0.01                                                                                         −0.01
                                                                           −0.01                                                    −0.02
              −0.05




                                                                                           −0.07
                                                                                                          −0.08
              −0.10




                                    −6     −5   −4       −3 −2 −1        0    1    2    3    4     5                            6       7          8
                                                          months since dividend payment (event time)


                                                                       (b) cumulative MPC
                        .6     .4
               cumulative effect




                                                                                                                                                   0.28
                                                                                                                           0.27
                                                                      0.24                0.24            0.24
              .2




                                                   0.17

                                    0.12
                        0




                                     0               1                 2             3                     4                5                       6
                                                                             horizon (months)


Notes: These figures show the the response of household spending on nondurables and services to the receipt of the Alaska
Permanent Fund Dividend (PFD) by estimating equation (6). All specifications use changes in levels as the dependent variable.
Panel (a) shows leads and lags of the regression coefficients on the dividend. Panel (b) cumulates the marginal propensity to spend
from the beginning of October when the PFD is paid out to the end of April. Bars and dashed lines show two robust standard
errors, clustered at the household level, which adjust for arbitrary within-household correlations and heteroskedasticity.
                               Figure 4 – Near-Rationality and Heterogeneity in MPCs

                                      (a) by potential loss      (∝ relative dividend size2 )

                    1.2
                                                        potential loss                MPC
                                                                                                                     5
                                                        actual loss
                     1                                                                                4.19
                                                                                                                     4
                          0.84




                                                                                                                         Economic Loss (in %)
                     .8

                                                                                                                     3
              MPC




                                            0.60
                     .6

                                                                 0.42                                                2
                     .4
                                                                                     0.27
                                                                                  0.97
                                                                                                                     1
                     .2                                                                                  0.16
                                                               0.46
                                         0.24
                     0.09
                     0    0.07              0.09                 0.08                 0.07               0.11        0
                            1                   2                  3                   4                     5
                                                        potential−loss quintile


                                                (b) by per capita after-tax income


                          .8



                                                                                                             0.61
                          .6



                                                                                        0.41
                    MPC




                          .4

                                                                      0.29


                          .2
                               0.12
                                                 0.09


                          0

                                1                   2               3                      4                     5
                                                         income−per−capita quintile

Notes: These figures decompose the average quarterly MPC in nondurables and services across the two predicted dimensions of
potential wealth-equivalent losses by estimating equation (7) without controls x; Table 3 reports the results when adding a full set
of controls. Panel (a) uses the potential loss (4) from fully spending the dividend in the 4th quarter instead of fully smoothing
it throughout the year, which is monotone increasing in the relative dividend size—the amount of PFD payments received by a
household divided by the household’s annualized total expenditures. The actual economic loss is calculated using (5) with T = 4 and
γ = 2. Panel (b) uses after-tax income, normalized by the household’s OECD equivalence scale. Dashed lines show bootstrapped
95% confidence intervals (panel a) respectively two robust standard errors clustered at the household level (panel b), which adjust
for arbitrary within-household correlations and heteroskedasticity.
                                                                                                                                                 Figure 5 – Extensions



                                                                     (a) durables: regression βs                                                                                                                                           (b) durables: cumulative MPC
  0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                       0.08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.15
  0.05




                                                                                                                                                                      0.05                                                                 0.12                       0.12




                                                                                                                                                                                         cumulative effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.09




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.08
                                              0.02
                                                                                                                                                 0.01                            0.01                                                                                                                    0.06
  0.00




                                                                           0.00                                                       0.01
                                                                                                                      −0.00                                 −0.00
                                                                                    −0.01
                                                                  −0.01
                                                          −0.02                             −0.03




                                                                                                                                                                                        0
  −0.05




                                                                                                              −0.05
                                                                                                                              −0.06

                                                                                                                                                                                                              −.1
  −0.10




                                             −6     −5         −4        −3 −2 −1        0    1    2    3    4     5                                    6         7          8                                                       0      1             2            3             4             5      6
                                                                          months since dividend payment (event time)                                                                                                                                           horizon (months)




                                              (c) additional income tax per $ of dividend                                                                                                                                (d) cons. commitments: homeowners vs renters
  −0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.1 1.3 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                           (homeowner MPC) − (non−homeowner MPC)




                                                              0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .9




                                                                         0.06                                                                                                                                                       0.80
                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                        .5    .7




                                                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                                   0.01                      0.01                                                                       0.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                  .3




                                                                                                                 0.00                                          0.00                                                                                                                 0.21
                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                  −0.01                                        −0.01                          −0.01                                                                                                                                                                      0.09
                                                                                                                                                                                        −.1   .1




                                              1           2          3          4          5           6     7           8            9          10          11         12                                                           1                     2                          3                   4
                                                                                                        month                                                                                                                              quintile of relative dividend size (potential welfare loss)




Notes: Panels (a) and (b) show the dynamics of the spending response on durables paid for with a credit card, based on regression
equation (6). In addition to Alaska and year-by-month time fixed effects and family size the regression also controls for household
income, liquid assets (bank balances), and fixed effects for age, education, residential ZIP code, homeownership status, marital
status, and occupation. Panel (c) shows the additional federal income taxes paid in each month due to the previous year’s
Permanent Fund Dividend, based on regression equation (9). Panel (d) shows the differential nondurable spending response
between homeowners and non-homeowners. Bars and dashed lines show two robust standard errors, clustered at the household
level, which adjust for arbitrary within-household correlations and heteroskedasticity.
Table A1. Expenditure aggregation

                          Personal Finance Website Data (PFW)

PFW ID   Expenditure                         PFW ID      Expenditure                 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE)

Non‐durables:                                Services:                               Non‐durables and services:
611     Baby Supplies                        1           Entertainment               food at home
7       Food & Dining                        101         Arts                        food away
701     Groceries                            102         Amusement                   alcohol at home
704     Coffee Shops                         4           Personal Care               alcohol away
706     Fast Food                            403         Hair                        tobacco
707     Restaurants                          404         Spa & Massage               personal care services
708     Alcohol & Bars                       406         Laundry                     child care
1401    Gas & Fuel                           5           Health & Fitness            adult care
1702    Office Supplies                      501         Dentist                     domestic services
                                             502         Doctor                      gas
Durables:                                    503         Eyecare                     electricity
103       Music                              505         Pharmacy                    fuel
104       Movies & DVDs                      506         Health Insurance            phone
105       Newspapers & Magazines             507         Gym                         water
2         Shopping                           508         Sports                      public transport
201       Clothing                           6           Kids                        vehicle services
202       Books                              602         Babysitter & Daycare        vehicle insurance
204       Electronics & Software             609         Kids Activities             gasoline
206       Hobbies                            9           Pets                        rental cars
207       Sporting Goods                     901         Pet Food & Supplies         rental furniture
606       Toys                               902         Pet Grooming                clothes
1003      Books & Supplies                   903         Veterinary                  tailors
12        Home                               10          Education                   textiles
1201      Furnishings                        1001        Tuition                     fees and charges
1203      Home Improvement                   11          Financial                   occupation expenses
1208      Home Supplies                      1102        Life Insurance              entertainment services
1403      Service & Parts                    1105        Financial Advisor           reading material
                                             1202        Lawn & Garden               educational services
Other expenditures:                          1204        Home Services               health insurance
603      Child Support                       1206        Home Insurance              health care services
610      Allowance                           13          Bills & Utilities           life insurance
8        Gifts & Donations                   1301        Television                  home maintenance
801      Gift                                1302        Home Phone                  home repairs
802      Charity                             1303        Internet                    home management
1002     Student Loan                        1304        Mobile Phone                home security
1207     Mortgage & Rent                     1306        Utilities                   home insurance
1404     Auto Payment                        14          Auto Services & Transport   parking
16       Fees & Charges                      1402        Parking
1601     Service Fee                         1405        Auto Insurance
1602     Late Fee                            1406        Public Transportation
1604     Finance Charge                      15          Travel
1605     ATM Fee                             1501        Air Travel
1606     Bank Fee                            1502        Hotel
1607     Trade Commissions                   1503        Rental Car & Taxi
20       Uncategorized                       1504        Vacation
2001     Cash & ATM                          17          Business Services
                                             1701        Advertising
                                             1703        Printing
                                             1704        Shipping
                                             1705        Legal
Figure A1 – Non-parametric evidence of spending excess sensitivity - median changes
                                                          150
         difference in monthly per capita spending changes
                                                100




                                                                                                                              78
                                      50




                                                                              16
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                             2                   0                           2
                            0




                                                                                                                       −1
                                                                      −12            −12
                                                −18                                                      −21
                 −50




                                                                                                                                     −52
      −100




                                                                jan     feb    mar     apr   may   jun     jul   aug    sep    oct     nov   dec


      Notes: This figure complements Figure 2(a) showing the median difference in monthly household per
      capita spending changes of nondurables and services between households in Alaska and Washington.
      The Permanent Fund Dividend is paid out at the beginning of October. Per capita spending is calcu-
      lated using the OECD household equivalence scale. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals.
