                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           OBSTFELD AND ROGOFF'S INTERNATIONAL MACRO PUZZLES:
                       A QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT

                                      Jonathan Eaton
                                     Samuel S. Kortum
                                       Brent Neiman

                                    Working Paper 21774
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w21774


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2015




We thank Max Perez Leon and Laurence Wicht for excellent research assistance. We have
benefitted enormously from the helpful comments and discussions of Ariel Burstein, Giancarlo
Corsetti, Ken Rogoff, and Michael Waugh. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jonathan Eaton, Samuel S. Kortum, and Brent Neiman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Obstfeld and Rogoff's International Macro Puzzles: A Quantitative Assessment
Jonathan Eaton, Samuel S. Kortum, and Brent Neiman
NBER Working Paper No. 21774
December 2015, Revised May 2016
JEL No. E3,F17,F4

                                         ABSTRACT

Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001) propose that trade frictions lie behind key puzzles in international
macroeconomics. We take a dynamic multicountry model of international trade, production, and
investment to data from 19 countries to assess this proposition quantitatively. Using the
framework developed in Eaton, Kortum, Neiman, and Romalis (2016), we revisit the puzzles in a
counterfactual world without trade frictions in manufactures. Removing these trade frictions goes
a long way toward resolving a number of the puzzles: The dependence of domestic investment on
domestic saving falls by half or disappears entirely, mitigating the Feldstein-Horioka (1980)
puzzle. Changes in nominal GDPs in U.S. dollars become less variable across countries and line
up with changes in real GDPs as much as with real exchange rates, mitigating the exchange rate
disconnect puzzle. Less dramatically, changes in consumption become more correlated across
countries, mitigating the consumption correlations puzzle and changes in real exchange rates
become less variable across countries, mitigating the relative purchasing power parity puzzle.


Jonathan Eaton                                  Brent Neiman
Department of Economics                         University of Chicago
Pennsylvania State University                   Booth School of Business
303 Kern Graduate Building                      5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
University Park, PA 16801                       Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        and NBER
jxe22@psu.edu                                   brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu

Samuel S. Kortum
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
samuel.kortum@yale.edu
1        Introduction

International macroeconomics has grappled with a number of empirical regularities that are at
odds with the simplest canonical model of the international macroeconomy. This canonical model
assumes complete markets, frictionless trade (at least for some sectors), and a national represen-
tative household with a constant discount factor. Financial market incompleteness is one ex-
planation for the gap between this formulation and the data. In a provocative paper, Obstfeld
and Rogoff (2001, henceforth OR) propose, instead, that trade frictions alone could explain these
“puzzles,” with no financial market incompleteness required.1
    Their proposition, if true, would be satisfying for a number of reasons. For one thing, there
are myriad ways in which financial markets can be incomplete. Hence a particular puzzle could
be resolved by assuming a particular friction consistent with it, imposing little discipline on the
endeavor. For another, the force of gravity is strongly evident in the trade data, providing a means
of measuring the magnitude of trade frictions. OR’s account thus holds out the hope of explaining
a wide range of observations in international trade and in international macroeconomics with a
single force that is fairly easy to quantify.
    OR show how trade frictions have the potential to resolve these puzzles qualitatively. Since
they pursue their analysis in a set of stylized two-country examples, their ability to show how far
this explanation can go quantitatively is limited. As Engel (2001) writes in his comment on their
paper, “OR provide us with extraordinary intuition for why goods markets move things in the
right direction, but we need more study to be able to reconcile their compelling but simplified
examples with the results that emerge from simulation of more fully specified dynamic models.”
According to the notes on the general discussion of OR at the NBER Macroeconomics Annual
conference in 2000, “John Leahy expressed the concern that the effects identified in this paper
might turn out to be quantitatively small in a realistically calibrated model.”
    A barrier to the quantitative analysis of OR’s proposition is the technically daunting task of
introducing trade frictions into a multi-country dynamic framework. Dealing with a finite number
of goods with trade frictions requires grappling with a taxonomy of cases, depending on whether
    1
        Dumas (1992) is an earlier paper showing how trade frictions limit financial market integration.



                                                           1
a particular good is traded and, if so, in what directions. As the number of goods or countries
rises, the taxonomy explodes.2
   Eaton, Kortum, Neiman, and Romalis (2016, henceforth EKNR) recently developed a mul-
ticountry dynamic model of international trade and production, with complete markets, to in-
vestigate the forces behind the collapse of trade in the Global Recession of 2008-2009 and its
recovery in the aftermath. Their methodology allows for an arbitrary number of sectors (each
with a continuum of goods) and countries and is amenable to realistic calibration with readily
available data.
   EKNR’s methodology relates changes in trade, production, spending, and prices across four
sectors in each country to underlying shocks in every country, most importantly shocks to trade
frictions, productivity, the efficiency of investment, and intertemporal preferences. The framework
is one of dynamic equilibrium accounting, in the spirit of Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007),
but in a multicountry context: Together, the shocks fully explain the data. To dissect the forces
underlying the trade collapse, EKNR shut down various subsets of shocks and recompute the
equilibrium to isolate those most responsible for what happened.
   In this paper we apply EKNR’s framework to quantify the role of trade frictions in explaining
five of OR’s puzzles. Since in our methodology the underlying shocks explain the data perfectly,
the model necessarily captures any puzzle. To give OR’s explanation substance we compare the
puzzles in the data (which are accounted for in our baseline model) with a counterfactual in which
we eliminate trade frictions in manufactures, but hold other shocks at their baseline values. This
counterfactual lets us observe a world like the one we live in only without these trade frictions.
The disappearance of a puzzle in this counterfactual vindicates OR’s explanation. To the extent
that a puzzle survives, forces other than trade frictions must be at work.
   Our results provide quantitative support for OR’s proposition. Not surprisingly, removing
trade frictions in manufactures eliminates home bias for those goods. More interesting is that
eliminating trade frictions in manufactures greatly reduces the correlation between national in-
vestment and saving rates, mitigating the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle. Real consumption becomes
   2
     As OR recognize, using a continuum of goods as in Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977) alleviates some
of the problem, but one is still stuck with only two countries.



                                                      2
positively correlated across countries on average, mitigating the consumption correlations puzzle.
Price changes become much less variable across countries, even for nontraded goods, mitigating
the relative purchasing power parity (RPPP) puzzle. Changes in nominal GDP (translated into
a common currency) become less variable across countries and more in line with changes in real
GDP, mitigating the exchange rate disconnect puzzle.
    A number of researchers have pursued OR’s argument in directions different from ours.
Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008) explore the role of trade frictions in risk sharing and in
the relationship between real exchange rates and relative consumption, the Backus-Smith (1993)
puzzle. Coeurdacier (2009) assesses the ability of trade frictions to explain home bias in equity
holdings. Fitzgerald (2012) shows that, for OECD countries, geographic factors alone can explain
cross-country deviations from perfect consumption risk sharing.3
    Complementary to our analysis here are Reyes-Heroles (2015) and Alessandria and Choi
(2015). Using a related framework, Reyes-Heroles shows that, if trade frictions had not de-
clined since 1970, global trade imbalances would now be much closer to zero. Alessandria and
Choi attribute roughly half of the growth in the U.S. trade deficit from the 1980s to the 2000s to
global trade integration.
    We proceed as follows: Section 2 presents our data. Section 3 reviews the puzzles and examines
the extent to which they appear in our data. How we adopt the EKNR framework to the task at
hand is the topic of Section 4. In Section 5 we create a counterfactual world without trade frictions
in manufactures but with the other shocks driving the world economy unchanged. We repeat the
exercises performed on the actual data in Section 3 with data generated in this counterfactual
world. The elimination or diminution of a puzzle supports OR’s proposition.



2        Our Data

We apply our analysis to 19 countries (18 actual countries and a Rest of World) across four
sectors: construction (C), durable manufactures (D), nondurable manufactures (N ), and services
(S), which aggregates everything else. We treat the gross output of the two manufacturing sectors
    3
        Rabitsch (2012) examines the role of trade frictions for monetary policy.



                                                           3
D and N as tradable and the gross output of construction C and of services S as nontradable. We
treat the final output of nondurable manufactures N and of services S as consumption goods and
the final output of construction C and of durable manufactures D as investment goods. We use
data from EKNR on production and prices for all four sectors, along with data on bilateral trade
for the two manufacturing sectors. Our data are quarterly, extending from 2000:Q1 to 2012:Q4.
Table 1 lists the countries and some key magnitudes.4



3       The Puzzles

We now turn to OR’s puzzles. We examine their presence in our sample of countries over our
period.


3.1       Puzzle 1: Home Bias in Trade

Why do people have such a strong preference for their home goods? To explain home bias in
purchases OR develop a symmetric two-country Armington model which they calibrate to a ratio
of home to foreign consumption spending of 4.2. They match this ratio by introducing iceberg
trade costs d = 4/3 and CES demand with an elasticity of substitution of 6.
    For each of our 19 countries, columns 1 and 2 in Table 2 report the ratio of purchases from
home to imports for durable and nondurable manufactures, the two sectors we treat as tradable.5
For durables, the implied ratio of home to foreign spending varies from 0.17 (for Denmark) to 6.39
(for Japan). For nondurables, which exhibit more home bias, it varies from 0.42 (for Denmark)
to 8.00 (for India). Hence the range of home bias that our countries exhibit in these two sectors
spans OR’s postulated amount. The solid line in Figure 1 depicts the evolution of global trade
relative to world GDP. The ratio remains well below 0.2.
    In our many-country world, trade frictions can differ between any pair of countries and across
sectors. Home bias is just one manifestation of a much more general feature of bilateral trade:
gravity. The value of trade between any pair of countries diminishes with distance, with an
    4
     See the online appendix to EKNR for a detailed description of how the data were assembled.
    5
     We refer to statistics calculated from the actual data as “baseline” to distinguish them from those calculated
in our counterfactual, which we call “frictionless trade.”


                                                        4
elasticity around one.
   Table 3 reports results from running a gravity regression among our 18 actual countries for
durable (column 1) and nondurable (column 2) manufactures. Specifically we estimate the equa-
tion:                                      !
                                      j
                                     πni
                                ln    j        = Sij + Dnj + Bj ·xni + ujni ,                       (1)
                                     πnn
       j
where πni is the share of country i in country n’s total spending on goods in sector j, where
j ∈ {D, N } respectively, Sij is a fixed effect for exporter i, and Dnj is a fixed effect for importer
n. The vector xni corresponds to a set of bilateral characteristics for countries i and n that
commonly show up in the gravity literature: (i) the distance (in logs) between them, (ii) an
indicator for whether countries are contiguous, and (iii) an indicator for whether they share a
common language (either official or primary). The data are for 2005:Q4, around the middle of
our sample.
   Our estimates of the distance elasticity are significantly greater than one (in absolute value),
but in the general neighborhood. Common language and contiguity are positive, but only the
first is significant. As is typical in empirical gravity equations, country fixed effects together with
geography explain trade very well. The R2 ’s both exceed 0.9.
   While our gravity regression relates bilateral trade flows to geographic indicators, these indi-
cators play no role in what follows. Our analysis below takes into account the joint contribution
                                                                                         j
from all sources of trade frictions that give rise to the actual bilateral trade shares πni in sector j.


3.2     Puzzle 2: Feldstein-Horioka

A classic paper by Feldstein and Horioka (1980, henceforth FH) establishes that long-period
averages of domestic investment rates are highly correlated with similar averages of national
saving rates. If individual countries are part of an integrated global market for investment funds
then (i) a positive shock to saving in a particular country should raise investment everywhere,
while (ii) a positive shock to investment should attract funding from everywhere. If investment
and saving shocks are uncorrelated with each other across countries, there is no reason for the
local response to be more pronounced than anywhere else. Hence FH’s finding constitutes a puzzle


                                                       5
under an assumption of global market integration.
   In FH’s original paper, a cross-country regression of investment on saving, both as shares of
GDP and averaged over the period 1960 to 1974, yields a slope of 0.89, nearly one. When they
instead use long differences in investment and saving rates, they estimate a slope of 0.72. OR
run the equivalent of the first regression specification using investment and saving rates averaged
over the period 1990 to 1997. They get a coefficient of 0.60 for the OECD, lower than FH but
still substantially greater than zero.
   To assess the extent to which the puzzle survives in our sample of countries in our period
we perform the corresponding exercise. We define investment country n’s investment spending
            I
in year t, Xn,t , as the sum of final spending on construction and on durable manufactures.6 We
                                                                                               I
construct a measure of country n’s saving in year t, Sn,t , by augmenting investment spending Xn,t
with the trade balance calculated from the excess of production over absorption in country n.7
Following FH and OR, we normalize both measures by country n’s GDP in period t, creating the
                         I
investment rate, in,t = Xn,t /GDPn,t , and the saving rate, sn,t = Sn,t /GDPn,t . We take averages
ı̄n and s̄n over different subperiods of our sample and also look at long differences over the entire
period, ∆in = in,2012 −in,2001 and ∆sn = sn,2012 −sn,2001 . Figure 2 plots the individual observations.
While the level of the investment rate is only moderately responsive to the level of the saving rate
over 2001-2012 or 2001-2008, the investment and saving measures line up quite closely during
2009-2012 and in long differences.
   To examine the relationships more formally we estimate:


                                            ı̄n = α + βs̄n + εn                                           (2)

and:
                                          ∆in = α + β∆sn + εn .                                           (3)
   6
      Here we follow EKNR in treating consumer durables as a component of the stock of durable manufactures.
Hence household spending on durable manufactures constitutes investment spending, just like business spending
on durable manufactures.
    7
      FH constructed two different saving measures using the trade balance and the current account to augment
investment to get saving. We pursue only the trade balance definition as our framework below does not generate
predictions about the current account.




                                                      6
Columns 1 to 4 of Table 4 report the results, for different subperiods and for the long difference
from the beginning to the end of the sample.8
    Several results stand out. In terms of the relationship in levels, in the period before the Great
Recession (2001-2008) the coefficient is 0.25 (only marginally significantly different from 0), much
smaller than in the earlier studies mentioned above. This result suggests that the puzzle, at
least among the countries in our sample, had been waning. But it comes back with a vengeance
during and after the recession (2009-2012), with a significant coefficient of 0.63, in line with OR’s
estimate.9 Moreover, the puzzle remains very pronounced in looking at long differences over the
entire period, with a significant coefficient of 0.88, even larger than the corresponding coefficient
in FH.
    Another way of thinking about FH’s puzzle is that countries rely very little on external finance
to fund investment. The solid lines in Figure 3 illustrate actual trade deficits relative to GDP in
our four largest countries. Note that trade imbalances rarely stray beyond 10 percent of GDP.


3.3      Puzzle 3: Home Bias in Equity Portfolios

OR, like EKNR, assume complete Arrow-Debreu markets. They show that in a special case of
their model (if the parameters for relative risk aversion and the elasticity of substitution in their
two-country Armington model satisfy a particular condition), equities are sufficient to span the
markets. They then show that in this special case equity holding would exhibit home bias.
    The general version of EKNR would not satisfy OR’s condition for equities to span markets,
so that additional cross-country transfers would be needed to achieve market completeness. Ad-
dressing this puzzle requires a detailed modeling of financial markets which lies beyond the scope
of our current framework.10 We leave the integration of this puzzle into our framework for future
research.
   8
      While our data begin in 2000, we examine the puzzles starting in 2001. We drop 2000 from our counterfactuals
with frictionless trade below to minimize the impact on our results of the transition from the baseline, as we later
explain. Hence we examine the puzzles in our baseline and in our counterfactuals over the same period, 2001-2012.
    9
      Baxter and Crucini (1993) use a two-country dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to show how, even
in the absence of trade barriers, the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle can arise because of country size and correlation
across countries in productivity shocks. To the extent that the great recession constituted a correlated productivity
shock across countries, their model suggests why the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle is more pronounced in that period.
   10
      There is a large literature on home bias in portfolios. Heathcote and Perri (2013) make a recent contribution
justifying home bias on the basis of risk characteristics.


                                                         7
3.4     Puzzle 4: International Consumption Correlations

In the canonical model, frictionless trade, complete markets, and identical, risk-averse preferences
imply identical rates of growth of marginal utility, or with log utility, identical consumption growth
rates across countries. Earlier papers, notably Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) and Stockman
and Tesar (1995), show that the correlation of consumption growth is highly imperfect, even when
limited to consumption of highly tradable goods.
    OR report the correlation of real annual per capita consumption growth among 6 major
economies during 1973-1992. Coefficients range from a low of 0.13 (between Italy and the United
States) to a high of 0.65 (between the United Kingdom and the United States), with a simple
average of 0.40.
    Turning to our sample, we consider cross-country correlations of log changes in real consump-
tion.11 At quarterly frequency, bilateral correlations range from -0.55 (between Germany and
Romania) to 0.45 (between Germany and South Korea). The mean correlation is only 0.03 and
the median is 0.04. At annual frequency the range is much broader, from -0.80 (between Germany
and the United States) to 0.84 (between the United Kingdom and the United States). But the
mean and median are both only 0.01.12 Hence there is little evidence at either frequency that
countries are using trade imbalances to smooth consumption.13


3.5     Puzzles 5 and 6: (Relative) Purchasing Power Parity and Ex-

        change Rate Disconnect

OR lump their last two puzzles together. They focus on persistent deviations from purchas-
ing power parity (PPP) and how little large fluctuations in nominal exchange rates affect real
  11
      We use the structure of our model to impute consumption spending from data on sectoral production, GDP,
and input-output coefficients obtained from the OECD, as described in the online appendix to EKNR. As we
discuss in Section 4, our measure includes final purchases by households of nondurable manufactures and services
as well as household rental payments for the services of durable manufactures and structures. Footnote 14 explains
how we construct the corresponding price deflator used to obtain a measure of real consumption.
   12
      The solid lines in Figures 4 and 5 show the distribution of consumption correlations, at quarterly and at
annual frequency, respectively, with solid vertical lines at the means. Table 5 reports summary statistics, at
quarterly frequency in column 1 and at annual frequency in column 3.
   13
      We find more evidence of correlation looking at consumption of just nondurable manufactures, which are
tradable. Using this narrower measure, the mean and median correlations of log changes are both 0.16 at quarterly
frequency. At annual frequency the mean correlation is 0.42 and the median is 0.49.


                                                        8
outcomes other than the real exchange rate.
    We first examine the standard deviations across countries of log changes in price indices for
each of our four sectors. RPPP would imply no cross-country variation. Columns 1 and 3 of
Table 6 report the standard deviation of quarterly and annual log changes, averaged across 2001-
2012, for each sector. With quarterly data the standard deviations for the two sectors we treat
as tradable (durable and nondurable manufactures) are both around 0.1, and are about half that
using annual data. The standard deviations for the two nontradable sectors (construction and
services) are only somewhat higher. Deviations from RPPP for traded sectors are not much lower
than for nontraded ones. This finding is consistent with Engel (1999), who finds that variation
in the overall real exchange is driven as much by variation in the real exchange rate for traded
goods as for nontraded ones.
    We can also ask how cross-country variation in price changes in individual sectors combine
to generate cross-country variation in changes in a consumer price index (CPI). As reported in
the last line of Table 6, the cross country standard deviation is just above 0.11 at a quarterly
frequency and just below 0.06 at an annual frequency.14 While our focus is on prices, complete
markets, as assumed both by OR and in our model below, imply a common world nominal interest
rate. Hence differences in real interest rates correspond to differences in changes in the CPI.
    How do changes in the CPI relate to changes in trade imbalances? Columns 1 and 2 of
Table 7 report the results of regressing the log changes in the CPI against the changes in the
trade deficit relative to GDP. At a quarterly frequency the slope coefficient is 0.29 regardless of
whether country fixed effects are included. At an annual frequency the relationship is much more
pronounced, with coefficients well above one.15 At either frequency the relationship is noisy, with
an R2 at or below 0.33 even if time and country fixed effects are both included.
    Having established that deviations from RPPP remain substantial in our data, we explore the
  14
      As a CPI should reflect the rental costs rather than the prices of durables and structures, our CPI index uses
rental costs for these two sectors extracted from the numerical procedure we describe in the next section. The
relevant rental and goods prices for the four sectors are combined using Törnqvist weights based on parameters
and expenditure shares whose derivation we describe below.
   15
      A scatter plot of annual changes in the CPI against annual changes in the trade deficit relative to GDP
suggests that a single observation, Romania between 2008 and 2009, is responsible for the high slope coefficient.
Removing this outlier reduces the slopes from those reported in the columns 5 and 6 of Table 7 by about 0.3 in
each case. If we remove time fixed effects each slope coefficient rises by around 0.3.



                                                         9
exchange rate disconnect as the disconnect between log changes in nominal and real GDP.16 We
                                                                                         L
begin with the basic identity relating changes in nominal GDP (in the local currency) Ŷi,t+1 , in
                                              L
real GDP ŷi,t+1 , and in the GDP deflator P̂i,t+1 (where for any magnitude xt , x̂t+1 = xt+1 /xt ):


                                                   L                 L
                                                Ŷi,t+1 = ŷi,t+1 P̂i,t+1 .


We translate local currency values into a common currency using the nominal exchange rate ei,t ,
                                                                             L
defining the change in nominal (common currency) GDP as Ŷi,t+1 = êi,t+1 Ŷi,t+1 and the change
                                                             L
in the (common currency) price level as P̂i,t+1 = êi,t+1 P̂i,t+1 , so that:


                                                Ŷi,t+1 = ŷi,t+1 P̂i,t+1 .


Taking logs of this expression relative to its analog for country n, we get:


                 ln(Ŷi,t+1 ) − ln(Ŷn,t+1 ) = ln ŷi,t+1 − ln ŷn,t+1 + ln(P̂i,t+1 ) − ln(P̂n,t+1 ).


Thus, log changes in relative nominal GDP’s equal log changes in relative real GDP’s plus log
changes in the real exchange rate.17
   To avoid having to consider this expression for all bilateral pairs, for each country i we average
the expression above across n to obtain:


                                               Ỹi,t+1 = ỹi,t+1 + P̃i,t+1                                  (4)


where, for any variable x̂i,t+1 ,

                                                                 N
                                                              1 X
                                     x̃i,t+1   = ln x̂i,t+1 −       ln x̂n,t+1 .
                                                              N n=1
  16
      Itskhoki and Mukhin (2016) interpret exchange rate disconnect in a similar manner. In a two-country model
(without money or nominal rigidities) they take the exchange rate to be the countries’ relative wage and explore
why its variation is largely disconnected from real magnitudes.
   17
      Note that here we are defining log changes in the real exchange rate in terms of log changes in the GDP
deflator rather than (as is more conventional) log changes in the CPI.




                                                           10
In words, the growth in country i’s nominal GDP (relative to the simple world average) is its
growth in real GDP (relative to the simple world average) plus the growth in its real exchange
rate.18
    Columns 1 to 3 of Table 8 report the standard deviation of growth in: (i) nominal GDP
Ỹi,t+1 , (ii) real GDP ỹi,t+1 , and (iii) real exchange rate P̃i,t+1 at quarterly frequency. Note that,
for every country, nominal GDP growth is much more volatile, by a factor that ranges from just
below 2 up to over 7, than real GDP growth. In contrast, the standard deviation of growth in
the real exchange rate is close to that for nominal GDP. Hence the magnitudes Ỹi,t+1 and P̃i,t+1
(which both embody nominal exchange rates) are much more volatile than the real magnitude
ỹi,t+1 . Columns 7 to 9 report the corresponding decomposition at an annual frequency. The main
difference is that standard deviations at this lower frequency are about half those at the quarterly
frequency. But the standard deviation of real GDP changes remains much lower than that of
nominal GDP or the real exchange rate.
    How is variation in the growth of nominal GDP Ỹi,t+1 divided between variation in the growth
of real GDP ỹi,t+1 and variation in the growth of the real exchange rate P̃i,t+1 ? Table 9 shows, for
our set of countries, results of panel regressions of ỹi,t+1 on Ỹi,t+1 , at quarterly (in columns 1 and
2) and annual (in columns 5 and 6) frequency. The slope coefficients in Table 9 rise in moving to
an annual frequency and fall with the inclusion of country fixed effects. But in all cases the slope
coefficients are far below one half, barely making it up to a quarter. Hence Ỹi,t+1 and P̃i,t+1 are
very connected to each other but largely disconnected from the real magnitude ỹi,t+1 .19
   18
      Here, the growth in country i’s real exchange rate is the simple average of the growth in its real exchange
rate with each country.
   19
      Our interpretation of these regressions follows from (4), which implies:

                               var(Ỹi,t+1 ) = cov(ỹi,t+1 ,Ỹi,t+1 ) + cov(P̃i,t+1 ,Ỹi,t+1 ).

Thus, the OLS slope coefficients in Table 9 give the fraction of Ỹi,t+1 ’s variance attributed to its covariance with
ỹi,t+1 .




                                                             11
4        A Multi-Country Dynamic Framework

We now turn to the EKNR framework that we use to tie our data to underlying shocks, including
shocks to trade frictions.20 We allow for an arbitrary number N of countries and four sectors.
                                                                             k
Country i at time t has an endowment of labor Li,t and two types of capital Ki,t , k ∈ {C, D},
corresponding to structures (produced by its construction sector) and consumer and producer
durables. Firms use the services of these stocks of capital for production while households consume
the services of these stocks. Each sector’s output also serves as an intermediate input for all four
sectors.


4.1      Technology

Production in each sector is Cobb-Douglas in labor, capital, and intermediates. In country i,
sector j has a labor share βiL,j , a share of capital of type k of βiK,jk , and a share of intermediates
from sector l, βiM,jl for j, l ∈ {C, D, N, S}, k ∈ {C, D}.
     The total output of a sector is a CES aggregate (with elasticity of substitution σ j ) of output
of a unit continuum of goods (a separate one for each sector) indexed by z ∈ [0, 1]. Country i’s
efficiency aji,t (z) at making good z in sector j is the realization of a random variable aji,t with:

                                                                          !−θ 
                                     j                          a
                                  Pr ai,t ≤ a = exp −                         ,                            (5)
                                                               γ j Aji,t


drawn independently for each z across countries i.21 Here, Aji,t > 0 is country i’s average produc-
tivity in sector j. The parameter θ is an inverse measure of the dispersion of efficiencies.
     As in OR, trade in a good incurs an iceberg trade friction, meaning that delivering one unit
of a good produced by sector j in country i to country n requires shipping djni,t ≥ 1 units, with
djii,t = 1. We treat the output of sectors j ∈ {C, S} as nontradable by letting djni,t → ∞, n 6= i,
for these sectors.
    20
    A note that derives and analyzes a simplified version of the model can be found on the authors’ web pages.
    21
    Here γ j is a parameter that depends on only θ and σ j . Except for the requirement that θ > σ j − 1, σ j and
 j
γ play no further role.




                                                       12
   The capital stock of type k ∈ {C, D} in country i evolves according to:


                              k
                                                    α k          1−αk
                                    = χki,t Ii,t
                                             k              k
                                                                          + 1 − δ k Ki,t
                                                                                    k
                             Ki,t+1                        Ki,t                          ,                (6)


       k
where Ii,t is investment and δ k is the depreciation rate. As in Lucas and Prescott (1971), not
                   k
all the resources Ii,t put into investment wind up as capital. With αk < 1, less emerges when
investment is large relative to the stock of capital. The term χki,t allows the efficiency of investment
to vary across countries and over time.


4.2      Preferences

Each country has a representative household that makes consumption and investment decisions.
                                                                                  N        S
Each period t country n’s household consumes nondurables and services in amounts Cn,t and Cn,t
                                                                      H,D      H,C 22
and the services of its stocks of durables and structures in amounts Kn,t and Kn,t . From the
perspective of the beginning of time (t = 0), its utility is:

                                                                                              
                             ∞
                             X                  X                           X
                                                          j       j                         H,k 
                      Un =         ρt φn,t              ψn,t ln Cn,t +             ψ k ln Kn,t   ,       (7)
                             t=0               j∈{N,S}                    k∈{C,D}


       j
where ψn,t are Cobb-Douglas weights. To accommodate shocks in the data, we allow country-
specific shifts between nondurables and services over time. Here ρ is a constant discount factor
that applies globally while φn,t represents country and time-varying shocks to that discount fac-
tor.23


4.3      Market Structure

As in OR, markets are perfectly competitive and complete. We also assume that foresight is
perfect. Market perfection and completeness allow us to solve for the competitive equilibrium
by solving the corresponding social planner’s problem. EKNR describe the solution method used
  22                                                                                      k      H,k
    Hence, capital of type k ∈ {C, D} available for production in country n at date t is Kn,t − Kn,t .
  23
    Stockman and Tesar (1995) introduce such shocks into an international real business cycle model. Heathcote
and Perri (2014) discuss their role in the subsequent literature.




                                                            13
here.


4.4       Some Basic Expressions

The model delivers some basic expressions that are useful for understanding how we connect it
to data.
   The cost cji,t of a bundle of inputs for producing in sector j, combining labor, capital, and
intermediates, is:
                                                 L,j    Y             βiK,jk Y                     βiM,jl
                               cji,t = (wi,t )βi                k
                                                               ri,t                         pli,t             ,    (8)
                                                       k∈ΩK                    l∈Ω

                         k
where wi,t is the wage, ri,t the rental rate on capital of type k, and pli,t is the price level of sector
l goods, all in country i at time t. These price levels are determined by production costs in each
country as:
                                               
                                                 N
                                                                             !−θ −1/θ
                                                X             cji,t djni,t
                                      pjn,t   =                                               .                  (9)
                                                       i=1
                                                                 Aji,t

   The share of what country n spends on sector j that comes from country i is:

                                                                              !−θ
                                                j             cji,t djni,t
                                               πni,t    =                           .
                                                              Aji,t pjn,t

Taking the ratio of what i exports to n relative to what i buys from itself, we obtain:24

                                                j
                                                                              !−θ
                                               πni,t           pji,t djni,t
                                                j       =                           .
                                               πii,t              pjn,t

A simple rearrangement gives us an expression for the trade friction in terms of trade shares and
prices:
                                                              j
                                                                     !−1/θ
                                                             πni,t             pjn,t
                                              djni,t =        j                         .                         (10)
                                                             πii,t             pji,t
  24
     If, instead, we take the ratio of what n imports from i to what n buys from itself we get a version of the
gravity equation (1) above, with:                               
                                                Sij = ln cji /Aji .

See Eaton and Kortum (2002).




                                                               14
4.5    The Shocks Driving the Evolution of the Global Economy

EKNR describe the solution to the model which connects observed outcomes to underlying shocks.
As in EKNR, we solve the model in changes to facilitate its calibration, where, again, for any
variable x we define:
                                                                    xt+1
                                                       x̂t+1 =           ,
                                                                     xt

as the change in x from t to t + 1.
   From period t to t + 1 the shocks hitting the global economy are:


                        Ψ̂t+1 = {dˆjni,t+1 , Âji,t+1 , χ̂ji,t+1 , φ̂i,t+1 , ψ̂i,t+1
                                                                               N                  S
                                                                                     , L̂i,t+1 , Di,t+1 },


consisting of:

  1. trade friction shocks dˆjni,t+1 for j ∈ {D, N }, the two tradable sectors,

  2. productivity shocks Âji,t+1 in any sector,

  3. investment efficiency shocks χ̂ki,t+1 for k ∈ {C, D},

  4. intertemporal preference shocks φ̂i,t+1 ,

                                                                 N
  5. shocks to the demand for nondurables relative to services ψ̂i,t+1 ,

  6. labor supply shocks L̂i,t+1 ,

                              S
  7. services deficit shocks Di,t+1 , in levels.

   We need the seventh shock to accommodate our treatment of the services sector as nontraded.
In fact, not all trade is in manufactures, so that nonmanufacturing deficits are nonzero. To
                                                                                         S
make our model consistent with adding-up constraints in the national accounts, we treat Di,t+1
as exogenous and take its value from the data.


4.6    Quantification

We now turn to how we connect the model to our quarterly data. We refer to the initial period
of our data, 2000:Q1, as tI and the final period, 2012:Q4, as tE .

                                                               15
4.6.1   Calibration

The following parameters are from EKNR:


                                ρ        θ        αC     αD         δC     δD           ψC      ψD
                              0.987      2    0.50      0.55      0.011   0.026         0.33    0.08


As in EKNR, input-output coefficients are from the 2009 edition of the OECD’s country tables.
Labor shares βiL,j are total employee compensation in sector j divided by the value of sector
j’s total output. The total capital shares βiK,jC + βiK,jD are value added less compensation of
employees divided by the value of total output in sector j, assigning 43 percent to structures.
Intermediate shares βiM,jl are total spending in sector j on inputs from sector l divided by sector
j’s total output.


4.6.2   Paths of Capital

To back out the shocks over our period requires knowing the paths of the changes in the capital
         k
stocks K̂i,t+1 , which in turn requires specifying {Ψ̂t+1 } for the period after our data. We assume
that, after date tE , all shocks stop changing, setting:


                            dˆjni,t+1 = Âji,t+1 = χ̂ji,t+1 = φ̂i,t+1 = ψ̂i,t+1
                                                                          N
                                                                                = L̂i,t+1 = 1,


     S        S              E
and Di,t+1 = Di,t E for t ≥ t . The world then converges to a stationary state in which all
                                                                       k
magnitudes, including capital stocks, are constant. We solve for the K̂i,t+1 for t beyond tE that
allow the economy to glide along a perfect foresight path to this stationary state.
   We then iterate backwards to tI + 1, using the following equation derived by combining (6)
and the Euler equation for intertemporal utility maximization:
                                                                                                                   !
                      k
                    K̂i,t                    αk     k    k          I,k           k
                                                                                                 1 − δk
              k
                                    =ρ    I,k
                                                   ri,t Ki,t +   ρX̂i,t   1−α           +     k
                                                                                                                       .
            K̂i,t − (1 − δ k )           Xi,t−1                                             K̂i,t+1 − (1 − δ k )

                                                                         I,k             k    k
Along with the parameters above, we use data on investment spending for Xi,t and obtain ri,t Ki,t



                                                                  16
from data on production, spending, Cobb-Douglas preference shares, and capital shares.25


4.6.3     Paths of Shocks

                                     k
Given paths for changes in capital K̂i,t+1 and the parameter values described above, we back out
the shocks from our data as follows:

   1. For the traded sectors, equation (10) delivers an expression relating (unobserved) changes
        in trade frictions to (observable) changes in trade shares and in price indices:

                                                          j
                                                                     !−1/θ
                                                        π̂ni,t+1                p̂jn,t+1
                                        dˆjni,t+1   =       j                              .        (11)
                                                          π̂ii,t+1              p̂ji,t+1


             N      S
   2. Since ψi,t + ψi,t = 1 − ψ C − ψ D we can write:

                                                           F,N      F,S
                                                          Xi,t+1 + Xi,t+1
                                            φ̂i,t+1 =       F,N    F,S
                                                                                   ,                (12)
                                                           Xi,t + Xi,t

        and:
                                                                    F,N
                                                      N
                                                                  X̂i,t+1
                                                    ψ̂i,t+1   =             ,                       (13)
                                                                  φ̂i,t+1

        letting us back out demand shocks from observations on final consumption spending on
                      F,N                  F,S
        nontradables Xi,t and on services Xi,t .

   3. Changes in labor L̂i,t are from data.

                               S
   4. Services trade deficits Di,t+1 are from data.

   5. The law of motion for capital in changes:

                                                  I,k
                                                               !−αk
                                                                         k
                                                X̂i,t+1                K̂i,t+2 − (1 − δ k )
                               χ̂ki,t+1 =                                                      ,    (14)
                                            p̂ki,t+1 K̂i,t+1
                                                       k                 k
                                                                       K̂i,t+1 − (1 − δ k )

        lets us back out shocks to the efficiency of investment from data on spending on durables
        and on construction.
  25
    See EKNR for more detail on this procedure, which builds on the two-country framework of Kehoe, Ruhl,
and Steinberg (2014).

                                                        17
    6. We back out productivity shocks Âji,t+1 using the expression from the dual:


                                                     ĉji,t+1              1/θ
                                        Âji,t+1 =                j
                                                                π̂ii,t+1          ,               (15)
                                                     p̂ji,t+1


      where ĉji,t+1 is the change in input costs cji,t+1 given in (8). For p̂li,t we use data on the
                                                      k
      relevant price indices. We back out ŵi,t and r̂i,t from data on changes in output and changes
      in consumer spending, and our parameters βiL,j , βiK,jk , and ψ k .


    This procedure delivers our baseline shocks {Ψ̂t+1 }, with all values of the shocks frozen as
described above for t ≥ tE . By construction, the solution to the model with the baseline shocks
replicates the data for the period of 2000:Q1 to 2012:Q4. After that date the solution glides toward
the steady state. Tables 2 through 4 in EKNR summarize the values of the shocks delivered by
this procedure.



5     The Puzzles in a World without Trade Frictions

We now ask how well OR’s puzzles survive in a counterfactual world without trade frictions in
manufactures, continuing to treat construction and services as nontraded. To create this world we
first extract the shocks driving the global economy during 2000:Q1 through 2012:Q4, as described
in Section 4. We then solve the dynamic equilibrium of the model in a counterfactual in which
we introduce alternative trade friction shocks dˆjC                                 j
                                                 ni,t+1 for j ∈ {D, N } that imply dni,t+1 = 1. We

now describe how we derive these shocks.


5.1     Eliminating Frictions

We eliminate trade frictions at the beginning of our period and thereafter. We simulate such a
world as follows:


    1. For our initial period tI we insert data on trade shares and prices into the right-hand side
      of expression (10) to measure actual trade frictions in levels djni,tI , where we calculate price



                                                     18
       levels from the World Bank’s International Comparisons Project for 2005.26

   2. We construct a counterfactual change in trade frictions between period tI and tI + 1 as:

                                                                    1
                                                   dˆjC
                                                     ni,tI +1
                                                              =             ,
                                                                  djni,tI


       which lowers trade frictions in period tI + 1 from their measured tI value to 1.

   3. We set dˆjC                  I
               ni,t+1 = 1 for t > t + 1, maintaining frictionless trade.


   4. The counterfactual values of the shocks Ψ̂C                                         ˆj
                                                t+1 keep all elements of Ψ̂t+1 other than dni,t+1 at

       their baseline values.

   5. We solve the model over the period 2000:Q1 to 2012:Q4 using Ψ̂C
                                                                    t+1 . Since our initial

       conditions reflect the expectation of the baseline we continue to treat the initial period tI
       as generated by the expectation of Ψ̂t+1 through 2012:Q4. The switch to the counterfactual
       Ψ̂C                                                                                   C
         t+1 in 2000:Q2 is a surprise at that date, but the agents subsequently anticipate Ψ̂t+1

       thereafter. In either scenario, all shocks remain at their 2012:Q4 values (in levels) as the
       system transits from 2013:Q1 onward to the steady state.

    Having computed this counterfactual, we now revisit OR’s puzzles. We perform exactly the
same exercises on the data generated by this counterfactual that we performed on the actual data
as described in Section 3. The elimination or weakening of a puzzle supports OR’s explanation
for it. Since the elimination of trade frictions in manufactures between 2000:Q1 to 2000:Q2 comes
as a surprise, we drop the first four quarters to minimize the implications of the transition for
our results. Hence, we limit our analysis to the period 2001:Q1 to 2012:Q4.27
    Note that our counterfactual continues to treat the construction (C) and services (S) sectors
as nontraded. Hence we are moving not to a frictionless world but toward a world as in Balassa
  26
      We assume relative price levels for durables in 2005:Q4 equals the relative price level indices in the data
for “Machinery and equipment.” We assume relative price levels for nondurables equals the relative level of
expenditure-share weighted averages of “Food and non-alcoholic beverages”, “Alcoholic beverages and tobacco”,
and “Clothing and Footwear.” We then use the quarterly growth of durables and of nondurables prices from the
EKNR dataset to trace those relative price levels back to 2000:Q1.
   27
      The surprise elimination of trade frictions causes sharp changes in a number of magnitudes in the first period
of the counterfactual. Hence including the first year changes some results substantially from what we report here.
But once the first year is dropped, dropping subsequent years has little effect on what we report.

                                                        19
(1964) or Samuelson (1964), where some goods are not traded at all while others are costlessly
traded.


5.2       Puzzle 1: Home Bias in Trade
                                 j
In this world, for j ∈ {D, N }, πni = πiij for all n. Not surprisingly, eliminating trade frictions in
manufactures generates a large increase in trade. The dashed line in Figure 1 depicts this increase
in our counterfactual, with trade rising from about 14 percent to over 70 percent of world GDP
before settling down above 50 percent.28
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 report what happens to the ratio of purchases from home to
purchases from abroad for each of our countries. The ratio falls in the counterfactual by a factor
of between 15 and 108. Every country purchases more from abroad than from itself.
    As revealed by columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, by eliminating trade frictions we have destroyed
gravity. Our bilateral characteristics have been rendered powerless with importer and exporter
fixed effects fully explaining trade, as each source country has the same market share across all
destinations.


5.3       Puzzle 2: Feldstein-Horioka

Figure 6 portrays the relationship between investment and saving rates with frictionless trade.
In all periods and in long differences the relationship appears much weaker. Columns 5 to 8 of
Table 4 report the results of regressing the investment rate on the saving rate with frictionless
trade. When the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle was most puzzling, during and after the recession and
in long differences, lowering trade frictions mitigates or eliminates the puzzle. The coefficient on
the saving rate in levels during 2009-2012 drops from 0.63 to 0.14. In differences over the entire
period it drops from 0.88 to an (insignificant) -0.29. Over the entire period the coefficient falls by
more than half. For the period 2001-2008 the effect falls in magnitude in moving to frictionless
trade but gains statistical significance.29
  28
      Trade in intermediates accounts for how manufacturing trade as a ratio to world GDP can exceed the share
of manufacturing value added in world GDP.
   29
      That remnants of the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle survive, although in diminished form, suggests that shocks to
saving and investment are themselves correlated, as proposed by Baxter and Crucini (1993). Ford and Horioka


                                                       20
    With frictionless trade, the waning of the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle means countries rely much
more on external finance for investment, suggesting a more active role for trade deficits. The
dashed lines in Figure 3 illustrates counterfactual trade deficits relative to GDP in our four
largest countries. Trade imbalances go as high as 30 percent of GDP and display much more
volatility than the actual ones.30


5.4     Puzzle 4: International Consumption Correlations

With frictionless trade, log changes in consumption become more correlated across countries. The
dashed lines in Figures 4 and 5 show the distribution of bilateral correlations at quarterly and
annual frequencies, respectively. In moving to the counterfactual both distributions have shifted
noticeably to the right, particularly at annual frequency. Columns 2 and 4 of Table 5 report
summary statistics. At quarterly frequency the correlations range from -0.45 (between Mexico
and Spain) to 0.74 (between Finland and Italy) with a mean and median bilateral correlation
of 0.10. At annual frequency the correlations range from -0.83 (between the rest of the world
and the United Kingdom) to 0.98 (between Finland and Germany). The mean correlation is 0.24
and the median is 0.23. We conclude that eliminating trade frictions in manufactures generates
noticeable positive cross-country correlation in log changes in consumption, while little tendency
for positive correlation is evident in our baseline.31
    Why aren’t log changes in consumption even more correlated with frictionless trade in manu-
factures? Country-specific intertemporal preference shocks, the φ̂n,t ’s in the model above, mean
that countries don’t want their consumption to be too correlated. Eliminating these shocks (by
setting φ̂n,t = 1 for all countries in all periods) as well as trade frictions in manufactures, the
(2016) discuss how impediments either to the international mobility of capital or to the international mobility of
goods can generate a correlation between national saving and investment rates. Bai and Zhang (2010) provide a
general equilibrium model in which a constellation of financial frictions generates a Feldstein-Horioka relationship,
with trade remaining frictionless.
   30
      Note that the lines for the data and frictionless trade start at the same point, as we start our counterfactual
at the same point as the factual. The big changes in the first period reflect the effect of the enormous drop in
trade barriers going from the baseline to our counterfactual of frictionless trade.
   31
      As mentioned above, looking at consumption of just nontradable manufactures, we did observe more cor-
relation in our baseline. For this narrower measure of consumption, correlation of log changes actually falls in
moving to frictionless trade, from an average of 0.16 to 0.11 at quarterly frequency and from 0.42 to 0.29 at annual
frequency. An explanation for the fall is that variation across countries in shocks to the preference weight on non-
                 N
durables, the ψ̂n,t+1 ’s in the model above, creates cross-country variation in demand for nontradables. Without
trade frictions countries can fulfill these differences in demand more easily.

                                                         21
mean and median correlation rises to 0.57 and 0.66 at quarterly frequency and to 0.69 and 0.79
at annual frequency.32


5.5     Puzzles 5 and 6: (Relative) Purchasing Power Parity and Ex-

        change Rate Disconnect

Table 6 reports averages of the standard deviations of log changes in price indices for each of
our sectors in our counterfactual, at quarterly frequency in column 2 and at annual frequency in
column 4. As we should expect, the absence of trade frictions in manufactures delivers perfectly
correlated prices for these sectors. Even for the nontraded sectors the standard deviation falls by
around 0.03. Input-output relationships between traded and nontraded sectors contribute to this
decline. Solving for the effects on the rental cost of durables and structures, the average standard
deviation of log changes in the CPI falls by not quite a half.33
    How does frictionless trade alter the relationship between log changes in the CPI and changes
in trade deficits relative to GDP? Most interestingly, as shown in Table 7, it becomes much
tighter, with R2 rising from around a quarter to over 0.65 in all cases. The slope coefficients fall,
however. The fall is small and not significant at quarterly frequency, where they were already
below 0.3. At annual frequency, however, the fall is from over 1 to just above one third.
    Table 8 reports the standard deviations of growth in nominal GDP, growth in real GDP, and
growth in the real exchange rate with frictionless trade, at quarterly frequency in columns 4 to 6
and at annual frequency in columns 10 to 12.
    Overall, and for every country except Austria, the Czech Republic, and Denmark at quarterly
frequency and Denmark alone at annual frequency, the volatility in nominal GDP falls with
frictionless trade compared with its volatility in the baseline. Overall and for most countries
  32
      Consumption correlations remain below one because, among other things, services remain nontraded and
consumption of the services of durables and structures depends on the different histories of investment in these
sectors across countries.
   33                                                                                   k
      Section 4.6.3 explains how we use our model to extract changes in rental prices r̂i,t+1 from data. We construct
the change in our CPI, using the Törnqvist formula, as:
                                                N
                                          21 (ψi,t   N                           S     S                   ψC             ψD
                                                    +ψi,t+1 )               12 (ψi,t +ψi,t+1 )
                     p̂U         N
                       i,t+1 = p̂i,t+1                          p̂Si,t+1                            C
                                                                                                  r̂i,t+1           D
                                                                                                                  r̂i,t+1         .




                                                                      22
individually, the volatility in real GDP with frictionless trade actually rises compared with its
volatility in the data. Real exchange rate volatility falls overall and for every country except
Denmark. Since nominal GDP is much more volatile than real GDP in the data, these changes
bring volatility in real and in nominal GDP closer together.
     How does frictionless trade affect the relationship between real and nominal GDP? As reported
in Table 9, the slope of a regression of ỹi,t+1 on Ỹi,t+1 rises toward one half at quarterly frequency
and exceeds one half at annual frequency. With frictionless trade, in stark contrast to the baseline,
changes in nominal GDP reflect changes in real GDP about as much as changes in real exchange
rates.


5.6      Robustness to the Trade Elasticity

To create our world of frictionless trade we needed to take stand on a particular parameterization
of a particular model. The parameter θ, governing heterogeneity in the distribution of efficiencies
within sectors, becomes, in our context, the elasticity with which changes in trade costs affect
changes in trade flows, the well-known trade elasticity. We have taken the value of 2 from EKNR.
Some studies have identified values of this elasticity around 4.34 We computed an alternative
frictionless trade counterfactual using this larger value. We see no differences from what we
report above worth mentioning.35



6        Conclusion

We find that eliminating trade frictions in manufactures goes a long way toward resolving a host
of puzzles in international macroeconomics. Most dramatically, domestic investment depends
much less or not at all on domestic saving. Real and nominal GDP become much more closely
aligned. We also find that overall consumption becomes more correlated and prices changes, and
therefore real interest rates, become more similar across countries.
    34
     See, e.g., Simonovska and Waugh (2014).
     A higher value of θ implies that we back out values of the dˆni ’s closer to one to explain movements in trade
    35

shares, as shown in equation (11). The effects of the two changes together on the outcomes we examine here
largely offset each other.



                                                        23
   To explore the role of trade frictions in isolation, we conducted our analysis in a perfect
world.36 Our analysis hasn’t addressed such issues as unemployment, variable markups, or the
determination of nominal exchange rates. There is no scope for monetary or fiscal policy. We
hope someday to see our framework extended in ways to address these issues. While we are not
arguing that the world is perfect, our analysis suggests that the 5 puzzles we address above are
not necessarily evidence of imperfection.




  36
    We interpret trade frictions as describing the technology for moving goods between countries, and not as
imperfections.


                                                    24
References
Alessandria, G., and H. Choi (2015): “The Dynamics of the Trade Balance and the Real
 Exchange Rate: The J Curve and Trade Costs?,” Working Paper.

Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1992): “International Real Business
 Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 745–775.

Backus, D. K., and G. W. Smith (1993): “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Dynamic
 Economies with Non-Traded Goods,” Journal of International Economics, 35(3), 297–316.

Bai, Y., and J. Zhang (2010): “Solving the Feldstein–Horioka Puzzle with Financial Frictions,”
 Econometrica, 78(2), 603–632.

Balassa, B. (1964): “The Purchasing-Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” The Journal of
 Political Economy, pp. 584–596.

Baxter, M., and M. J. Crucini (1993): “Explaining Saving–Investment Correlations,” The
 American Economic Review, pp. 416–436.

Chari, V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle Accounting,”
 Econometrica, 75(3), 781–836.

Coeurdacier, N. (2009): “Do Trade Costs in Goods Market Lead to Home Bias in Equities?,”
 Journal of International Economics, 77(1), 86–100.

Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2008): “International Risk Sharing and the Trans-
 mission of Productivity Shocks,” The Review of Economic Studies, 75(2), 443–473.

Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. Samuelson (1977): “Comparative Advantage, Trade,
 and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic Review,
 67(5), 823–839.

Dumas, B. (1992): “Dynamic Equilibrium and the Real Exchange Rate in a Spatially Separated
 World,” Review of financial studies, 5(2), 153–180.

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5),
 1741–1780.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, B. Neiman, and J. Romalis (2016): “Trade and the Global Reces-
 sion,” NBER Working Paper 16666.

Engel, C. (1999): “Accounting for US Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 107(3), 507–538.

                                             25
        (2001): “Comments on Obstfeld and Rogoff’s “The Six Major Puzzles in International
  Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?”,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
  Volume 15, pp. 403–412. MIT press.

Feldstein, M., and C. Horioka (1980): “Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows,”
 The Economic Journal, 90(358), 314–29.

Fitzgerald, D. (2012): “Trade Costs, Asset Market Frictions and Risk Sharing,” American
  Economic Review, 6(102), 2700–2733.

Ford, N., and C. Y. Horioka (2016): “The ‘Real’ Explanation of the Feldstein-Horioka
 Puzzle,” Working Paper.

Heathcote, J., and F. Perri (2013): “The International Diversification Puzzle is Not as Bad
 as You Think,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(6), 1108–1159.

        (2014): “Assessing International Efficiency,” Handbook of International Economics, 4,
  523–584.

Itskhoki, O., and D. Mukhin (2016): “Exchange Rate Disconnect,” Working Paper.

Kehoe, T., K. Ruhl, and J. Steinberg (2014): “Global Imbalances and Structural Change
 in the United States,” Working Paper.

Lucas, R. E., and E. C. Prescott (1971): “Investment Under Uncertainty,” Econometrica,
 39(5), 659–681.

Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (2001): “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeco-
 nomics: Is There a Common Cause?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15, pp.
 339–390. MIT press.

Rabitsch, K. (2012): “The Role of Financial Market Structure and the Trade Elasticity for
 Monetary Policy in Open Economies,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(4), 603–629.

Reyes-Heroles, R. (2015): “The Role of Trade Costs in the Surge of Trade Imbalances,”
 Working Paper.

Samuelson, P. A. (1964): “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, pp. 145–154.

Simonovska, I., and M. E. Waugh (2014): “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evi-
  dence,” Journal of International Economics, 92(1), 34–50.

Stockman, A. C., and L. L. Tesar (1995): “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model
  of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” The American Economic Re-
  view, pp. 168–185.

                                             26
                                          Share of             Share of
            Country           Code                                                Trade/GDP (%)        Production/GDP (%)
                                      Global GDP (%)        Global Trade (%)


            Austria        AUT                 0.7                   1.7                 36.4                     51.5
            Canada         CAN                 2.5                   4.0                 22.2                     46.6
            Czech Republic CZE                 0.3                   1.1                 53.6                     94.7
            Denmark        DNK                 0.6                   1.1                 26.8                     35.5
            Finland        FIN                 0.4                   0.8                 27.7                     65.4
            Germany        DEU                6.0                   11.9                 28.2                     62.5
            Greece         GRC                 0.5                   0.4                 11.6                     29.1
            India          IND                 1.8                   1.2                  9.6                    52.0
27




            Italy          ITA                3.9                   5.0                  18.1                    65.0
            Japan          JPN                10.0                   6.8                  9.7                    61.4
            Mexico         MEX                 1.9                  2.9                  21.4                    55.0
            Poland         POL                 0.7                   1.3                 27.2                     63.6
            Romania        ROU                 0.2                   0.4                 28.4                     52.2
            South Korea    KOR                 1.8                  3.4                  26.3                    108.2
            Spain          ESP                 2.5                   3.1                 17.6                     53.4
            Sweden         SWE                0.8                   1.6                  28.5                    56.7
            United Kingdom GBR                5.1                   5.8                  16.2                    33.4
            United States  USA                28.5                  15.9                  7.9                     35.6
            Rest of World  ROW                32.0                  31.6                 14.0                     56.4


                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics on GDP, Trade, and Production, 2005

     Notes: Trade and production data are for manufacturing only. Trade is the average of exports and imports.
                                                              Baseline              Frictionless Trade
                               Country
                                                    Durables     Nondurables       Durables     Nondurables


                               Austria                 0.30          0.50                0.02      0.02
                               Canada                  0.75          1.99                0.05      0.04
                               Czech Republic          0.62          1.15                0.03      0.05
                               Denmark                 0.17          0.42                0.01      0.01
                               Finland                 1.19          2.14                0.03      0.02
                               Germany                 1.16          1.37                0.07      0.05
                               Greece                  1.12          1.84                0.02      0.02
                               India                   3.24          8.00                0.06      0.12
28




                               Italy                   2.42          3.14                0.07      0.07
                               Japan                   6.39          6.50                0.13      0.06
                               Mexico                  0.77          3.39                0.05      0.08
                               Poland                  0.88          2.04                0.03      0.05
                               Romania                 0.61          1.11                0.01      0.02
                               South Korea             3.30          4.56                0.14      0.06
                               Spain                   1.50          2.56                0.06      0.06
                               Sweden                  0.86          1.12                0.03      0.02
                               United Kingdom          0.63          1.67                0.04      0.04
                               United States           2.18          5.13                0.11      0.12
                               Rest of World           2.54          4.82                0.14      0.18


                                                        Table 2: Home Bias in Trade

     Notes: Table reports the ratio of home purchases to imports by sector in 2005:Q4.
                                                               Baseline               Frictionless Trade
                             Country
                                                     Durables     Nondurables      Durables     Nondurables


                             Distance                -1.301***      -1.432***          0.000        0.000
                                                      (0.113)        (0.105)          (0.000)      (0.000)

                             Contiguous                0.073          0.148            0.000        0.000
                                                      (0.200)        (0.210)          (0.000)      (0.000)

                             Common Language         0.508***       0.554***           0.000        0.000
29




                                                      (0.163)        (0.120)          (0.000)      (0.000)

                             Constant                -3.217***      -4.188***          0.000        0.000
                                                      (0.187)        (0.167)          (0.000)      (0.000)

                             Importer FE               YES            YES              YES           YES
                             Exporter FE               YES            YES              YES           YES

                             Observations               306           306              306           306
                             R-squared                  0.93          0.92             1.00          1.00


                                                       Table 3: Gravity Regressions

     Notes: Dependent variable is the log of the ratio of bilateral trade share to destination country’s own trade share in 2005:Q4. We
     exclude ROW (and home country observations) so the number of observations equals 306 = 182 − 18. Robust standard errors in
     parentheses. p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.1 denoted by ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively.
                                                Baseline                                       Frictionless Trade
                         2001-12     2001-08     2009-12     Long Difference      2001-12    2001-08    2009-12    Long Difference


        Saving            0.378**    0.254*      0.630***       0.881***           0.146**   0.148**     0.141          -0.292
                          (0.134)    (0.142)      (0.120)        (0.179)           (0.068)   (0.058)    (0.092)        (0.441)

        Constant          0.144***   0.174***    0.0852***        0.003           0.263***   0.280***   0.232***       -0.0822*
                           (0.032)    (0.034)     (0.028)        (0.010)           (0.041)    (0.036)    (0.053)        (0.042)
30




        Observations         19         19          19             19                19         19         19             19
        R-squared           0.34       0.18        0.63           0.63              0.20       0.20       0.12           0.02


                                                    Table 4: Feldstein-Horioka Regressions

     Notes: Dependent variable is investment. Investment and saving are expressed relative to GDP. Saving is defined as investment plus
     trade balance. “Long Difference” calculated as the 2012 value less the 2001 value. Robust standard errors in parentheses. p < 0.01,
     p < 0.05, and p < 0.1 denoted by ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively.
                                                    Quarterly                                 Annual
                                         Baseline      Frictionless Trade         Baseline      Frictionless Trade


                        Mean                0.03               0.10                  0.01               0.24

                        Median              0.04               0.10                  0.01               0.23

                        Maximum             0.45               0.74                  0.84               0.98
31




                        Minimum             -0.55              -0.45                 -0.80              -0.83


                                                     Table 5: Consumption Correlations

     Notes: Table gives moments of the distribution of correlations in quarterly and annual log changes in consumption (both at an annual
     rate) between each pair among the 19 countries from 2001 through 2012.
                                                     Quarterly                              Annual
                                          Baseline     Frictionless Trade        Baseline      Frictionless Trade


                      Construction          0.177             0.147                0.073              0.049

                      Durables              0.095             0.000                0.048              0.000

                      Nondurables           0.100             0.000                0.051              0.000
32




                      Services              0.124             0.088                0.063              0.039


                      CPI                  0.114              0.060                0.059              0.030


                                                Table 6: Relative Purchasing Power Parity

     Notes: We report standard deviations in quarterly and annual log changes in prices (both at an annual rate) across 19 countries,
     averaged over 2001-2012.
                                                         Quarterly                                         Annual
                                              Baseline         Frictionless Trade              Baseline           Frictionless Trade


      Change in Trade Deficit / GDP       0.291**   0.294**    0.253***   0.246***        1.123***    1.252***    0.366***   0.336***
                                          (0.019)   (0.120)     (0.034)    (0.021)         (0.404)     (0.446)     (0.041)    (0.038)

      Constant                             0.004     0.003       -0.002     -0.002        -0.054***   0.056***   -0.066***   -0.072***
                                          (0.014)   (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.007)         (0.020)     (0.017)    (0.005)     (0.010)
33




      Country FE                           NO        YES         NO         YES             NO         YES          NO         YES
      Time FE                              YES       YES         YES        YES             YES        YES          YES        YES
      Observations                         893       893         893        893             209        209          209        209
      R-squared                            0.24      0.25        0.61       0.65            0.25       0.33         0.71       0.83


                                                    Table 7: The CPI and Trade Deficits

     Notes: Dependent variable is quarterly or annual log changes in the CPI. Robust standard errors in parentheses. p < 0.01, p < 0.05,
     and p < 0.1 denoted by ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively.
                                                Quarterly                                                           Annual
                                   Baseline                 Frictionless Trade                      Baseline                 Frictionless Trade
                            Nominal     Real               Nominal     Real                  Nominal     Real               Nominal Real
                                             RER                            RER                                   RER                            RER
                             GDP        GDP                 GDP        GDP                    GDP        GDP                 GDP    GDP


      Austria                 0.066     0.026    0.066       0.095      0.044   0.056          0.031      0.008   0.031        0.028     0.014   0.015
      Canada                  0.109     0.021    0.107       0.077      0.028   0.062          0.046      0.011   0.044        0.026     0.015   0.021
      Czech Republic          0.102     0.020    0.100       0.117      0.073   0.050          0.062      0.014   0.057        0.043     0.028   0.018
      Denmark                 0.068     0.031    0.059       0.163      0.060   0.112          0.025      0.007   0.029        0.047     0.019   0.033
      Finland                 0.057     0.037    0.068       0.052      0.039   0.033          0.032      0.016   0.033        0.018     0.017   0.011
      Germany                 0.057     0.024    0.064       0.045      0.023   0.040          0.029      0.017   0.036        0.024     0.013   0.023
      Greece                  0.119     0.060    0.097       0.081      0.063   0.055          0.079      0.046   0.042        0.032     0.045   0.020
34




      India                   0.120     0.043    0.112       0.068      0.051   0.046          0.065      0.018   0.051        0.041     0.035   0.014
      Italy                   0.066     0.014    0.066       0.038      0.018   0.028          0.038      0.006   0.039        0.021     0.010   0.015
      Japan                   0.209     0.034    0.207       0.125      0.048   0.092          0.093      0.015   0.088        0.054     0.024   0.037
      Mexico                  0.164     0.027    0.164       0.082      0.029   0.062          0.084      0.016   0.072        0.034     0.016   0.022
      Poland                  0.152     0.031    0.167       0.070      0.031   0.063          0.070      0.018   0.076        0.033     0.022   0.026
      Romania                 0.179     0.066    0.170       0.104      0.067   0.085          0.095      0.032   0.075        0.052     0.043   0.019
      South Korea             0.147     0.032    0.133       0.072      0.038   0.044          0.085      0.016   0.081        0.041     0.019   0.025
      Spain                   0.075     0.020    0.064       0.045      0.028   0.020          0.052      0.013   0.042        0.031     0.021   0.012
      Sweden                  0.086     0.028    0.079       0.061      0.032   0.039          0.049      0.012   0.041        0.032     0.019   0.015
      United Kingdom          0.091     0.020    0.090       0.086      0.031   0.065          0.053      0.010   0.049        0.045     0.019   0.030
      United States           0.153     0.020    0.147       0.119      0.033   0.096          0.067      0.012   0.060        0.053     0.020   0.040
      Rest of World           0.050     0.007    0.050       0.048      0.019   0.040          0.030      0.003   0.029        0.025     0.009   0.019

      Pooled                  0.120     0.042    0.115       0.089      0.051   0.065          0.064      0.033   0.056        0.042     0.037   0.030


                                 Table 8: Variation in Nominal GDP, Real GDP, and the Real Exchange Rate

     Notes: Table reports standard deviations of Ỹi,t+1 , ỹi,t+1 , and P̃i,t+1 from equation (4), constructed using quarterly and annual log
     changes from 2001 through 2012.
                                                         Quarterly                                          Annual
                                             Baseline            Frictionless Trade              Baseline          Frictionless Trade


      Log Change in Nominal GDP         0.099***    0.064***     0.401***   0.369***       0.257***   0.146***     0.627***   0.505***
                                         (0.019)     (0.017)      (0.024)    (0.021)        (0.045)    (0.027)      (0.062)    (0.041)

      Constant                           0.019*       0.007      0.142***   0.138***       0.019***   0.013***     0.108***   0.100***
                                         (0.006)     (0.008)      (0.007)    (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.004)      (0.005)    (0.003)
35




      Country FE                          NO          YES          NO        YES             NO         YES          NO         YES
      Time FE                             YES         YES          YES       YES             YES        YES          YES        YES
      Observations                        893         893          893       893             209        209          209        209
      R-squared                           0.37        0.63         0.70      0.82            0.48       0.86         0.70       0.92


                                                 Table 9: Exchange Rate Disconnect Regressions

     Notes: Dependent variable is quarterly or annual log changes in real GDP. Robust standard errors in parentheses. p < 0.01, p < 0.05,
     and p < 0.1 denoted by ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, and ∗, respectively.
                .8         .6
        Global Trade / GDP
                 .4
36




     .2         0




                                2000                       2005                             2010                  2015

                                                           Baseline                    Frictionless Trade


                                       Figure 1: Global Trade / GDP in the Baseline and with Frictionless Trade
                                          2001-2012                                                                   2001-2008
      .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                                            .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
     Investment / GDP




                                                                           Investment / GDP
                                                           KOR                                                                         KOR
                                           ROU  IND CZE                                                              ROU     ESP ROWCZE
                                              ESP    ROW                                                                    INDITACAN
                                              POL
                                             MEX
                                                  CAN
                                                 JPN
                                               ITA   FIN
                                                   AUT                                                        GRC          MEX JPN
                                                                                                                          POL    AUTFIN
                              GRC         GBR    DEU
                                                 SWE                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                      GBR      DEU
                                                                                                                                SWE
                                        USA                                                                               DNK
                                            DNK
            0




                                                                                       0
                        0         .1       .2       .3      .4      .5                                  0     .1       .2       .3            .4   .5
                                          Saving / GDP                                                                Saving / GDP


                                          2009-2012                                                                 Long Difference
37




                                                                           Change in Investment / GDP
      .1 .2 .3 .4 .5




                                                                                            .15 .3
     Investment / GDP




                                                                                                                                      IND
                                                             KOR
                                                    IND                                                                                 KOR
                                              ROU                                                                                       ROU
                                                                                                                                       POL
                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                           CAN GBR AUT
                                                  POL
                                                CAN
                                                  FINROW                                                                         ROW
                                                                                                                               SWEDEU


                                                                            -.3 -.15 0
                                                    AUT
                                               JPN CZE                                                                         MEX
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                            JPN
                                             ITA                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                             ITA
                                            MEX
                                            ESP DEU
                                          GBR   SWE                                                                      ESP
                                                                                                                           CZE
                            GRC        USA DNK                                                                        GRC
            0




                        0         .1       .2       .3      .4      .5                                  -.3    -.15        0        .15            .3
                                          Saving / GDP                                                          Change in Saving / GDP



                                                    Figure 2: Feldstein-Horioka Plots, Baseline
                                           United States                                                                  Japan
     -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3




                                                                                -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3
        Trade Deficit / GDP




                                                                                   Trade Deficit / GDP
                              2000         2005          2010           2015                             2000      2005           2010   2015


                                              Germany                                                              Rest of World
38




     -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3




                                                                                -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3
        Trade Deficit / GDP




                                                                                   Trade Deficit / GDP

                              2000         2005          2010           2015                             2000      2005           2010   2015


                                                          Baseline                                       Frictionless Trade


                              Figure 3: Trade Deficits / GDP in the Baseline and with Frictionless Trade for Selected Countries
        2
        1.5
     Density
      1
39




        .5
        0




                -.5                             0                     .5                                           1
                                          Bilateral Consumption Correlation

                                           Baseline                     Frictionless Trade


        Figure 4: Distribution of Quarterly Consumption Correlations in the Baseline and with Frictionless Trade
        2
        1.5
     Density
       1
40




        .5
        0




               -1                     -.5                   0                 .5                                  1
                                            Bilateral Consumption Correlation

                                             Baseline                    Frictionless Trade


          Figure 5: Distribution of Annual Consumption Correlations in the Baseline and with Frictionless Trade
                                        2001-2012                                                                        2001-2008
                      .9




                                                                                                .9
     Investment / GDP




                                                                               Investment / GDP
                .6




                                                                                          .6
                                                                 INDKOR                                                                               KOR
                                                                                                                                                      POL
                                                                   POL                                                                          MEX IND
                                      ROW                   MEX
                                                              GRC
                                                      ITA ESPAUT
                                                                     ROU                                                ROW                ITA ESPGRC FIN
                                                                                                                                                        ROU
                                                                                                                                                          CZE
                                            JPN         CAN          FINCZE                                                 JPN              CAN AUT
         .3




                                                                                   .3
                                USA          DEU                                                                  USA       DEU
                                                                                                                           GBR
                                            GBR                                                                                               DNK SWE
                                                        DNK SWE
              0




                                                                                           0
                           0            .3            .6                .9                                  0            .3            .6                .9
                                          Saving / GDP                                                                     Saving / GDP


                                        2009-2012                                                                   Long Difference
41




                                                                               Change in Investment / GDP
                      .9




                                                                                                .15 .3
                                                                                                                                     IND
     Investment / GDP
                .6




                                                                 IND                                                           ROU
                                                                                                                              ROW
                                                                                                                   DNK


                                                                                -.3 -.15 0
                                 ROW                                KOR
                                                                    ROU
                                                                   POL                                                    CANDEUAUTKOR
                                                                                                                          SWE
                                        JPN                                                                                      GBRPOL
                                                     ITA    AUT
                                                      CAN MEX       FIN                                                        ITAFIN
         .3




                                          DEU                        CZE
                                          GBR           ESP GRC                                                            CZEUSA
                                                                                                                             JPN
                                                                                                                          ESP GRC
                               USA                  DNK    SWE

                                                                                                                                      MEX
              0




                           0            .3            .6                .9                                  -.3    -.15        0        .15              .3
                                          Saving / GDP                                                              Change in Saving / GDP



                                                   Figure 6: Feldstein-Horioka Plots, Frictionless Trade
