                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE THEORY AND THE FACTS
                       OF HOW MARKETS CLEAR:
               IS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION VALUABLE
                FOR UNDERSTANDING MACROECONOMICS?




                         Dennis W. Canton




                      Working Paper No. 2178




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                              March 1987




This paper is a draft of a chapter to appear in eds. Schmalensee
and Willig, Handbook of Industrial OrQanizat-ion. I thank NSF for
research support and Yakov Amihud, Reuven Brenner, Kenneth
McLaughlin, Ha-im Mendelson, Richard Schmalensee, Margaret Sheridan,
and George St-igler for helpful comments. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2178
                                               March 1987



               The Theory and the Facts of How Markets Clear:

  Is Industrial Organization Valuable for Understanding Macroeconomics?




                                  ABSTRACT




     This paper examines what industrial organization economists know and

don't know about how markets clear. It reviews the empirical evidence

which shows that, at least for some industries, price behavior is peculiar

with prices failing to adjust over long periods of time. The paper dis-

cusses several existing theoretical explanations for the peculiar behav-

ior such as fixed cost to changing price information asymmetries and

theories of dynamic oligopoly. The paper goes on to develop some new

theories to explain the observed behavior. The new explanations rely

heavily on the importance of a seller's knowledge of his customers and

on the optimality of non-price rationing. The paper discusses what re-

lation, if anything, macroeconomics has to industrial organization.




                                              Dennis W. Carlton
                                              University of Chicago
                                              Graduate School of Business
                                              1101 East 58th Street
                                              Chicago, IL 60637
                             I.   INTRODUCTION


      Industrial organization is the study of how individual industries

 operate. It attempts to explain how an industry reaches an equilibrium

 price and output and how the industry behaves over time in response to

 changes in either supply or demand conditions. As is typical in micro-

 economics, an important focus of attention has been on how price clears

markets. Industrial organization, perhaps more than any other branch of

microeconomics, has been well aware that the observed behavior of prices

turns out to be different from that predicted by any of the simple models

of market clearing. Despite this disparity between the evidence and the

theory, industrial organization has not, until quite recently, made great

strides toward resolving the conflict. This essay describes some of the

simple as well as more recently developed and more complicated theories

of how markets clear, and presents evidence on what industrial organiza-

tion economists know about how markets clear.

     Aside from industrial organization economists, macroeconomists are

also deeply interested in the question of how markets clear. In Keynesian

macroeconomics it is assumed that for some (often unexplained) reason

certain markets, typically the labor market, do not clear because a price

is rigid. When prices fail to clear markets, inefficiencies develop,

resources are wasted and unemployment can arise. If industrial organ-

ization economists find that certain prices are rigid, that fact should

be of great interest to Keynesians since their theories depend on these

price rigidities. Whether or not one is a Keynesian, understanding how

markets clear over time is valuable information to a macroeconomist. If

industrial organization economists can indeed predict the time path of
                                 -2-
prices, output, investments, the employment of factors, and inventories,

and the transmission of shocks from one sector of the economy to the

other, those predictions would be of interest to macroeconomists at-

tempting to explain business cycles. Recent explanations of business

cycles (e.g., Lucas (1981)) stress the importance of intertemporal sub-

stitution patterns, either in demand or in supply. It is these

intertemporal substitution patterns that industrial organization econo-

mists can help describe.

     Much of the recent work in macroeconomics emphasizes the importance

of information transmission in the economy (e.g., Lucas (1981)). For

example, some current explanations for unemployment and business cycles

depend upon individuals having difficulty obtaining information about the

economic environment from their own observations of the marketplace.

These theories, which stress the role of information, owe a great debt

to Stigler's initial analysis (1961) of market behavior when search costs

are positive. Recent advances in the theory of finance have emphasized

how well-organized competitive auction markets, like a stock market, can

facilitate the aggregation of information (see, e.g., Grossman and

Stiglitz (1980)). This paper will explain that auction markets and search

markets are just two of many possible types of market organization, each

of which have different properties of information transmissions. This

means that if industrial organization economists have theories to predict

which type of market organization will develop and how information gets

transmitted in each type of market organization, they could assist

macroeconomists in pinpointing those sectors of the economy where infor-

mation lags and information errors are most likely to occur.
                                  —3—
      One possible reason why macroeconomics has not paid more attention

 to industrial organization is that much of industrial organization seems

 fixated on answering how the behavior of markets differs as industry

 concentration changes. Although this is certainly an interesting ques-

 tion, industry concentration is only one of many ways in which markets

 can differ. Market liquidity, heterogeneity of product, variability in

 demand and supply, the ability to hold inventories, and the ability to

plan are also interesting characteristics, and differences in these

 characteristics lead to different market behavior. Yet the effect of

 these other characteristics has received much less attention from indus-

trial organization economists than the effect of differences in industry

concentration. And the effects of differences in these other character-

istics may well be of more importance to macroeconomists than the effects

of differences in concentration. This essay will discuss some of these

other characteristics.

     Although it is clear that industrial organization does have some-

thing to offer macroeconomists, it is unlikely that macroeconomists who

study industrialorganizatjon will suddenly realize that they have been

overlooking key insights into macroeconomics. One reason is that the

attempt within the last ten to fifteen years to provide a rigorous

micro-foundation for macroeconomics already represents interaction be-

tween industrial organization and macroeconomics. Another reason is that

industrial organization has only recently been making progress in areas

of potential interest to macroeconomists. My own assessment is that some

of these new areas of research, which I describe below, do have the po-

tential to provide a valuable contribution to macroeconomics. However,

the contributions will probably be better characterized as sharpening the
                                 -4-
perspective of macroeconomists rather than as fundamentally changing how

macroeconomists think. 1

     This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses some simple

theories of how markets clear. These simple theories focus on price as

the mechanism used to achieve resource allocation and investigate how the

price clearing function is altered depending upon whether the market is

a competitive one, an oligopoly or a monopoly. Section III provides ev-

idence on what industrial economists know about price behavior. The ev-

idence is sufficiently at variance with any of the predictions of the

simple theories that it raises serious questions about the usefulness of

these theories for explaining price behavior in many markets. Section

IV investigates a variety of alternative theories that go a good way,

though not all the way, toward explaining some of the observed puzzles

in the data on price. In particular, I present a general theory of how

markets operate without relying upon price as the exclusive market

clearing mechanism. In Section V1 I focus on features of market structure

other than the degree of market concentration to show how market structure

matters in explaining the response of various industries to shocks in

either supply or demand. Section VI presents my conclusions.




1.   I do not discuss the concept of money and credit. Even here, a few
     industrial organization economists have done some work that might
     interest macroeconomists. See, e.g., Telser and Higginbotham (1977)
     and Telser (1978) ch. 10. I also do not discuss the political theory
     of regulation (Stigler (1971), Peltzman (1976)) which might be used
     to explain fiscal and monetary policy.
                                      -5-
                II. SIMPLE THEORIES OF HOW MARKETS CLEAR


      In this section, I. briefly survey the three most important simple

models of how markets operate. These simple models form the background

against which I will analyze the evidence on prices in the next section.

Although these models are admittedly simple, it is first necessary to

understand where the simple models fail in order to develop better models.


     A.   Competition


     Probably the simplest and most frequently used model to evaluate

industry behavior is the standard competitive model in which price adjusts

so as to equate supply to demand. This model assumes that there is a

well-functioning auction market in which transactions take place. There

is no cost to using such a market nor is there uncertainty affecting

suppliers or demanders.

     The focus of the model is to explain price fluctuations as the

mechanism to clear markets. Given the standard assumptions of a perfectly

competitive model, it is straightforward to trace out how the market re-

sponds to shifts in either supply or demand. For example, we can write

in equilibrium that



          D(P;a) =   S(P;a)                             (1)




where D is the demand curve, S is the supply curve, P is the price, and

a represents exogenous factors influencing supply or demand or both. We

can rewrite equation (1) in logarithmic form as in equation (2)



          in D(ln P;ln a) =   in   S(ln P;ln a)        (2)
                                      -6-
where in a =   log   of exogenous factors. We can perform comparative statics

on equation (2) to figure out how price will change in response to fluc-

tuations in a. It is straightforward to show that the percentage change

in price resulting from a one percent change in exogenous factors will

be related inversely to the elasticities of demand and supply as given

by equation (3).


     dinPoc          1                                     (3)
     d in a      ESED

where E   elasticity of supply (Es) or demand (ED).

     The insights from the competitive model usually stop with (3). This

means that the analyst, once he knows the elasticities of supply and de-

mand, is done. He uses equation (3) to predict the price effects using

the price elasticities. Typically not much attention is paid to the

economic explanations of the likely magnitude of Es or ED, based upon the

economic motivation of firms and individuals.

     The competitive model is elegant in its simplicity and in its pred-

ictions. When either demand or supply changes, price adjusts to clear

the market. The amount by which price has to adjust depends solely upon

the supply and demand elasticities. There are no unsatisfied demanders

at any instant nor any sellers who wish to sell the good but cannot. All

sellers receive and all buyers pay the same price, and price changes are

perfectly correlated across different buyers.


     B.   Oligopoly Models


     It has long been recognized that the competitive model will fail if

there are only a few firms in the marketplace and if these few firms

recognize their mutual interdependence. In such a situation, the industry
                                  -7-
supply curve will no longer equal the summation of the marginal cost

curves of the firms. Instead, the amount one firm is willing to supply

depends, in part, on the reactions that the firm thinks its rivals will

take to its actions. There is no one model of oligopoly behavior that

is uniformly accepted today. This inability to develop a single model

reflects in part ignorance, but also the fact that oligopolies differ

quite a bit in their behavior, and therefore it is unrealistic to expect

one model to completely describe their behavior. Most simple models of

oligopoly (e.g., Bertrand, Cournot, kinked demand curve) assume that

however price is set, there are no unsatisfied demanders or sellers at

that price, that price changes are passed along to all buyers simultane-

ously, and that it is not costly to transact in the market.

     One common theme of most models of oligopoly is that the behavior

of price in an oligopoly will be much different than it is in a compet-

itive market. This insight is useless, though, unless it is possible to

describe the types of differences one expects. One early attempt was to

use the model of the kinked demand curve to explain oligopoly pricing.2

As shown in Figure 1, under the kinked demand curve theory of oligopoly

pricing, every firm faces a demand curve that is much more elastic above

a price, p. and much less elastic below that price. If firms do face such

demand curves, it is clear that there will be a tendency for firms to

price at p for a range of different marginal costs. The marginal cost

curve will go through the gap in the marginal revenue curve. (See Figure

1.) The kinked demand theory of oligopoly behavior therefore predicts

that prices will tend to remain unchanged for small changes in costs.



2. Other recent models yielding kinked demand curves include Salop
     (1979) and Schmalensee (1982).
                          -8-
            Figure 1 -   Kinked Demand Curve




               Demand


Price                \

        P


                                               marginal cost
   mC

                                          Q
                                  -9-
     Unfortunately, the theory is silent on how price initially gets set.

The kinked demand curve is certainly not a theory to explain price levels.

At best, it is a theory to explain why prices do not change in response

to moderate shifts in cost. (In response to large shifts in cost, the

theory predicts that prices should change, although it provides no

guidelines as to how the new price level will then be set.)

     The property of the kinked demand curve that price is unresponsive

to some cost fluctuations is preserved in most discussions of oligopoly

theory whether or not based on the kinked demand curve. The reasoning

is that in oligopolies prices fluctuate less in response to cost changes

(especially small ones) than they would otherwise in order not to disturb

existing oligopolistic discipline. Anytime a price change occurs in an

oligopoly, there is a risk that a price war could break out. Hence, firms

are reluctant to change price.


     C.   Monopoly


     The theory of monopoly like the theory of competition is exceedingly

simple. The firm calculates its marginal revenue curve and equates mar-

ginal revenue to marginal cost. Again, the simple theory of monopoly does

not typically analyze how the shapes of either the demand curve or mar-

ginal cost curve will be influenced by economic motivations facing con-

sumers or the firm. The implication of the theory of monopoly is that

price will exceed marginal cost. Again, as in the models of competition

and oligopoly, there are no unsatisfied demanders at the market price,

and the cost of allocating goods, that is the cost of using a market price

to allocate goods, is assumed to be zero. The demand curve is assumed
                                   - 10   -


to   be known and price changes across different buyers are expected to be

highly correlated.

       It is straightforward to use the simple theory of monopoly to explain

how a monopolist will react to shifts in either supply or demand. For

example, if marginal costs change, then the new price will be determined

by the intersection of the new marginal cost curve with the marginal re-

venue curve.

       It is common to see statements that a monopolist will have his price

vary less than it would if the market were competitive. This intuition

seems to be based upon an example in which demand curves are linear. In

such a case any change in marginal costs will be translated into a change

in price that is less than the change in marginal costs. For example,

if the demand curve equals




            Q9-P                                         (4)




and marginal cost equals 1, the optimal price is 5. If marginal cost

rises from 1 to 3, the optimal price goes up from 5 to 6. That is, price

rises by one-half of the cost increase.

      With linear demand curves and constant marginal cost, it is easy to

show that if costs are changing over time, then the resulting variance

in cost will be greater than the variance in price. However, it is also

possible to construct models with precisely the opposite property. For

example, suppose a monopolist faces a demand curve with a constant

elasticity of demand and has a constant marginal cost. Then the

monopolist's price equals a constant mark up above marginal cost. Since

the mark up exceeds 1, it follows that the variance of price will exceed
                                    — 11 —

 the   variance in marginal cost. For example, if the elasticity were two,

 the monopolist would be charging a price of $2 if marginal cost were $1.

 If marginal cost were to rise by $2 to $3, the optimal price would rise

by $4 and become $6. The increase in price would exceed the increase in

 cost.

         The previous examples show that the relationship of price changes

to cost changes varies with the shape of the demand curve and therefore

it is not possible to make any general statements about the variance of

price in relation to the variance of cost based upon whether a market is

competitive or monopolized. Moreover, since we know that oligopolies run

the spectrum from almost competitive industries to almost monopolized

industries, the simple theories do not allow any differential predictions

of price flexibility for (large cost changes) that depend solely on the

degree of competitiveness of the market.3


                    III. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON THE ROLE OF
                          PRICE IN ALLOCATING GOODS


       Several types of evidence are available to enlighten economists on

the role that price plays in clearing markets. One type of evidence is

casual observation which, although not terribly scientific, is better

than no observation at all. Another type of evidence relies upon surveys

of prices paid, as best they can be measured, for different commodities

and across time. We now review the evidence.




3. For small cost changes, the theory of oligopoly suggests that prices
     may remain unchanged.
                                  - 12   -


     A.   Casual Observation


     Even if an economist has never studied the actual empirical dis-

tributions of prices across markets, he has transacted in many markets

himself. He knows that it is not unusual for him to go to the supermarket

to buy a product and for the supermarket to be out of that product. He

knows that if there are three cars ahead of him at the gas station, the

price of gasoline at the pump will not rise, but rather he will have to

wait to get his car filled up. In fact, for many items he commonly pur-

chases, the price, once set, stays fixed for a while.

     Newspaper articles often describe how some companies have difficulty

assuring themselves of supply during periods of high demand. Histories

of business, such as Alfred Chandler's The Visible Hand, describe in de-

tail that many firms vertically integrate, not necessarily to get a lower

price for the product, but rather simply to get the product on a reliable

basis. Waiting for a good and being unable to purchase a good when one

wants it are typical rather than atypical experiences in many markets.

In periods of tight supply, preferred customers get delivery, while new

customers often are unable to assure themselves of a supply at the same

price as the steady customers. In fact, short-term customers may be un-

able to get the product at all.

     The notion that emerges from these types of observations is that in

many markets price may not be the sole mechanism used to clear the market.

None of the simple theories of Section II are able to explain the exist-

ence of unsatisfied demanders, yet, that fact appears to be an essential

feature of many markets.
                                   - 13   —



     B.   Studies of Price Statistics


          1)   Early Studies


     The earliest study that I am aware of regarding the flexibility and

behavior of prices is the one by Frederick Mills in 1927. Mills examined

numerous price statistics gathered by the BLS for frequency of change and

amplitude of change. His work represents an outstanding contribution to

our knowledge of price behavior.

     In Figure 2, I have reproduced some of Mills' findings regarding the

frequency of price change over various time periods. The diagrams show

that the distribution across markets of the frequency of price changes

is U-shaped. That is, there are many products whose prices change fre-

quently, and many products whose prices change infrequently. I am unaware

of any attempt by economists to explain empirically the shape of these

functions. Of course, it is possible to say that in some industries there

is no need for price change, and what Mills is showing reflects simply

the distribution of shocks to various supply and demand curves. So for

example, there are many markets for which shocks are frequent, while there

are also many markets for which shocks are few. While that is one pos-

sibility, another is that there are some markets for which prices change

frequently and are the exclusive device used to clear markets, while there

are other markets for which price does not vary frequently and something

else is going on to clear those markets.
                                             - 14       -



                                            Figure 2




       COLUMN DIAGRAMS SHOWING DISTRIBUTIONS OF MEASURES OF
                  FREQUENCY OF PRICE CHANGE, BY PERIODS.1

Frequency




  30



  6O                                                                                  i890-i92!
                                           1906-1913      1914-1921       1922-1925
                                                                                      1914-I9ZF?


   iThe class intervals in which the x-acalea are graduated are given in Table 122.




    Source:           Mills (1927) p. 371
                      The horizontal axis measures frequency of
                      price change. Frequency increases as one
                      moves to the right.
                                 - 15   -



     It remained for Gardiner Means in 1935 to create turmoil in the
profession by suggesting that the Great Depression occurred because in

many markets the laws of supply and demand had been repealed and prices

no longer fluctuated to clear the market. Whatever one thinks of Means'

arguments, they attracted widespread attention. Here was a man claiming

that the Great Depression, which was (and is) inexplicable to most econ-

omists, was caused by a breakdown in market clearing, which formed the

basis for all economists' beliefs. Keynes' general theory soon came along

with predictions of economic behavior that resulted from an assumed wage

rigidity. Although I have never seen any analyses of wage rigidity com-

parable to, for example, Mills work, my suspicion is that wage rigidity

is less important than price rigidity, and the reliance by macroeconomists

on wage rigidity strikes me as misplaced.4 In any event, Means hypotheses

challenged the profession and though, as I explain later, his inferences

from price rigidity are misguided, they are based on, what I believe, is

a correct phenomenon, namely that none of the simple theories explain

price behavior very well.

     Means theory was that in many markets prices were "administered" --

which meant that the laws of supply and demand no longer predicted price

behavior, and instead prices were under the control of firms which, for

unexplained reasons, chose not to vary prices to clear markets. Means

claimed that price changes in "administered" markets were much less fre-

quent, and, when they did occur, much larger in amplitude than those in

competitive markets. According to Means, because administered markets


4. If prices are stickier than wages, real wages should be procyclical,
     while if wages are stickier than prices, real wages should be
     countercyclical. The evidence (see, e.g., Zarnowitz (1985)) is that
     real wages are procyclical.
                                 - 16   -


had long stretches of rigid prices, prices were failing to clear these

markets, and this failure caused the disequilibrium of which the Great

Depression is an example.

     Means seems to have resisted equating administered prices to prices

in markets with high concentration, and there was confusion as to what

exactly an administered price was. A voluminous and contentious litera-

ture developed to try to give structure to Means' arguments and test

them.5 The resUlt of that literature has, I think, been to confirm that

something unusual is going on in the behavior of some prices. (See, e.g.,

Weiss (1977), but see Stigler and Kindahi (1972) for a different point

of view.)

     Mills' (1927) earlier work, which attracted much less attention than

that of Gardiner Means, did not indicate a significant decrease in the

frequency of price changes from the 1890s to the mid-1920s (See Figure

2). Although I am not aware of any study that has redone Mills' analysis

on price flexibility for the period of the Great Depression, my hunch is

that prices did not become dramatically more rigid after 1929. That is,

Gardiner Means may well have been right to point out that economists had

inadequate theories to predict the flexibility of prices, but the phe-

nomenon he was talking about was one that was not confined to the period

of the Great Depression. Indeed, as we shall soon see, the phenomenon

of rigid prices characterizes the U.S. economy today. However, Means did

raise the possibility of a link between industrial structure and business

cycles -- a link that is only now being explored.   (See Section II.B.3.)



5.   The interested reader is referred to Beals (1975), Lustgarten (1975),
     Quails (1979), Scherer (1980), Ch. 13, Weiss (1977), and Weston and
     Lustgarten (1974), and the references cited therein.
                                 - 17   -



           2)   Later Studies


     The major criticism of Means' work is that it relies on price sta-

tistics gathered by the BLS. A study done by McAllister in 1961 for a

Congressional Committee on Price Statistics showed that the BLS data

typically did not reflect price discounts. Moreover, an examination of

the way in which the BLS gathered price statistics showed that the number

of reporters relied upon by the BLS varied from market to market. It is

a simple statistical exercise to show that the more reporters there are,

the more likely it is to observe some flexibility in an average price.

This is especially true when products are somewhat heterogeneous. The

McAllister study showed that the flexibility of prices, as determined from

BLS numbers, was closely linked to the number of reporters taking BLS

surveys.

     The findings of the McAllister study led to one of the most important

contributions to the debate on administered prices --   the   work by George

Stigler and James Kindahl (1970). Recognizing the inadequacies of BLS

price statistics, Stigler and Kindahi collected data on individual

transaction prices based on actual transactions between buyers and sell-

ers. Although the Stigler-Kindahl data undoubtedly contain reporting

errors, it is probably the best source of information on pricing behavior

available to economists today. Stigler and Kiridahl constructed indices

of prices for individual commodities, and found that their price indices

moved much more smoothly than those of the BLS. Price indices, when based

upon actual transaction prices, were much more flexible than the price

indices based on BLS data. Although Stigler and Kindahi did not explic-

itly claim that their findings were completely in accord with any of the

simple theories of market clearing, they did suggest that their work went
                                 - 18   -


a long way towards explaining the unusual findings of price investigations

based on BLS data. Their explanation was that the BLS data were simply

misleading.

     Stigler and Kindahi did recognize that there were some puzzling

features even in their own data set. For example, they noted that the

typical pattern of buyer-seller behavior was for buyers and sellers to

remain in contact with each other for long periods of time even for

transactions involving what appear to be homogeneous goods. This suggests

that buyers and sellers build up some specific capital from the trans-

actions and that this capital is valuable and must be preserved over time.

As will be seen below, this insight can be used to explain a great deal

of what appears to be unusual pricing behavior. Furthermore, the Stigler

and Kindahi data produced a price index that was not only more flexible

than the BLS index, but also had a different general trend from the BLS

index during some time periods. For example, if one believes that the

BLS price is more of a spot price than the Stigler-Kindahi price index,6

which is based on long-term contract prices, then the Stigler-Kindahi data

suggest that over the course of the business cycle there are systematic

differences between how spot prices behave and how long-term contract

prices behave. During booms, spot prices rise relative to long term

contract prices. There have been only a few attempts to explain why such

differences exist.7



6. The BLS index is based on current price quotations for delivery.
     Therefore, it is reasonable that the BLS index will reflect fewer
     long term contracts than the Stigler-Kindahi index. (See Stigler-
     Kindahi (1970), p. 6).

7.   See Stigler and Kindahi (1970), Carlton (1979), and Hubbard and
     Weiner (1986).
                                   - 19   -


     Another   interesting feature noted by Stigler and Kindahi is that most

of the transactions, although they last a long time and although they may

be pursuant to a "contract," seem to specify neither a price nor in many

cases a quantity. It is simply wrong to think of contracts as rigidly

setting both the price and the quantity terms in a market place.

(Williamson (1975) makes this same point.) That is, it is wrong to be-

lieve that it is the writing down of a fixed price contract that is

causing rigid prices in markets. Even if buyers and sellers had the op-

portunity to renegotiate after they have entered a deal, it will often

be the case that prices would not change in the contracts.

     Gardiner Means (1972) responded to the Stigler-Kindahi study by

claiming that their evidence, instead of contradicting his earlier work,

actually supported it. Since it is very hard to define exactly what

Means' hypotheses were, it is not worth attempting to resolve this dispute

here. However, Leonard Weiss (1977) did attempt to weigh the evidence

of Stigler-Kindahl against the evidence put forward by Means. Although

recognizing the difficulty of giving theoretical content to Means' hy-

pothesis, Weiss concluded that the evidence on pricing did appear unusual

in the sense that the simple theories do not do a good job of explaining

pricing behavior.

     The only other study using the Stigler-Kindahi data base is my own

(Carlton (1986)). Unlike Stigler and Kindahl, I did not construct indices

of prices to examine how a price index behaved over time because indices

can mask interesting behavior. For example, it is possible for an index

of prices to be perfectly flexible even if most contracts are character-

ized by rigid prices. This could occur if new buyers simply paid a dif-

ferent price than old buyers. Yet, it is surely important to know whether
                                  - 20   -



price   is being used to allocate goods to some buyers while not to others

and whether some other mechanism, such as a seller's knowledge of each

buyer's requirements, is being used to allocate goods. Instead of exam-

ining indices, I examined how prices to individual buyers change relative

to each other during the course of a ten year period. I also analyzed

how often a price, once set to an individual buyer, changed.

     Table 1 presents a summary of some of my findings. It shows

that the degree of price rigidity differs greatly across industries.8

In some industries the average price does not change for periods well over

one year, while in other industries the price changes quite frequently.

In fact, there are several instances of transactions in which the price

paid by a buyer does not change for periods of well over 5 years. Although

the evidence in Table 1 could conform to the simple theories under some

extreme assumptions, I think it is better viewed as casting doubt on them.

For example, one could argue that in industries with very rigid prices

the supply and demand conditions are virtually stable over time, while

in the other industries with flexible prices the supply and demand con-

ditions are changing frequently. I find that the duration of the rigidity



8. Rigid prices are troubling to an economist because they suggest that
     prices may not be clearing markets. However, it is not rigidity per
     se that should bother economists, but rather the inference from the
     rigid prices that prices are not clearing markets. Even if prices
     were perfectly indexed to inflation and hence were always changing,
     it would still be troubling if the evidence (e.g., unsatisfied buy-
     ers) indicated that price did not clear markets.
          It is also important to understand that the simple models pre-
     dict inefficient resource allocation when the marginal price fails
     to clear markets. A contract that specifies a fixed quantity at a
     fixed price is not a rigid price that can induce inefficiency since
     the marginal price of an additional unit is the price of buying that
     unit in the marketplace. When the quantity term is left open, as
     appears to be the case for the Stigler-Kindahi data, the contract
     price is the marginal price.
                             - 21   -


                            Table   1
                   Price Rigidity by Industry


 Product                                Average Duration of
  Group                                   Price Rigidity
                                             (Months)

Steel                                           17.9

Non—Ferrous Metals                               7.5

Petroleum      '                                8.3

Rubber Tires                                    11.5

Paper                                           11.8

Chemicals                                       19.2

Cement                                          17.2

Glass                                           13.3

Truck Motors                                    8.3

Plywood                                         7.5

Household Appliances                            5.9


Source: Canton (1986), Table 1.
                                  - 22   -


in   some prices to individual buyers is so long that this explanation is

not credible. And, further investigation (described below) reveals that

such explanations are wrong.

      The Stigler-Kindahl data allow one to examine how price changes

across different buyers of the identical commodity are correlated. In

all of the simple theoretical models of market clearing, the price changes

across different buyers of the same commodity should be highly correlated.

Although there were some markets for which this was true, there were se-

veral markets in which price changes seem to be poorly correlated across

buyers. My interpretation of these results is that the simple models

which rely exclusively on price to clear markets simply fail to explain

how many markets operate. It is an unsolved puzzle to explain why price

changes in some markets are highly correlated across buyers, while price

changes in other markets are not.

      One of the findings of this study was the strong positive relation-

ship between industry concentration and price rigidity. The more highly

concentrated an industry is, the greater is the likelihood that the in-

dustry has prices that remain unchanged for long periods of time. (Recall

that the simple models do not have any prediction relating price rigidity

to the amount of concentration in the market.9)

      In summary, detailed examination of the Stigler-Kindahl data uncov-

ers a number of anomalies in price behavior. These anomalies do not

support any of the simple models of market clearing. As will be explained



9. Although the theory of oligopoly can justify price rigidity in the
     face of small cost changes, notice that as the industry becomes more
     concentrated and an oligopoly becomes more powerful, the oligopoly
     should behave more like a monopolist for whom, according to the
     simple theory of monopoly, prices should not be rigid.
                                         - 23   -



 in   Section IV,   I   think it wrong to assert that these findings necessarily

prove that markets are operating inefficiently. Instead, these findings

prove that the simple models of price clearing are inapplicable to certain

markets.


             3)     Other Recent Studies


       There have been numerous empirical investigations of the relation-

ship between price, cost, business cycles, and concentration.10 Although

I will not describe them in great detail here, I would like to call at-

tention to several recent studies that improve on earlier studies by using

more comprehensive data.

       The work of Domowitz, Hubbard and Peterson (1986a, 1986b, 1986c)

examines the behavior of prices in the United States over the period 1958

to 1981 using data at the four digit SIC code level. They reached several

interesting conclusions. First, price-cost margins in concentrated in-

dustries are procylical --       they   rise in booms and fall in recessions.11

Second, price-cost margins in relatively unconcentrated industries tend"

to be countercyclical. Third, unionization in concentrated industries

appears to keep wages in those industries relatively stable over the

business cycle.

       Domowitz et al. explain their finding of procyclical margins in

concentrated industries by showing that costs, in particular real wages,

tend to be more rigid in those industries. That is, during a boom, a firm

in a concentrated industry experiences a price increase that is accompa-



10. The interested reader is referred to Chs. 9 and 13 in Scherer (1980)
     for a survey of some of these studies.

11. Qualls (1979) also finds this procyclical effect.
                                  - 24   -



nied   by only a modest cost increase so that the gap between price and

(marginal) cost rises. Unions provide one explanation for the greater

rigidity of wages in concentrated industries since unionization and con-

centration are positively correlated. Domowitz et al. find that the

differential degree of unionization (not just concentration) is an im-

portant explanation for this procyclical behavior of margins in concen-

trated industries. A corroborating piece of evidence is that local demand

effects are less important than aggregate economic activity in explaining

margins. This is exactly what one would expect if price changes were

relatively similar across industries but not cost changes so that dif-

ferences in cost were the main variable explaining different behavior of

margins across industries during the business cycle.

       This finding of procyclical margins in concentrated industries is

interesting for what it implies about how concentrated markets work. A

monopolist (or an oligopolist trying to behave like a monopolist) will

have his price-cost margin rise only if the elasticity of demand changes.

I have not seen any evidence to suggest that demand elasticities decrease

in booms.12 Therefore, some other explanation is needed to explain pro-

cyclical margins in concentrated industries. Possible explanations could

rely on either oligopolistic behavior (e.g., incentives to cheat, (see

Section IV) or the long-term relationship of the buyer or seller (see

Section IV).

       There has been some work that reaches opposite conclusions to those

of DomowitZ et al. For example, Scherer (1980), ch. 9, in reviewing the

literature concludes that margins in concentrated industries are likely



12. clearly, all demand elasticities cannot decrease because of the
     "adding up" constraint on the demand elasticities.
                                  - 25   -


to   be countercyclical. This view is based on studies that find slow ad-

justment of prices to cost changes in concentrated industries.

      Another contradiction to the procyclical nature of margins comes

from the work of Bus (1985). He finds that marginal cost is procyclical

and that, in general, margins are countercyclical. He finds no effect

of concentration on this relationship; however, his investigation of the

concentration effect relies on fewer observations than does the work of

Domowitz et al. Bus takes special care to measure marginal as opposed

to average variable cost. In contrast, Domowitz et al. are forced to use

average variable cost in their measure of margins. If marginal cost is

rising, then the true margin (which is based on marginal cost) could well

be unchanging or even falling over the cycle, while Domowitz et al. would

measure an increasing margin. Whether this explains the discrepancy be-

tween Bus and Domowitz et al. is unclear, but it surely reconciles at

least part of the discrepancy.

      A final piece of possibly contradictory evidence comes from Mills

(1936). Mills studied the behavior of margins during the period before

and after the Great Depression and found margins to be strongly counter-

cyclical. Although Mills did not investigate the relationship of margins

to concentration, his strong finding across all industries does contrast

with Domowitz et al.'s finding of a "tendency" for countercyclical be-

havior of margins and then only in unconcentrated industries.

      Just as it is important to understand how markets in the United

States clear, it is also important to understand how markets in different

countries clear. There has been some work trying to describe the dif-

ferent price flexibilities among various countries. One of the best is
                                 - 26   -



the work by Encaoua and Geroski (1984).13 They put together a detailed
data base that they used to estimate the relationship between price, cost

and concentration across a wide variety of countries and commodities.

They find, in general, that the higher the degree of concentration in a

market, the slower is the adjustment of price to cost changes.14 They

show that the more an industry is characterized by new entry and compe-

tition (measured by imports), the more likely it is that prices rapidly

adjust to cost changes. They also find that there is a difference in the

flexibility of price across countries with, for example, Japan having more

flexible prices than the United States. Understanding the reasons for

the differential flexibility of prices across countries remains an im-

portant task.


     C.   Summary of Evidence on Prices


     The evidence on price reveals that some markets are well described

by the simple models of market clearing, but others are clearly not.

Markets differ greatly in how flexible prices are, with the degree of

competition being an important determinant of flexibility. In some mar-

kets, price changes to one buyer may be uncorrelated with those to another

buyer, suggesting that other factors, such as a seller's knowledge of a

buyer, are involved. In other markets, long-term relationships between

buyers and sellers appear to be important. This suggests that industrial



13. See also Gordon (1983).

14. The empirical findings of Domberger (1979) for the United Kingdom
     are precisely opposite. Domberger's explanation of his results is
     that information should be easier to gather as concentration in-V
     creases and, so, prices should respond more rapidly to cost changes.
     See also Eckard (1982).
                                  — 27 -


organization   must consider arrangements more complicated than those based

on impersonal markets in which prices alone allocate goods.


                      IV. HOW TO EXPLAIN THE EVIDENCE


     There are several approaches to developing theories that better ex-

plain the observed evidence. (See Tucker (1938) for an early attempt.)

One approach is simply to think harder about the simple theories, improve

them, and see how far we can get. That approach takes us a good distance

and I will describe some of the most useful extensions to the simple

theories. However, those extensions to the theories get us only part of

the way and in the remainder of this section I explore alternative theo-

ries that are useful in explaining some, though perhaps not all, of the

evidence. It is the development of new theories of market clearing that

should receive priority in explaining the pricing anomalies and that could

have some impact on macroeconomic thinking.15


     A.   Extensions to the Simple Theory -
          The Introduction of Time


     The expositions of any of the simple theories stress price as the

market clearing mechanism and ignore the possibility of delaying con-

sumption or production to a later time. However, there is nothing in the

theory that prevents it from taking account of such intertemporal sub-

stitution. For example, it is a straightforward extension of the simple



15. I do not explore the importance of risk aversion in explaining price
     rigidity. My empirical work (Carlton (1986)) indicated it not to
    be important. The theoretical development of the effect of risk
     aversion on pricing turns out to be identical to that in my 1979
    paper. See Polinsky (1985) for a detailed study of risk aversion
     and pricing. I also do not explicitly examine pricing under condi-
     tions of natural monopoly. (See Hall (1984)).
                                   - 28   -



competitive    model to date goods and treat the same good at one date as a

different commodity than the same good at a different date. (See Debreu,

ch. 7, (1964).) Once dynamic elements are introduced in this way, it is

clear that the demander faces many substitutes to consuming a product

today, not only from other products consumed today, but also from the same

product consumed in the future. Conversely, from the viewpoint of the

supplying firm, the firm could substitute production today for production

tomorrow by holding inventories; in fact, the supply decisions of the firm

across time are based on a complicated decision problem of how to vary

inventories of inputs, capital, labor and final output inventories and

production in such a way as to satisfy a given stream of consumption.

These observations suggest that the intertemporal substitution patterns

of both consumers and firms will be critical to understanding the extent

to which prices today must adjust in order to clear markets.

     The introduction of time into any of the three simple models de-

scribed in Section II makes those models more realistic descriptions of

the world. The introduction of time emphasizes the importance of

intertemporal substitution on both the demand side and the supply side.

We now describe how each of the three simple theories gets altered by the

introduction of time.



          1)     Competition


     By employing the simple device, described above, of dating commod-

ities, it is straightforward to introduce time into the analysis of com-

petition. In this analysis, each commodity at each separate date is

regarded as a distinct commodity that is related in both supply and demand
                                    - 29   -


 to   all other commodities. The most important new relations are among the

 identical physical commodity over time.

       The demand curve for a product at a particular point in time depends

upon consumerst perceptions about what the price of the product will be

 in the future. If consumers are not impatient about consuming the prod-

uct, then the price today cannot deviate very far above the price expected

to prevail in the future without inducing consumers to cease purchasing

today. That is; the elasticity of demand (ceteris paribus) will be very

high. Similarly, on the supply side intertemporal substitution will af-

fect the willingness of firms to supply the product today at a given

price. Firms will recognize that an alternative to producing and selling

today is to produce and sell tomorrow, or perhaps to produce today, hold

the good in inventory and sell it tomorrow. The recognition that a firm

can decide on the optimal time path of production and the optimal em-

ployment of factors of production, one of which is inventory, will affect

the shape of the short run marginal cost curve (ceteris paribus).

       A competitive equilibrium will involve a separate price for each date

at which the commodity will be consumed. Anything that changes either

the cost of producing today or in the future or the demand today or in

the future will affect the entire vector of prices over time. This means,

for example, that a shock to demand today might well affect the price of

the good not only today but also in the future. This raises the possi-

bility that shocks to supply or demand today will be absorbed primarily

by something other than prices today. In fact, it is quite conceivable

that in response to only slight changes in the vector of prices in the

future, consumers will significantly rearrange their consumption of the

good over time. In such a case, increases in demand today may not in-
                                - 30    -


crease price today by very much, but rather leave most prices today and

into the future unchanged, but simply shift consumption from today to the

future.

     The important insight from this way of viewing competition is that

even though prices are clearing markets, the necessary equilibrating

price changes can be quite small. It will be quantity shifts among dif-

ferent goods (i.e., the same good consumed at different periods of time)

that will bear the brunt of the adjustment and not price.

     If there are large shifts in the timing of when goods get consumed

as demand and supply conditions change, the data should reveal large

swings in delivery lags (the lag between the placement and shipment of

an order). Many markets do seem to be characterized more by fluctuations

in delivery dates than by fluctuations in price. For example, in Table

2 I have calculated the variability of price and the variability of de-

livery lags for several major manufacturing industries. As the table

shows, the variability of delivery lags swamps the variability in

price for many industries. This evidence is consistent with the theory

we have just outlined of competitive market clearing. The insight of the

theory is that the price fluctuations that flone expects to clear markets

may well be lower than that predicted by the simple model that ignores

the importance of the time dimension.

     The importance of delivery lags as a market clearing device, in ad-

dition to price, has not been extensively studied. Zarnowitz (1962, 1973)

appears to have been the first to stress the importance of delivery lags

as a market clearing phenomenon. (See also Maccini (1973) and Carlton

(1983).) In Carltori (1985b), I estimated the importance of delivery lags
                                — 31 —


                                Table   2
               Price and Delivery Lag Fluctuations


                                             Standard       Median
                       Standard              Deviation     Delivery
                       Deviation             of log of       Lag
Industry            of log of Price         delivery lag   (months)

Textile Mill              .06                   .17          1.26
 Products
Paper and Allied          .05                   .08           .46
 Products
Steel                     .03                   .25          1.95
Fabricated Metals         .03                   .18         3.06
Non-Electrical            .04                   .25         3.63
 Machinery
Electrical               .05                    .10         3.86
 Machinery

Source: Canton (1983a) Table 1.
                                 - 32   -


as a determinant of demand. Those estimates are reproduced in Table 3.

In conjunction with Table 2, the results imply that for many markets the

fluctuations in delivery lags are approximately as important to the

equilibration of demand and supply as are fluctuations in price.

     There have been several studies that estimate the time path by which

firms adjust factors of production in an attempt to meet fluctuations in

demand. These studies (see e.g., Nadiri and Rosen (1973), Haltwanger and

Maccini (1983) nd Topel (1982)) explicitly recognize that firms can vary

inventories, labor, price and other factors of production to achieve their

desired sales. These studies of intertemporal substitution in production

provide us with a better understanding of the shape of the (ceteris

paribus) marginal cost curve at any instant in time. Obviously, if it

is costless to store inventories, prices will tend to be stable. If

prices were not stable, there would be an incentive to hold inventory to

speculate on any expected appreciation in price.

     Some recent work by Mills and Schumann (1985) has investigated the

determinants of how flexible firms make their production technology.

Since the flexibility of production technology is an endogenous decision

(see Stigler (1939)), an understanding of this endogenous choice of

flexibility will enable the analyst to better predict the likely supply

responses that are available in the short-run to help meet changes in

demand conditions. Mills and Schumann have uncovered what appears to be

a systematic difference between small firms and large firms. They found

that small firms have more flexible production technologies than large

firms. If true, this would suggest that the industries in which entry

of small firms is difficult will be less able to expand production during

booms than industries with no such difficulties.
                            - 33    -


                           Table    3
                    Elasticities of Demand



  Industry                 Price             Delivery Lag

Paper and Allied            -1.37              - .40
 Products                  (-7.9)              (3.7)

Steel                      -14.36              -.78
                            (2.8)              (3.0)

Fabricated Metals          -1.75               -.30
                            (1.8)              (3.6)

Non-Electrical             -3.5                - •35
 Machinery                  (5.4)              (3.5)

Electrical                 -1.60               - .64
 Machinery                  (2.2)              (3.3)

t-ratios in parenthesis.

Source: Carlton (1985b).
                                  - 34   -


     In   summary, the introduction of time into the simple competitive

model goes a good way toward explaining how markets may respond to shocks

without the analyst ever observing large changes in current prices. In-

stead of large price changes, there may be large shifts over time in

quantities consumed or produced as either firms or consumers take advan-

tage of intertemporal substitution.'6


           2.   Oligopoly


     The introduction of time affects oligopoly models for many of the

same reasons I have already discussed in the competitive model. That is,

the ability of consumers to substitute across time periods as well as the

ability of firms to produce the good across different time periods will

affect how the market responds to changes in the underlying conditions

of supply and demand. Some recent work has shown that the introduction

of time adds a new element to the analysis of oligopolies that is lacking

in the analysis of static oligopoly or dynamic competition. The key in-

sight is that firms in an oligopoly are playing a game with each other



16. An analysis that recognizes the quality of goods is conceptually the
     same as one involving time. If goods are described by a vector of
     characteristics, q, then in response to a perturbation in either
     supply or demand conditions, not only will the price of the good
     change, but the quality of the good, q, will change. (See Rosen
     (1974).) Again, this raises the possibility that, within the context
    of a perfectly competitive model, adjustments to demand or supply
     shocks can occur through changes in q as well as through changes in
    price. Although it appears that delivery lags are one of the most
     important quality components of a good that seem to fluctuate, there
    may well be others, depending upon the particular commodity. For
     example, in response to an increase in the demand for bus transpor-
     tation during rush hour, a city may put on more buses, but each bus
    may be much more crowded than during non-rush hour. That is, a less
    desirable product has been substituted and prices have remained un-
    changed.
                                  — 35   —



 over time. They are attempting to send each other a signal about the
 likelihood of successful collusion.

      Firms cannot communicate directly because of the antitrust laws, and

 therefore, any one firm has uncertainty about whether his rivals are ac-

tually coordinating their policies with him or, instead, are cheating and

stealing away his customers. One way for an oligopoly to behave is for

all firms to agree to charge a high price; however, whenever cheating is

suspected, all firms in the industry cut price as punishment for some

fixed period. This type of model, developed and refined by Porter (1983)

and Green and Porter (1984), suggests that oligopolies will go through

price wars. The oligopoly during good times will be characterized by high

and stable prices; however, when demand starts falling for the industry,

some industry members will mistakenly think that their downturn in demand

is caused by rivals secretly cheating on the cartel price and taking

business away from them and will cut their price as punishment. This

suggests a theory in which prices fall during downturns because of a

breakdown in oligopolistic coordination.

     As Stigler (1964) pointed out, a breakdown in oligopolistic coordi-

nation is more likely to occur the greater the "noise" in the economy.

Inflation increases the "noise" in the economy by making real prices more

uncertain (see Vining and Elwertowski (1976).17 Therefore breakdowns in

oligopolistic discipline should be more common during times of rapid price

change.

     Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) reach a different conclusion. In their

model, oligopolies behave more competitively in booms. The reason is


17. See Carlton (1983a) for a discussion of the effects of inflation on
    market behavior.
                                   - 36   -



that,   in their model, the gains from cheating on any non-competitive price

are greater during a boom. Since the gains from cheating can be lowered

by a lowering of price, oligopolists consciously choose a relatively low

price in booms to deter cheating. The theory suggests that the margins

of oligopolists should behave countercyclically, rising in lean years and

falling in boom years.19

        For these theories of oligopoly to have macroeconomic implications,

one must presume that economy-wide fluctuations simultaneously affect

many industries and account for significant fluctuations in each indus-

try's fortunes. For example, these theories might be especially relevant

during the Great Depression when the common large shock of a downturn in

demand simultaneously affected a wide spectrum of the economy. Whether

such theories of oligopoly are helpful in explaining cyclical behavior

during the more moderate business cycles after World War II remains to

be seen.


             3)   Monopoly


        The introduction of dynamic elements into the study of monopoly

raises the same issues about intertemporal substitution in demand and

supply discussed above for competition. There is one additional element

though that arises in the case of monopoly (or perhaps a cooperating

oligopoly) but not in the case of competition. A monopolist is concerned

not only with the influence of today's price on demand today, but also

with its influence on future demand. For example, an increase in the



18. Rotemberg and Saloner (1985) have also explored how their model can
     help explain some unusual empirical facts on inventory holdings over
     the business cycle.
                                  — 37 —


price   of steel scrap may lead some steel producers to alter their plans

for building a new steel furnace, and this will, in turn, affect the fu-

ture demand for steel scrap. To the extent that consumers adjust their

future behavior in response to price changes today, a monopolist will take

that adjustment into account in setting price. In contrast, a competitive

firm has no control over its price today or in the future, and therefore

cannot respond to the incentives to influence future demand. This rea-

soning explains why a monopolist might not want to raise price for fear

of inducing substitution away from his product in the long-run. This

suggests one reason why prices in a monopoly may be more stable over time

than in a competitive industry.

     A monopolist who can hold inventory takes account of the relation

between the marginal revenue curves at different points in time in setting

his price. By taking account of these interactions, the monopolist is

lead to choose a more stable price policy than the simple models of mo-

nopoly would suggest. (See, e.g., Amihud and Mendelson (1983), Blinder

(1982), Phlips (1981), and Reagan (1982).)

     To the extent that consumers are uncertain about future prices, a

monopolist might use his pricing path as a signal to tell consumers what

price they should expect in the future. This means that, if costs rise

unexpectedly in the short-run but the monopolist knows that the increase

will be only temporary, the monopolist might be reluctant to raise his

price and pass these temporary cost changes on to consumers for fear that

they will mistake the current price increases as being permanent and react

to them in the long-run by substituting away from the product. Therefore,

a monopolist has an incentive to absorb temporary cost changes so that
                                  - 38   -


the   price charged today might be a good indicator to consumers of the

price to be charged in the future.


       B.   Fixed Costs of Changing Price


       If there is a fixed cost that must be incurred every time a price

is changed, the firm will not continuously vary price as predicted by a

simple market clearing model under either competition or monopoly. In-

stead, price once set will remain fixed until the new price exceeds the

old price by an amount sufficient to justify incurring the fixed costs.

(See Barro (1972) for a development of a model along these lines.)

      This theory clearly accounts for nominal price rigidities, but, to

be believable, requires an explanation of the source of these fixed costs

of changing price. For example, it may cost money to publish a new cat-

alog, print a new menu, or remark items already on the shelf. In a setting

where the firm sells many products, it might well be more costly to change

price than in a setting in which only a few products are involved. For

example, grocery stores sell many products one of which is cigarettes.

It is not uncommon for a pack of cigarettes of one size, say regular, to

sell for the same price as a pack of cigarettes of another size, say, king

size, even though the wholesale price of the two packages to the indi-

vidual store differs. One rationale for the common retail price is that

the difficulty of training a clerk to recognize different prices for

different packages of cigarettes would induce too much error into the

process of checking out. Instead, price differences tend to be taken into

account only when larger packages, such as cartons of cigarettes, are

sold. Therefore, the probability of observing price differences on dif-
                                  - 39   -


ferent   sized cigarettes increases when the quantity purchased in a single

transaction is larger.

     Aside from the cost of having to relabel prices on items or send out

new catalogs or print up new menus, there is another reason why a firm

might be reluctant to change price and act as if it faced a fixed cost

of changing price. Some customers will settle on a firm to buy from only

after they have engaged in a search in which they have compared the price

of this firm to' the price in the rest of the market. As long as the

customer believes nothing has changed, the customer will remain with the

initially chosen firm. If the customer interprets a change in price by

the firm as a signal that market conditions have changed, then that cus-

tomer may well decide to search in order to investigate whether his chosen

firm still remains the optimal supplier for him.

     In Carlton (1986), I tabulated the minimum observed price change

across a wide variety of products sold at the intermediate level of man-

ufacturing. If the fixed costs of changing price are high, then small

price changes will tend not to occur. I have reproduced in Table 4 the

minimum price changes observed. Table 4 shows that for the large majority

of commodities examined the minimum price changes are quite small. The

evidence is that small price changes occur in many transactions and sug-

gests that, at least for some transactions, the fixed cost of changing

price is small.19 A theory that postulates a uniform fixed cost to change



19. I use the word "suggest" because it is possible that I am observing
     small price changes only when the new supply and demand conditions
     are expected to persist for a long time. The evidence could then
    be consistent with a significant fixed cost of changing price that
     causes prices to remain rigid for temporary shifts in supply and
     demand, but not for permanent ones. Although this explanation is
    possible, I have seen no evidence to suggest it to be true.
                                  - 40

                                   Table 4
              Frequency of Small Price Changes by Product Group
                              By Contract Type



                    Contract          Percent of Price Chanaes Less Than
Product               Type              1/4%      1/2%      1%      2%


Steel               Annual               .04      .08      .11     .27
                    Quarterly            .05      .11      .17     .24
                    Monthly              .09      .20      .36     .52


Non-Ferrous         Annual               .02      .05      .09     .27
  Metals            Quarterly            .02      .05      .12     .25
                    Monthly              .08      .15      .28     .49


Petroleum           Annual               0         0       .08     .24
                    Quarterly            0         0       .02     .17
                    Monthly              .01      .05      .19     .47


Rubber Tires        Annual               .12      .21      .30     .44
                    Quarterly            .07      .11      .18     .34
                    Monthly              .13      .23      .38     .63


Paper               Annual               .04      .09      .08     .27
                    Quarterly            0        .19      .24     .33
                    Monthly              .13      .23      .43     .62


Chemicals           Annual               .04      .08      .13     .24
                    Quarterly            0        .05      .11     .24
                    Monthly              .05      .14      .30     .42


Cement              Annual               .14      .22      .32     .46
                    Quarterly            0         0       .01     .19
                    Monthly              .71      .75      .85     .94


Glass               Annual               0         0       .07     .19
                    Quarterly            0         0       .20     .40
                    Monthly              .03      .20      .45     .67
                                - 41   -



                                Table 4
                               (continued)
           Frequency of Small Price Changes by Product Group
                            By Contract Type




                 Contract          Percent of Price Changes Less Than
Product            Type              1/4%      1/2%      1%      2%


Trucks, Motors   Annual                .03     .03      .12     .20
                 Quarterly             0        0        0      .08
                 Monthly               .12     .27      .50     .75


Plywood          Annual                --       --       --      --
                 Quarterly             .01     .02      .06     .19
                 Monthly               .19     .38      .54     .72

Household        Annual                0        0        0      .25
  Appliances     Quarterly             --       --       --      --
                 Monthly               .22     .44      .70     .95


Source: Canton (1986), Table 3.
                                  - 42   -



price   simply does not square very well with these facts.2° A theory that

predicts a different fixed cost to different customers could, of course,

explain the facts but then one would have to explain the source of the

differing fixed costs among different customers. This is in fact the

approach taken by the recently developed theory of market clearing which

is described in part D of this section.

    Whether or not there is a common large fixed cost of changing price

to individual buyers, the evidence in Section III shows that for many

markets prices do not change, at least in the short-run. In such a set

ting, the market behavior will deviate considerably from those of any of

the simple models. The new feature of models with a temporarily fixed

price is that consumers run some risk of not being satisfied in their

demand. The notion that consumers may find a product unavailable simply

has no counterpart in the standard theory. Yet unavailability of a

product is surely a fact of life and is one that our economic theories

should deal with.

    One of the early contributions to this literature on fixed prices

and product availability is the work by Edwin Mills (1962). Mills exam-

ined the behavior of a monopolist who must set price and produce before

he observes demand. The optimal inventory policy for the monopolist is

to choose output in such a way that the expected price equals marginal

cost. The expected price will equal the price charged times the proba-

bility that a customer will come to the firm. It is easy to show that



20. It is possible to set a a price policy that specifies price as a
     function of certain variables. Price could then change when the
     underlying variables changed. My evidence cannot be used to deter-
     mine if there is a substantial fixed cost to changing the price
     policy.
                                   - 43   -


the inventory holding policy of the firm depends on the mark-up of price

above cost. The closer is price to cost, the smaller will be the inven-

tory of the firm, and conversely the higher the mark-up of price over

cost, the larger will be the inventory of the firm. The reason is that

the incentive to hold inventory declines as the mark-up falls because the

profit from making a sale falls while the cost of getting stuck with un-

sold goods remains unchanged. What is interesting about this relationship

is that the probability of stock-outs, that is shortages, increases as

markets become more competitive.

     Models analyzing the availability of goods in competitive markets

have been developed in the work of Carlton (1977, 1978, 1985a), DeVany

and Saving (1977), and Gould (1978). In these models, consumers value a

firm not only for its pricing policies but also for its inventory policy.

The commodity space now is not simply a good at a particular period of

time, but rather a good consumed at a particular point of time with some

probability. Inventory policy affects the probability that the firm will

have the good available. Some consumers will prefer to shop at high-

priced stores that run out of the good infrequently, while other consumers

will prefer to shop at stores that charge low prices but may run out of

the good more frequently.

     Once it is realized that a firm must stock an inventory to satisfy

customers, it should be obvious that the variability of consumers' demand

for the product will affect the firm's costs. The cost function of the

firm depends upon the demand characteristic of consumers. The simple

separation between supply curves and demand curves is lost in these more

complicated models.
                                  - 44   -


     If   the consumers' variability of demand influences the firm's cost,

firms will want to charge different consumers different prices based on

their respective variability of demand. These price differences do not

reflect price discrimination, but cost differences. Prices to consumers

will differ as long as consumers have a different variability of demand

from each other, even though each consumer consumes the physically iden-

tical product. This means that prices to one consumer could change at

the same time that prices to another consumer remain unchanged. The re-

sult would be a low correlation of price changes across consumers --   a
finding that characterizes many markets (Section III).


     C.    Asymmetric Information and Moral Hazard


     It is common in economic transactions that a buyer has different

information than a seller. For example, when someone buys a house, the

buyer generally knows less about the house than the seller who has lived

there for a long time. When someone buys a share of IBM stock, he may

know less about IBM than other investors who are employed by IBM. Does

the introduction of this kind of asymmetric information affect how markets

reach equilibrium? In 1970, George Akerlof showed that the answer to this

question was a resounding yes. He showed that with asymmetric information

equilibrium no longer requires supply to equal demand. Moreover, not only

does asymmetric information affect how prices are set, asymmetric infor-

mation can also cause markets to vanish completely.

     Akerlof used a simple example to illustrate his point. Consider a

market in which buyers are purchasing used cars that differ in quality.

A buyer knows nothing about the quality of a particular used car and only

knows the quality of the average car sold. The seller on the other hand
                                  - 45   -


 knows exactly the quality of his used car. At any price, p, an owner is

willing to sell his car only if the value of the car is less than or equal

   p. If only cars whose quality is valued at p or less are placed on

the market, then the average quality of cars offered at price p will be

valued at less than p. But if the average quality of a car offered at p

is not valued to be worth p, the price will fall. A simple repetition

of the argument shows that no matter how low the price falls, the average

quality offered' in the marketplace will never be valued at the stated

prices This causes the market to vanish entirely. That is, not only does

the price mechanism not clear the market, there is rio market left to

clear. This collapse of the market can occur even though there may be

buyers and sellers who, in a world of perfect information, would find it

mutually beneficial to transact with each other.

     It is possible to extend Akerlofs model to show how equilibrium can

involve either excess demand or supply. (See, e.g., Stiglitz (1976,

1984).) For example, suppose a firm wishes to hire a worker of a par-

ticular skill level. The firm obviously wants to pay as little as pos-

sible for such a worker. However, if the firm advertises a low wage, the

people who apply for the job are likely to be low quality workers. The

higher the wage rate offered, the higher the average quality of the ap-

plicant.21 Therefore, when firms have difficulty measuring worker qual-

ity in advance, it might be sensible for the firm to set a sufficiently

high wage in order to attract more than one applicant for the job. Al-

though the firm would like to pay a lower wage for a given quality worker,



21. The average quality rises with the wage because higher quality
     workers (in addition to the lower quality workers who applied at the
     lower wage) apply as the wage rises.
                                 - 46   -


the firm realizes that if it lowers its wage, only lower quality workers
will apply for the job. Equilibrium, therefore, involves setting a high

wage and having an excess supply of labor.

     Akerlof's model can be recast as a problem in the principal-agent

literature. In that literature there is a principal who hires an agent

to perform some task. The principal can only imperfectly observe the

agent's action. The problem that the principal-agent literature ad-

dresses is how to design the best contract given the constraints of

asymmetric information. For example, in Akerlof's automobile example,

the buyer could be regarded as the principal and the seller the agent.

The seller's decision to sell the car is based on the car's quality which

is unobservable to the buyer. The problem in Akerlof's model is that as

the price of a car falls, the agent, that is the seller, is able to respond

by choosing to withdraw the higher quality cars from the market.

     Akerlof's model has been extended to a variety of circumstances using

the principal-agent analogy. For example, Keeton (1979) and Stiglitz and

Weiss (1981) have examined the market for loans. They observe that when

a bank makes a loan, the bank is unable to perfectly monitor the riskiness

of the investments that the borrower puts the money into. One response

of a borrower to a higher interest rate might be to take on riskier

projects. There are instances when a bank is unwilling to raise the in-

terest rate in the face of excess demand for loans for fear that the in-

creased interest rate will drive borrowers to pursue riskier projects to

the disadvantage of the bank. Therefore, the bank might be content to

refuse to make additional loans rather than raise the interest rate. This

is an example in which asymmetric information leads to an equilibrium in

which supply does not equal demand and in which there is a rigidity in a
                                  - 47   -



price   variable, namely the interest rate. In short, asymmetric informa-

 tion creates incentives for adverse selection (only bad workers showing

up for a low paying job), and for moral hazard (borrowers choosing riskier

investments in response to higher interest rates), and can, as a result,

lead to either the disappearance of markets or to market equilibrium in

which supply does not equal demand and in which there are rigidities in

the relevant price variables.


     D.    Toward A General Theory of Allocation22


           1)   It is Costly to Create a Market that Clears by Price Alone.


     The key feature which most theories of market clearing ignore is that

it is costly to create a market in which price equates supply to demand.

In the standard theory, we usually assume that there is a fictional

Wairassian auctioneer adjusting prices to clear markets. But in fact

there is no such person. The markets that probably come closest to the

textbook model of competitive markets are financial markets, such as fu-

tures markets. A moment's thought will reveal that it is costly to run

such markets. Aside from the actual physical space that is required,

there is the time cost of all the participants who are necessary to run

the market. For example, at the Chicago Board of Trade, the floor trad-

ers, the employees of the brokerage firms, as well as the members of the

associated clearinghouses, are all working together to produce a suc-

cessful futures exchange. The people who use these futures markets must

somehow pay all the people who work either directly or indirectly in


22. The theories in this section are developed in detail by Canton
     (1987). See also Okun (1981) and Williamson (1975).
                                 - 48   -



making the transactions of customers.23 These payments from the customer

to the market makers can take several forms, such as direct commissions

or simply bid-ask spreads.

     Another important cost of making markets is the time cost of the

actual customers. (See, Becker (1965).) It would be very inefficient

to have a market in which customers had to spend large amounts of their

own time in order to transact. The purpose of a market is not merely to

create transactions but rather to create transactions at the lowest cost.

     Once one recognizes that the creation of markets is itself a pro-

ductive activity that consumes resources, it makes sense to regard the

"making of markets" as an industry. There has not been much research on

the "making of markets," (see Canton (1984)), but just like there is

competition to produce a better mousetrap, so too is there competition

to produce better and more efficient markets. The New York Stock Exchange

competes with the American Stock Exchange; the Chicago Mercantile Ex-

change competes with the Chicago Board of Trade, and so on.

     Lest one think that it is easy to create a successful futures market,

one need only consult the historical record. I have presented in Table

5 the average failure rates of new futures markets based on evidence

from the United States. The table indicates that about 40 percent of all

futures markets fail by their fifth year. The making of successful mar-

kets is a risky activity, and as the exchanges themselves well know, it

is hard to predict which markets will succeed and which will fail.



23. Markets benefit non-users too by providing price information. This
     creates a free-rider problem.
                          - 49    -


                         Table    5

              Death Rates of Futures Markets


    Age                   Probability of Dying at the
   (years)                     Given Age or Less


     1                                .16

     2                                .25

     3                                .31

     4                                .37

     5                                40

    10                                .50


Source: Carlton (1984) Table 5.
                                 - 50   -



     Organized24 spot and futures markets exist for only a handful of
commodities. Since we know that there are definitely social benefits to

the creation of markets and since at least some of these benefits can

probably be privately appropriated, the paucity of organized markets em-

phasizes that it must be costly to create them.


          2)   Heterogeneity Is An Important Characteristic
               Of Determining How Markets Will Clear


     The heterogeneity of the product is perhaps the most critical char-

acteristic in determining whether a market will clear by price alone.

If buyers have different preferences for when they want to transact, what

they want to transact (that is, the particular quality of the good), or

where they want to transact, it is unlikely that a successful market can

be organized that clears by price alone. Attempts to create an organized

market in the face of widespread product heterogeneity will simply lead

to an illiquid market that cannot support the cost of having the requisite

number of traders. (Telser and Higgenbotham (1977)).

     Since product heterogeneity within an industry is an endogenous

characteristic, the industrial organization economist should be able to

predict which markets are likely to be sufficiently homogeneous so that

an organized market can exist. For example, suppose each buyer is pur-

chasing a standardized product. Each buyer is deciding whether he should

continue purchasing the standardized product or whether he should cus-

tomize the product to his own taste. The advantage of customizing will

depend on how idiosyncratic the buyer's needs are. The disadvantage is


24. I use the term "organized)' to mean auction markets that clear by
     price alone.
                                  - 51   -


that   the buyer is forced to transact in a less liquid (higher transaction

cost) market. The greater the benefits from custom designing a product

to one's own specifications, the less likely it will be that a market can

be created that will clear by price alone. Indeed in the extreme case,

in which every buyer demands a slightly different product, it will be

impossible for buyers to trade with each other and the incentive to create

an organized market will be small.



            3)   How Do Markets Clear If There Is No
                 Organized Market?


       When an organized market does not exist, it is not possible for the

firm to discover (costlessly) the market clearing price, and the firm must

rely on something else to figure out how to allocate its products to

buyers. There are a wide variety of mechanisms other than the auction

price mechanism that can be used to clear the market. One alternative

was discussed by Stigler in his article (1961) on search theory. In

Stigler's model, there is no organized market in which price equates

supply to demand. Instead, buyers must search across different sellers

in order to discover prices. Buyers' search costs become the resource

cost of operating the market.

       The notion of firms posting prices and consumers searching across

firms is only one of many ways in which markets can function. An alter-

native is for firms to hire salesmen whose task it is to become know-

ledgeable about the demands of individual customers. Even if it is

difficult for the firm to set the market clearing price, it may be pos-

sible to identify those customers who should obtain the goods (i.e., the
                                  - 52   -


efficient   allocation of goods).25 The firm could use price to identify

those buyers who want the goods the most, and then could use a second

screen, based on the firm's own internal knowledge of each buyer's needs,

to decide which of the remaining buyers should receive the goods. So,

for example, it would not be uncommon during tight supply situations for

steady customers to get delivery while new customers stood waiting. It

would also not be unusual to see buyers and sellers entering long-term

relationships so that the sellers could better understand the buyers'

needs and vice versa.

     The importance of price diminishes once one recognizes that price

alone may not be not clearing markets and, instead, that price in con-

junction with other mechanisms, such as a seller's knowledge of a buyer's

needs, is performing that function. Indeed, if price is not the sole

mechanism used to allocate goods, it becomes less interesting to observe

whether price remains rigid. Although a rigid price does imply an inef-

ficiency under any of the simple models in which price alone is the ex-

clusive mechanism used to achieve efficient resource allocation, a rigid

price does not imply inefficiency in a world in which price is but one

of the many methods firms are using to allocate goods to customers.

     A theory that combines price with non-price methods of allocation

would have the following implications.26



25. An example may help. Imagine that a firm, with a capacity of 100
     units, has only two buyers who are known to be identical. If the
     firm is supply constrained (i.e., each buyer's demands are high at
     the stated price), then the efficient allocation is obvious (50-50),
     but the market clearing price is not. (See Carlton (1983a, 1987)
     for more details.)

26. Additional implications regarding behavior during periods of price
     controls, speed of price adjustment, and behavior of price indices
     are discussed and tested in Carlton (1986 and 1987).
                                 - 53   -



     a)   The longer the buyer and seller have dealt with each other, and

therefore the better they know each other, the less need there is to rely

on price to allocate goods efficiently. A seller's knowledge of a buyer's

need can be a substitute for an impersonal (auction) market that clears

by price alone.

     b)   The length of time a buyer and seller are doing business with

each other becomes a characteristic of the transaction and can make one

buyer differentfrom another from the viewpoint of the seller. Therefore,

observing differences in the price movements to different buyers who are

purchasing the identical physical commodity may reveal nothing about

allocative efficiency, since prices for different "products" should be

expected to move differently from one another. The evidence in Section

III that indices of spot prices and long-term contract prices do not al-

ways move together is consistent with this implication, as is the evidence

that the correlation of price movements across buyers of the same product

is often low.

     c)   The pattern of a buyer's demand over the business cycle or,

alternatively, the covariance of one buyer's demands with those of other

buyers, will be a characteristic of interest to the seller. Again, even

though two buyers purchase the identical commodity, they may be charged

different prices and have their prices change differently simply because

they have different buying patterns over time. The evidence on different

price movements for different buyers of the same product is consistent

with this observation.

     d)   Rapid turnover of customers will inhibit the use of long-term

relationships in which a seller's knowledge of customers is used to al-

locate goods. Industries with significant new entry or with customers
                                  - 54   -


with   little "loyalty," should rely on price as the primary mechanism to

allocate goods.

       e)   The establishment of a new futures market will disrupt the

traditional pricing policies of existing firms in the industry. These

firms should be expected to complain about the introduction of the new

futures market. If the allocation of goods is a productive activity that

requires resources, then a futures market acts as a "competitor" to the

marketing department of firms in the industry. Futures markets create

marketing information. Without futures markets, other agents, such as

brokers or salesmen, must create this marketing information and get com-

pensated for doing so. If a futures market is established, there is in-

creased competition in this marketing arena and the value of marketing

skills declines. Therefore, it is natural for those firms who were suc-

cessfully performing the marketing function, before the introduction of

the futures market, to complain about the increased competition in this

activity.

       There is some evidence of hostility towards the creation of new fu-

tures markets from the affected industry's members. For example, the

aluminum futures market was established in the late 1970s. Aluminum

producers opposed their establishment (American Metal Market, Jan. 6,

1978, p. 9). If marketing requires money, one possible interpretation

of the complaints of the aluminum companies is that the resources they

have invested to market their product are now competing with the resources

of a futures market to market the product.
                                 - 55   -



     E.   Summary of New Theories


     The development of theories of allocation that use methods in addi-

tion to price alone to clear markets is in its infancy. These theories

hold promise of explaining many of the puzzling features of price behav-

ior.27 They also may explain why these features of price behavior emerge

from what is (at least privately) efficient behavior.

     Macroeconomists have studied the properties of information trans-

mission in search markets and have based theories of unemployment and

business cycles on these properties. (See, e.g., Lucas (1981).) Search

markets, as I have described, are just one of many ways to allocate goods.

The method chosen to allocate goods will influence how information gets

transmitted, as well as how markets respond to various shocks. For this

reason, the study of how markets clear is one to which both industrial

economists and macroeconomists should look for valuable insights into

where information lags are likely to occur in the economy and how various

industries are likely to respond to shocks.


              V.     MARKET STRUCTURE MEANS MORE THAN JUST
                                   OF CONCENTRATION


     Industrial economists often examine how market behavior differs as

concentration in the market changes.28 However, as the preceding section



27. They may also be useful in explaining some of the empirical puzzles
     associated with purchasing power parity, such as why prices (ex-
     pressed in a common currency) of identical products in two different
     countries seem to differ when exchange rates change.

28. This experiment only makes sense if concentration in a market is an
     exogenous variable. Recent research has suggested that concen-
     tration is an endogenous variable and is influenced by the relative
     efficiency of firms. (See, for example, Demsetz (1973), Peltzman
     (1977)). See Schmalensee (1985) for a different viewpoint.)
                                 - 56   -


made clear, there are many other features of market structure that matter

a great deal in explaining how markets behave, and, in particular, how

markets will respond to shocks in either supply or demand. For example,

we saw in the previous section that market operation will be significantly

influenced by the ability of consumers and suppliers to substitute over

time, and by the reliance the market places on price to allocate goods.

Studying the importance of features other than market concentration may

lead industrial organization economists to develop insights that are

useful to macroeconomists. In this section, I discuss two illustrations

of market characteristics that influence an industry's responses to

shifts in either supply or demand.29

     A.   Whether an industry holds inventories, and

     B.   whether the industry has a fixed price in

          the face of random demand.


     A.   Produce to order versus produce to stock.


     There are two basic ways an industry can be organized. It can wait

for orders to come in (produce to order) and then produce, or it can

produce first, hold inventories, and then hope to sell the products

(produce to stock).3° Although I have not seen much research on this

topic, I expect that our economy has increased its reliance on industries



29. Other illustrations include the incentives the industry has to plan
     (Canton (1982), the degree of vertical integration, Carlton (1983a)
     and Wachter and Williamson (1978)), the importance of new products,
     Shleifer (1985) and the effect of search, Lucas (1981), and Diamond
     (1982).) Each of these features affect how an industry responds to
     shocks.

30. See Zarnowitz (1973) and Belsley (1969).
                                   — 57   —



that   produce to stock versus produce to order, especially with the growth

of the service sector in recent times.

       An industry that produces to stock will be able to satisfy customers

quicker, and be able to take advantage of economies of scale more than

an industry that produces to order. On the other hand, an industry that

produces to order will be able to economize on inventory holdings of the

final good (though not necessarily of inputs), will be able to custom

design products.. to closely match the buyers specifications, and will

perhaps be induced to adopt flexible technologies to compensate for its

inability to hold inventories of the final output. The need to cut or

raise prices significantly in order to clear markets will be greater in

produce-to-stock industries than in produce-to-order ones. Moreover, the

transmission of shocks will depend on whether the industry produces to

stock (i.e., hold inventories). If either firms or final consumers are

holding inventories, a temporary increase in demand will be at least

partially accommodated by a decrease in inventory which, next period, will

lead to an increase in production. If inventory holding is not occurring,

the increase in demand may only drive current price up with little, if

any, increase in production in the current or subsequent periods. Work

by Amihud and Mendelson (1982) has shown how the recognition of inventory

holding can justify a Lucas-type aggregate supply equation.


       B.   Transmission of Shocks in Industries with
            Fixed Prices


       Suppose an industry is organized as described in Section IV B and

that prices once set don't change for some period of time. The production

of the goods must occur before demand is observed and therefore there is

some risk that firms will run out of the good. It is straightforward to
                                 - 58   -



show that the ratio of inventory to average demand will depend on the

ratio of price to cost (see e.g., Canton (1977)). The reason is that

the opportunity cost of a lost sale rises with prices, so that the in-

centive to hold inventories increases with price. If price exceeds cost

by a large amount, the amount of goods produced will exceed the amount

demanded on average. A contrasting case would be one where price is close

to cost so that inventory on hand is small relative to the average level

of demand. In this second case, stock-outs will be frequent.

     It is possible to show that in response to a mean-preserving increase

in the riskiness of demand, firms will increase their inventory holdings

in the first case, while firms will decrease their inventory holdings in

the second case. In the second case, stock-outs become more frequent.

Firms that operate with little extra inventory will not be able to cushion

demand shocks. Therefore, when prices are temporarily unchanging, an

economy is more vulnerable to disruption (i.e. stock-outs) from shocks

the more competitive it is (i.e. the closer price is to marginal cost).

     There has recently been interesting work linking aggregate macroe-

conomic activity to models involving fixed costs of price changes.31 (See

e.g., Akenlof and Yellen (1985), Mankiw (1985) and Blanchard (1985).)

These papers make the interesting point that the need to adjust prices

may be less important for the firm than for the economy as a whole. The

reason is that firms are assumed to have market power so that there is a

gap between price and marginal cost. Even if a change in price does not

raise the firm's profits significantly it could, in this second best

world, significantly raise consumer welfare. This point is related to



31. See also Dreze (1975), Fischer (1977), Hall (1978), Malinvaud (1979),
     Rotemberg (1982), and Phelps and Taylor (1977).
                                 - 59     -


the one in public finance that in a second-best world, small shifts in

one market can have significant welfare effects if price does not equal

marginal cost in other markets. See e.g., Harberger (1971). Therefore,

there may be a divergence between a firm's incentive to incur a cost to

change price and society's incentive to do so.32


                              VI. SUMMARY


     This essay..has presented a survey of what industrial economists know

about how markets clear. The evidence on price behavior is sufficiently

inconsistent with the simple theories of market clearing that industrial

economists should be led to explore other paradigms. The most useful

extensions of the theory will be those that recognize that marketing is

a costly activity, that an impersonal price mechanism is not the only

device used to allocate goods, and that price methods in conjunction with

non-price methods are typically used to allocate goods.

     Exactly what macroeconomists can learn from all this is less clear

to me. Since both macroeconomists and industrial economists are inter-

ested in the same question of how markets clear, I have no doubt that

there is the potential for the two groups to influence each other's re-

search. Whether that potential is realized depends in part on how some

of the new areas of research in industrial organization develop.




32. A closely related point is that in    the presence of distortions be-
     tween price and marginal cost, the   value of an output expansion can
     be greater to society than to the    firm. See Harberger (1971). Hart
     (1982) applies this principle in a   macroeconomic setting.
                        BIBLIOGRAPHY
Akerlof, G., "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the
      Market Mechanism," quarterly Journal of Economics (August 1970),
      84(3): 488-500.

Akerlof, G. and Yellen, J., "A Near-Rational Model of the Business Cycle
      With Wage and Price Inertia," Quarterly Journal of Economics (Supp.
      1985), 100(5): 823-838.

American Metal Market, (Jan. 6, 1978), P. 9.

Amihud, Y. and Mendelson, H., "Price Smoothing and Inventory," Review of
      Economic Studies, (January 1983), 50(1): 87-98.

_________   "The Output-Inflation Relationship: An Inventory Adjustment
      Approach," Journal ok ottary Ec.pnQwics (March 1982), 9(2):
      163-184.

Barro, Robert J., "A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment," Review of
      Economic Studies (January 1972), 39(1): 17-26.

Beals, R., "Concentrated Industries, Administered Prices and Inflation:
      A Survey of Empirical Research," Council on Wage and Price
      Stability, Washington, 1975.

Becker, Gary, "A Theory of Allocation of Time," Economic Journal (Sep-
      tember 1965), 75(299): 493-517.

Beisley, D.A., Industry Production Behavior: The Order Stock
      Distinction, Amsterdam, North Holland Pub. Co., 1969.

Bus, M., "The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost of Price," University
      of Rochester Working Paper No. 30 (November 1985).

Blanchard, 0., "Monopolistic Competition, Small Menu Costs and Real Ef-
      fects of Nominal Money," MIT (unpublished), 1985.

Blinder, Alan S., "Inventories and Sticky Prices: More on the Microf-
      oundations of Macroeconomics," American Economic Review (June
      1982), 72(3): 334-348.

Canton, Dennis W., "Uncertainty, Production Lags, and Pricing," American
      Economic Review (February 1977), 67(1): 244-49.

____________ 'Market Behavior with Demand Uncertainty and Price Inflexi-
      bility," American Economic Review (September 1978), 68(4): 571-87.

___________ "Contracts, Price Rigidity, and Market Equilibrium," Journal
      of Political Economy (October 1979), 87(5): 1034-1062.

___________ "Planning and Market Structure," in The Economics of
      mation and JncQniflty, J.J. McCall ed.,, Chicago, IL: University
      of Chicago Press, 1982: 47-72.
                               - Biblio-2   -




____________ "The Disruptive Effect of Inflation on the Organization of
       Markets" in Hall ed. Inflation, Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, (1983a): 139-152.

____________ "Equilibrium Fluctuations When Price and Delivery Lag Clear
      the Market," Bell Journal of Economics (Autumn 1983b), 14(2):
      562—572.

___________ "Futures Markets: Their Purpose, Their History, Their
      Growth, Their Successes and Failures," Journal of Futures Markets,
      (Fall 1984), 4(3): 237—271.

__________ Market Behavior under Uncertainty, New York: Garland Press,
      (1985a).

____________ Delivery Lags as a Determinant of Demand, (unpublished)
       (1985b).

___________ "The Rigidity of Prices," American Economic Review, (Sep-
      tember 1986), 76(4): 637-658.

               The Theory of Market Allocation, 1987 (forthcoming).

Chandler, A., The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
      Business, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press (1977).

Debreu, G., Theory of Value, New York: Wiley (1959).

Demsetz, Harold, "Industry Structure, Market Rivalry, and Public Policy,"
      Journal of Law and Economics (April 1973), 16(1): 110.

DeVany, A.,, and Saving, T., "Product Quality, Uncertainty, and Regu-
      lation: The Trucking Industry," American Economic Review, (Sep-
      tember 1977), 67(4): 583594.

Diamond, Peter, "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,"
      Journal of Political Economy (October 1982), 90(5): 881-894.

Domberger, S., "Price Adjustment and Market Structure," The Economic
      Journal, (March 1979), 89(353): 96108.

Dreze, "Existence of an Exchange Equilibrium Under Price Rigidities,"
      International Economic Review, (June 1975), 16(2): 301-20.

Domowitz, I.,, Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Petersen, Bruce C., "Intertemporal
      Stability of the Concentration-Margins Relationship," Journal of
      Industrial Economics, (September 1986b), 35(1): 1—22.

___________    "Business Cycles and the Relationship Between Concentration
      and Price-Cost Margins, Rand Journal of Economics, (Spring 1986a),
      17(1): 1—17.
                             - Biblio-3   -



___________ "Oligopoly   Supergames: Some Empirical Evidence (unpub-
      lished) 1986c.

Eckard, E. Woodrow, "Firm Market Share Price Flexibility, and Imperfect
      information," Economic Inquiry (July 1982), 20(3): 388-392.

Encaoua, D., and Geroski, P., "Price Dynamics and Competition in Five
      Countries," University of Southampton, Working Paper No. 8414
      (September 1984).

Fischer, S., "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
      Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy (February 1977),
      85(1): 191—205.

Gordon, R., "A Century of Evidence on Wage and Price Stickiness in the
      United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan," in J. Tobin ed.
      Macroeconomics. Prices and Quantities: Essays in Memory of Arthur
      H. Oken, Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution (1983) 85-134.

Gould, J., "Inventories and Stochastic Demand: Equilibrium Models of the
      Firm and Industry," Journal of Business (January 1978), 51(1):
      1-42.

Green, E., and Porter, R., Noncooperative Collusion Under Imperfect Price
      Information, Econometrica, (January 1984), 52(1): 1-42.

Grossman, S., and Stiglitz, J., "On the Impossibility of Informationally
      Efficient Markets," American Economic Review (June 1980), 70(3):
      393-408.

Hall, R.E., "The Macroeconomic Impact of Changes in Income Taxes in the
      Short and Medium Runs," Journal of Political Economy (April 1978)
      86(2): 571—585.

________ "The Inefficiency of Marginal Cost Pricing and the Apparent
      Rigidity of Prices," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
      Paper No. 1347, (1984).

Haltwanger J. and L. Maccini, 'tA Model of Inventory and Layoff Behavior
      Under Uncertainty," unpublished, 1983.

Harberger, A., "Three Basic Postulates for Cost Benefit Analysis,"
      nal of Economic Literature (September 1971), 9(3): 785797.

Hart, 0., "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian Features,"
      quarterly Journal of Economics (February 1982) 97(1): 109-138.

Hubbard, G., and Weiner, R., "Contracting & Price Flexibility in Product
      Markets," (unpublished) June 1986.

Keeton, W., Credit Rationing, New York: Garland Press, (1979).

Lucas, R.E., Jr., Studies in Business-Cycle Theory, Cambridge, Mass: MIT
      Press (1981).
                              - Biblio-4   -




 Lustgarten, S., "Administered Pricing: A Reappraisal,1' Economic Incluirl
       (June 1975), 13(2): 191-206.

 McAllister, H., "Government Price Statistics," Hearings before the Sub-
       committee on Economic Statistics of the Joint Economic Committee,
       87th Cong., 1st sess., 1961.

 Maccini, Louis J., "On Optimal Delivery Lags," Journal of Economic Theori
       (April 1973), 6(2): 107-25.

Malivaud, E., The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered, New York, New York:
      Haisted Press (1979).

Mankiw, N.G., "Small Menu Costs and Large Busines Cycles: A Macroeconomic
      Model of Monopoly," quarterly Journal of Economics (May 1985),
      100(2): 329-323.

Means, G.C., "Industrial Prices and Their Relative Inflexibility," Senate
      Document 13, 74th Congress, 1st Session, Washington, D.C., U.S.
      Government Printing Office, 1935.

___________ "The Administered Price Thesis Reconfirmed," American
      nomic Review, (June 1972), 62(3): 292-307.

Mills, D.E., and Schumann, L., "Industry Structure with Fluctuating De-
      mand," American Economic Review, (September 1985), 75(4): 758-767.

Mills, E., Prices. Output and Inventory Policy, (New York: Wiley) 1962.

Mills, Frederick C., The Behavior of Prices, New York: National Bureau
      of Economic Research (1927).

__________ Prices in Recession and Recovery, New York: National Bureau
      of Economic Research (1936).

Nadiri, M. Ishaq and Rosen, Sherwin, A Disequilibrium Model of the Demand
      for Factors of Production, New York: National Bureau of Economic
      Research and and Columbia University Press (1973).

Okun, A., Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis, Washington,
      D.C., The Brookings Institution (1981).

Peltzman, S., "Toward a More General Theory of Regulation," Journal of
      Law and Economics (August 1976), 19(2): 211-240.

_____________ "The Gains and Losses from Industrial Concentration,"
      Journal of Law and Economics (October 1977), 20(2): 229-263.

Phelps, E.S. and Taylor, J.B., "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy
      under Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy (Febru-
      ary 1977), 85(1): 163-90.
                             - Biblio-5   -



Phlips, L., The Economics of Price Discrimination New York: Cambridge
      University Press, York (1981).

Polinsky, A.M., "Fixed Price Versus Spot Price Contracts: A Study in Risk
      Allocation," Stanford Law School, Working Paper No. 20 (1985).

Porter, R., "Optimal Cartel Trigger-Price Strategies," Journal of
      nomic Theory, (1983), 29(2): 313-338.

Quails, P. David, "Market Structure and the Cyclical Flexibility of
      Price-Cost Margins," Journal of Business (April 1979), 52(2):
      305—325.

Reagan, P., "Inventory and Price Behavior," Review of Economic Studies
      (January -1982), 49(1): 137-142.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differen-
      tiation in Pure Competition," Journal of Political Economy
      (January/February 1974), 82(1): 34-55.

Rotemberg, J., "Sticky Prices in the United States," Journal of Political
      Economy (December 1982) 90(6): 11871211.

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Saloner, Garth, "Strategic Inventories and the
      Excess Volatility of Production," Sloan School of Management, MIT,
      Working Paper No. 1650-85 (April 1985).

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Saloner, Garth, "A Supergame-Theoretic Model of
      Business Cycles and Price Wars During Booms," American Economic
      Review, (June 1986), 76(3): 390-407.

Salop, S., "Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods," Bell Journal
      of Economics (Spring 1979), 10(1): 141-156.

Scherer, F.M., Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance,
      Chicago: Rand McNally, 1980.

Schmalensee, R., "Product Differentiation Advantages of Pioneering
      Brands," American Economic Review (June 1982), 79(3): 349-65.

_______________ "Do Markets Differ Much," American Economic Review (June
      1985), 75(3): 341—351.

Shleifer, A., "Implementation Cycles," MIT (unpublished) 1985.

Stigler, G., "Production and Distribution in the Short Run," Journal of
      Political Economy (June 1939), 47(3): 305-27.

__________   "A Theory of Oligopoly," Journal of Political Economy (Feb-
      ruary 1964), 72(1): 44-61.

___________ "The Economics of Information," Journal of Political
      Economy, (June 1961), 69(2): 213-225.
                             - Biblio-6   -



__________ "The   Theory of Economic Regulation," Bell Journal of
      nomics, (Spring 1971), 2(1): 3-21.

Stigler, George J., and Kindahi, James K., The Behavior of Industrial
      Prices, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1970.

___________ "Industrial Prices as Administered by Dr. Means," American
      Economic Review (September 1972), 63(4): 717—721.

Stiglitz, J., "Prices and Queues as Screening Devices in Competitive
      Markets," IMSS Technical Report No. 212, Stanford University,
      (1976).

___________ "Price Rigidities and Market Structure, American Economic
      Review, (May 1984), 74(2): 350-355.

Stiglitz, J., and Weiss, A., "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
      Information," American Economic Review, (June 1981), 71(3):
      393-410.

Telser, L., Economic Theory and the Core, Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press, 1978.

Telser, L., and Higgenbotham, H., "Organized Futures Markets: The Costs
      and Benefits," Journal of Political Economy, (October 1977), 85(5):
      969-1000.

Topel, Robert H., "Inventories, Layoffs, and the Short-Run Demand for
      Labor," American Economic Review (September 1982), 72(4): 769-787.

Tucker, R., "The Reasons for Price Rigidity," American Economic Review
      (March 1938), 28(1): 41-54.

Vining, D., and Elwertowski, T., "The Relationship between Relative
      Prices and the General Price Level, American Economic Review (Sep-
      tember 1976), 66(4): 699-708.

Wachter, N., and Williamson, 0., "Obligational Markets and the Mechanics
      of Inflation," Bell Journal of Economics (Autumn 1978), 9(2):
      549-71.

Weiss, L., "Stigler, Kindahl and Means on Administered Prices," American
      Economic Review (September 1977), 67(4): 61O19.

Weston, F., and Lustgarten, S., "Concentration and Wage-Price Changes"
      in Goldschmidt H., ed. Industrial Concentration: The New
                Boston: Little, Brown and Co., (1974): 307-338.

Williamson, O.E., Markets & Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust
      cations: A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization, Mew
      York: Free Press (1975).
                             - Biblio-7    -



Zarnowitz, V., "Unfilled Orders, Price Changes and Business Fluctu-
      ations," Review of Economics and Statistics (November 1962), 44(4):
      367-394.

__________   Orders, Production and Investment, New York: National Bu-
      reau of Economic Research, (1973).

_____________ "Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical Prospective:
      A Review of Theories & Evidence," Journal of Economic Literature
      (June 1985), 23(2): 523-80.
