                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AIR POLLUTION AND CRIMINAL ACTIVITY:
                         EVIDENCE FROM CHICAGO MICRODATA

                                          Evan Herrnstadt
                                         Erich Muehlegger

                                       Working Paper 21787
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21787


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2015




Thanks to seminar participants at Resources for the Future, UC-Berkeley, UC-Irvine, and UC-Davis
for valuable comments. Neither author has a material financial interest related to the research in the
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Evan Herrnstadt and Erich Muehlegger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Air Pollution and Criminal Activity: Evidence from Chicago Microdata
Evan Herrnstadt and Erich Muehlegger
NBER Working Paper No. 21787
December 2015
JEL No. K42,Q53

                                             ABSTRACT

A large and growing literature documents the adverse impacts of pollution on health, productivity,
educational attainment and socioeconomic outcomes. This paper provides the first quasi-experimental
evidence that air pollution causally affects criminal activity. We exploit detailed location data on over
two million serious crimes reported to the Chicago police department over a twelve-year period. We
identify the causal effect of pollution on criminal activity by comparing crime on opposite sides of
major interstates on days when the wind blows orthogonally the direction of the interstate and find
that violent crime is 2.2 percent higher on the downwind side. Consistent with evidence from psychology
on the relationship between pollution and aggression, the effect is unique to violent crimes – we find
no effect of pollution on the commission of property crime.


Evan Herrnstadt
Harvard University Center for the Environment
24 Oxford St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
eherrnstadt@gmail.com

Erich Muehlegger
University of California - Davis
Economics Department
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
emuehlegger@ucdavis.edu
     1     Introduction

     A large and growing literature documents adverse impacts of air pollution on a wide range of
     individual outcomes in the short- and long-run. Using a variety of quasi-experimental strate-
     gies, the literature documents that pollution harms adult and infant health in the short-run and
     long-run1 , reduces productivity and labor market participation2 , impairs short-run cognition
     and lowers test scores3 and induces avoidance behavior4 . This paper adds a new dimension to
     the literature on the adverse effects of pollution, by documenting the first quasi-experimental
     evidence that air pollution affects violent criminal activity. Building on previous work in eco-
     nomics and medicine, our results suggest that pollution may affect cognition in ways that
     extend beyond impairing standardized test performance and may influence behavior along
     dimensions more complicated than those previously considered. Our findings further imply
     that traditional estimates of the external costs imposed by local air pollution may be under-
     stated. Estimates of the direct and indirect annual costs of crime in the U.S. are considerable
     and of similar magnitude to many of the well-studied impacts of traffic on health considered
     relevant for cost-benefit analyses – accounting for impacts on criminal behavior would increase
     externality-correcting Pigouvian pollution taxes.
          To estimate the causal effect of pollution on crime, we exploit detailed location data on over
     two million serious crimes reported to the Chicago Police Department from 2001-2012. Our
     empirical strategy is straightforward. We focus our attention on major interstates that transect
     the city of Chicago: I-90, I-94, I-290, I-55 and I-57, which generate substantial local air pollution.
     We estimate the causal effect of pollution on criminal activity by comparing crime on opposite
     sides of major interstates on days when the wind blows orthogonally to the direction of the
     interstate. As an example, I-290 runs due west from the Chicago city center to the suburbs of
     Oak Park and Berwyn. On days when the wind blows from the south, the pollution from the
     interstate impacts on the north side of the interstate, whereas when the wind blows from the
     north, the pollution impacts neighborhoods south of the road. By comparing relative criminal
     activity on opposite sides of I-290 on days when the wind is blowing to the south versus the
     north, we can control for the main threat to panel identification: omitted variables plausibly
     correlated with both pollution and criminal activity, such as economic activity. The side of the
     interstate from which the wind blows acts as a control that captures variation in day-to-day
1 e.g.,
      Schlenker and Walker (2011), Currie and Walker (2011), Beatty and Shimshack (2014), among others
2 Hanna  and Oliva (2015), Zivin and Neidell (2012)
3 Lavy et al. (2014)
4 Moretti and Neidell (2011), Zivin and Neidell (2009)




                                                       2
crime, ambient pollution and unobservables, such as neighborhood economic activity.
      On days when the wind blows orthogonally to the interstate, we find that violent crime
increases by 2.2 percent on the downwind side. The effects we find are unique to violent crimes
– we find no effect of pollution on the commission of property crime. As further evidence that
we are identifying a causal effect of road pollution, we find that the effect of being downwind
is attenuated on days when the direction of the wind is not orthogonal to the road and when
wind speeds are sufficiently high to disperse pollution. We also consider alternative ”roads”
parallel to I-290 as a form of falsification test and find that the downwind estimate is maximized
precisely at the latitude at which I-290 transects the Chicago. Finally, we present suggestive
evidence that the effect on violent crime is driven by NOx (or other pollutants that manifest
in the warmer seasons) rather than CO. When we allow treatment effect to vary by season,
we find that the point estimate of the downwind effect greatest during spring and summer
months.
      We first discuss summarize the two threads of the literature most relevant to this work: the
literature on environmental conditions and crime and the literature on pollution and cognitive
impacts. We discuss data in section 3 and in section 4 provide suggestive city-level evidence,
by instrumenting for pollution using wind direction and wind speed. In section 5, we examine
the micro-geography of criminal activity. Section 6 concludes.



2      Previous Literature

2.1     Environmental Conditions and Crime

There is a long history in the criminology, sociology, and economics literatures focused on the
relationship between the prevalence of criminal activity and the surrounding environment.
Most closely related to our work, Cohn and Rotton (1997) represents a strand of criminology
research in which a time-series of weather is regressed on crime for a single city. They find
that violent crimes follow an inverted U-shape as temperatures rise. Jacob et al. (2007) take a
panel data approach, using weekly crime and temperature measures for over 100 U.S. cities.
They, too, establish that crime is increasing in temperature; additionally, while violent crime
decreases with precipitation, property crime is mostly unaffected. Ranson (2014) uses 50 years
of monthly data across nearly 3000 U.S. counties and semiparametrically estimates a flexible
relationship between crime and weather. He finds that violent crime increases approximately
linearly with respect to ambient temperature. In contrast, property crime is lower when it is


                                                 3
      cold, but does not increase on especially hot days. Similar patterns arise when considering
      aggressive behavior more broadly as discussed by Hsiang et al. (2013), in countries around the
      world and at both interpersonal and societal levels (see, e.g., Hsiang et al., 2011; Burke et al.,
      2009).5
             In contrast to the research linking temperature to crime, research examining a possible link
      between pollution and crime rates is limited. Rotton and Frey (1985) estimate a time-series re-
      gression based on pollution, temperature, domestic disturbance, and assault data from Dayton,
      OH. They find that higher ozone levels are related to increased domestic disturbance calls and
      assaults, though the latter is not statistically significant. In a long-run context, Reyes (2007) ex-
      ploits the staggered phase-out of leaded gasoline in the United States and finds that childhood
      lead exposure increases a cohort’s future crime rate.


      2.2      Pollution and Cognitive Outcomes

      There are three main channels through which one would expect the greater environment to
      affect criminal activity. First, consider a criminal weighing the costs and benefits of committing
      a crime, as in Becker’s model of rational crime. If it is unpleasant to be outside, this contributes
      to the cost side if the crime must be committed outdoors. Second, consider a model of crime
      in which the number of crimes is a function of total interpersonal interactions, i.e., criminal
      opportunities. If the number of people outside decreases because of environmental factors,
      this would also reduce crime rates. Third, environmental factors may affect the propensity of
      a potential criminal to commit crime .
             The medical, physicological and economic literatures suggest two pathways by which air
      pollution might affect behavior: a physiological one, through which air pollution directly af-
      fects the central nervous system, and a psychological one, through which air pollution causes
      discomfort which itself leads to antisocial behavior. Block and Calderón-Garcidueñas (2009)
      summarizes several hypothesized physiological pathways by which ambient pollution expo-
      sure can affect the function of the central nervous system. The first pathway is the direct entry
      of ultra-fine particulate matter into the brain. Once the particles reach the brain, medical re-
      searchers posit two mechanisms for toxicity. The pollutant (or toxic compounds bonded to
      the pollutant) can affect brain chemistry directly. Ozone, as an example, is a highly reactive
      substance that reacts with molecules in the body to create toxins. Alternatively, the pollutant
   5 Otherdocumented environmental drivers of crime include rainfall, most commonly by impacting agricultural
productivity (see, e.g., Iyer and Topalova, 2014) and ambient light, by impacting the likelihood of detection (Doleac
and Sanders, 2012).



                                                         4
may trigger an inflammatory response in the central nervous system. Beurel and Jope (2014)
outline a number of studies that link neuroinflammation to increased aggression, impulsivity,
and depression.
   Finally, air pollution can affect physiology in other ways that impact cognition. As an ex-
ample, carbon monoxide may directly affect physical and cognitive functioning. CO binds to
hemoglobin, thus preventing it from accepting oxygen and contributing to hypoxia. This oxy-
gen deficiency can have deleterious effects on an exposed individual. In a rare controlled lab
experiment, Amitai et al. (1998) exposed 45 Hebrew University students to various levels of
carbon monoxide. They tested these students, as well as 47 control students, along various
neuropsychological dimensions. They found that even low level exposure results in impaired
learning, attention and concentration, and visual processing. Although this experiment ex-
posed subjects to higher levels of CO than the ambient levels found in Chicago during our
sample period, the results are suggestive of cognitive effects.
   Alternatively, pollution may trigger a psychological response. A long literature in psychol-
ogy hypothesizes and tests the notion that pain and discomfort can induce aggressive behavior
(Anderson and Bushman, 2002). Exposure to a variety of pollutants can cause irritation and
pain. For instance, Nattero and Enrico (1996) followed 32 subjects over the span of nine months
and found that high concentrations of ambient CO and NOx were both significantly correlated
with incidence of headache. Further, headaches and head tightness are known symptoms of
acute CO exposure. Finally, ambient pollution causes irritation of the eyes and respiratory sys-
tem. Because of the ethical concerns involved, lab experiments in which human subjects are
exposed to pollution are rare. Thus, Rotton (1983) and Rotton et al. (1978) exposed laboratory
subjects to malodorous chemicals. The odors were found to reduce cognitive performance, tol-
erance for frustration, and the subjects’ ratings of the quality of other people and the physical
environment. The authors hypothesize that this effect is similar to other basic stressors, such
as noise.
   Regardless of the pathway, papers in both psychology and economics document relation-
ships between air pollution and observable cognitive impairment. A first strand of the liter-
ature presents observational evidence that psychological distress is more prevalent on days
with high pollution. Rotton and Frey (1984) use data on psychiatric emergencies from the Day-
ton, OH police department. They find that such calls are positively correlated with levels of
ozone precursors and sulfur dioxide, even when controlling for time trends and contempora-
neous weather conditions. Szyszkowicz (2007) examined the relationship between emergency



                                                5
department visits for depression and ambient air pollution. There were significant positive
correlations for a variety of pollutants, including CO, NO2 , SO2 , ozone, and PM2.5 . Further,
there are several studies that find a positive association between a number of different pollu-
tants and suicide, suicide attempts, and suicidal ideation (Lim et al. (2012); Szyszkowicz et al.
(2010); Yang et al. (2011)).
    In the economics literature, previous research has established a link between pollution and
cognitive ability as measured by academic testing. Lavy et al. (2014) analyze student per-
formance on high-stakes Israeli high school examinations. They find that students who take
their exam on days with higher PM2.5 and CO tend to receive lower scores. The PM2.5 path-
way appears to be driven at least partially by asthma, but the impact of CO is homogeneous
across demographics, suggesting a more fundamental cognitive impact. Sanders (2012) takes a
longer-run approach by relating in utero exposure to total suspended particulates to later aca-
demic performance. He finds that a one standard deviation increase in particulates caused an
decrease in test scores of 0.07 standard deviations. Finally, Stafford (2014) exploits the quasi-
random timing of school renovations to link indoor air quality and academic performance.
She finds that, while attendance is not affected, performance on standardized tests improve
after the renovations. The average mold remediation project led to a 0.15 standard deviation
improvement in test scores, while the average ventilation project led to a 0.04-0.09 standard
deviation improvement. More recent literature extends to alternative measures of cognitive
impairment to test scores: Archsmith (2015) finds evidence that baseball umpires make more
mistakes when calling strikes on polluted days.



3     Data

3.1   Crime Data

Our crime data come from the City of Chicago’s open data portal. The database is drawn
from the Chicago Police Department’s Citizen Law Enforcement Analysis and Reporting sys-
tem, and it includes all reported crimes from 2001 to the present. Variables include type of
crime, date, time of day, location of the crime (down to the city block), whether an arrest was
made, and whether the crime was considered domestic. To narrow our focus to commonly-
examined crimes, we restrict the sample to the two million FBI Type I crimes reported in the
city of Chicago between 2001 and 2012. This class of crimes consists of homicide, forcible rape,
robbery, assault, battery, burglary, larceny, arson, and grand theft auto. We further separate


                                               6
these crimes into violent crimes (homicide, forcible rape, assault and battery) and property
crimes (burglary, robbery, larceny, arson, and grand theft auto). The 240,000 violent crimes
are predominately battery (57%) and assault (32%), while the 1.8 million property crimes are
predominately larceny (58%), burglary (17%) and grand theft auto (14%).
   Crime reports display certain temporal and seasonal regularities. As is clear from Figure 1,
reports of violent crime are lowest in the very early morning and steadily increase until mid-
night. Property crime reports also are lowest in the early morning, but tend to be higher during
the day than at night. In Figure 2, we present the average number of crimes for a given week
of the year to consider seasonality. Two things are worth noting here. First, the absolute mag-
nitude of property crime is roughly 6-7 times larger than that of violent crime. Second, the
seasonal patterns are slightly different. While violent crimes are approximately symmetrical
around their peak in the summer, property crimes tail off more slowly in the fall than they
rise in the spring. Finally, Figure 3 presents the annual trends in property and violent crimes
between 2001 and 2012. Each type of crime’s 2001 level is normalized to 100. Overall, violent
crime has declined more rapidly than property crime, although both varieties are far below
their 2001 levels.
   In Figures 1 and 2, there are spikes in crime reports at midnight and in the first week of the
year. If one looks at the day of the month, there is also a spike on the first of the month. Some
of this is driven by the fact that the time and date in our data refer to the actual occurrence
of the crime, not the report. Thus, if someone waits to report a crime or forgets the time and
date exactly, they might be more likely to simply choose midnight or the first of the month.
Correspondence with the Chicago Police Department’s Research and Development Division
indicates that there is no official procedure that would otherwise be driving this phenomenon.
This effect is the largest for January 1, some of which could be driven by the New Year’s Eve
holiday. At any rate, we control for the 1st day of the month and year when appropriate in our
citywide regressions. In our analyses using detailed geographic coordinates, we are comparing
treatment and control areas within the same day, so any effect should be swept out.
   The geographic patterns of property versus violent crime also differ from one another. The
heat maps in Figure 4 plot the density of property and violent crime throughout Chicago for
2001-2012. The grey lines denote the major interstates running through the city limits. The
shades are comparable only within a map; that is, an area on the violent crime map that is
darker than an area on the property crime map does not necessarily indicate that there are
more violent crimes in absolute terms. It simply means that the share of violent crimes that



                                               7
occur in that area is greater than the share of property crimes. The poorer areas, such as the
South Side, and the westernmost portions of the West Side have experienced the most violent
crime. Although these areas also experience high rates of property crime, the densest area for
property crime is the Loop. Part of this may be driven by a higher population density overall,
and part might be driven by high levels of economic activity.
      The temporal, seasonal, and geographic distributions of crime nicely summarize some of
the identification challenges that we face. First, crime and pollution have both been declin-
ing over time in Chicago. Thus, we need to use short-run variation in the two variables for
appropriate causal identification. Second, the seasonality indicates that weather (particularly
temperature) is an important variable that must be controlled for flexibly. Third, the clear cor-
relation between crime location and economic activity stresses the importance of a good instru-
ment, because ambient pollution and the location of pollution sources will also be correlated
with economic activity and the demographic characteristics of residents of a given neighbor-
hood.
      Like other papers that use data on reported criminal activity, our data share shortcomings
common with other data sources used in the existing literature documenting criminal activ-
ity. We only observe crimes reported to the police, with the exception of homicide. Crimes
may be differentially underreported, especially those that are personally sensitive. However,
this should only matter if underreporting is directly affected by our instrument. Unless un-
derreporting is correlated with when pollution is blowing into an area, our strategy for causal
identification will remain valid. Second, the time stamp of each crime reflects the time at which
the crime was reported, rather than committed. As noted above, this might result in some de-
gree of misreporting in terms of the hour (more likely) or the date (less likely). Our empirical
specifications will account for this problem, but all estimates will still be conditional on the
pattern of reporting found in the data.


3.2     Weather Data

Our weather data is based on data collected by the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC).
The NCDC is the most comprehensive source of publicly available U.S. weather data, reporting
temperature, precipitation and other meteorologic variables at approximately 10,000 locations.
For the analysis, we use temperature, precipitation, wind speed and wind direction at Midway
airport, the closest weather station to the Chicago city center consistently reporting all four




                                                8
      variables.6
          The construction of our daily wind variables merits discussion. We observe hourly wind
      speed and direction; because wind direction is circular data, averages are not straightforward.7
      To obtain a daily average wind direction, we first take the angle (in radians) θ, and calculate
      the u (cos θ) and v (sin θ) components of the hourly direction vectors. We average the each
      component over the hours in a day, and calculate the mean direction as arctan (u/v).
          To calculate average speed and power measures, we take two different approaches, one
      “vector-based” and one “scalar-based”.8 The vector-based approach weights each hour’s u
      and v components with the speed (or power) observed. The speed/power average is then
                                                     p
      the norm of the resulting average vector (i.e., (u2 + v2 )). This approach obtains a measure
      of the average net speed or power of the wind. The scalar-based approach takes the simple
      average of the wind speed (or power) over the hours of the day. In the text, we specify the
      measure we use in any given context, and provide explanations for why the selected measure
      is more appropriate. Although the two approaches measure slightly different things, they are
      nonetheless highly correlated (ρ ≈ 0.9).


      3.3    Pollution Data

      Our direct measures of ambient pollution come from the Environmental Protection Agency’s
      network of monitors. In the city-level regressions that follow this section, we take monitors
      that are located in the Chicago area and are generally operating from 2001-2010. This leaves 4
      CO monitors and 2 PM10 monitors. For CO, we take a simple daily average over the hourly
      measurements. Only monitor-days with at least 18 valid hourly readings are included in the
      sample. In the case of PM10 , hourly measurements are not available, so we use the 24-hour
      average provided by the EPA. To avoid composition problems, we only include days for which
      all the monitors for a given pollutant have a valid daily average. For CO, these criteria reduce
      our sample to 3515 days out of a possible 3650. For PM10 , the sample is reduced to 3399. As is
      clear from Table 1, the missing observations are relatively uniformly spread across the months
      and years for both pollutants. The mean CO and PM10 readings vary over the course of the
      year, as illustrated in Figure 5. PM10 emissions are highest during summer months while CO
   6 As a comparison, we also examined similar variables at O’hare, located approximately twice as far from the city

center as Midway airport. Readings at Midway and O’hare for all four variables are highly correlated. Correlation in
temperatures, precipitation, wind speed and wind direction were 0.995, 0.750, 0.950 and 0.703. Our results throughout
the paper are not sensitive to the choice of weather station.
   7 For instance, the average direction of an hour during which the wind blows at 1 degree and one during which it

blows at 359 degrees is 0 degrees, not 180.
   8 Gilhousen (1987) provides an overview and comparison of the two approaches.




                                                         9
emissions are highest during the winter months, reflecting the different sources of the two
pollutants.



4      City-level Crime and Pollution

4.1     Empirical Strategy

We start by establishing a suggestive relationship between pollution and crime at the city level
using a time-series variation. In this context, OLS estimates will be vulnerable to a number of
sources of bias. Specifically, pollution and crime are both likely to be correlated with seasonal
trends, coincident weather conditions and unobservables such as economic activity.
      Our empirical strategy is relatively straightforward. To address seasonality and disparities
between the weekdays and weekends, we condition on month-of-year and day-of-week fixed
effects. Since pollution and crime are both correlated with weather, we flexibly condition on
temperature and precipitation using a semi-parametric bin estimator for both. The remaining
clear threat to identification is unobserved economic activity.
      Days with greater economic activity may increase both pollution and criminal activity, the
latter arising because of increased interpersonal interaction. To address this source of bias, we
instrument for pollution using wind direction and power. As an illustration of the first-stage,
Figures 6 and 7 display contour plots of pollution at one PM10 and one CO monitor in our data.
The shade of the plot region represents mean pollution intensity, the arc direction represents
the average direction from which the wind is blowing, and the distance from the center of the
circle represents vector-based wind speed.
      As Figure 6 illustrates, wind direction in Chicago plays an important role in air quality.
As a point of reference, monitor 31-1016-3 is located near to I-55, approximately twelve miles
southeast of the city center. Strong winds off of Lake Michigan (blowing from the northeast)
lead to low levels of PM10 at the inland monitor. In contrast, winds from the southeast and
southwest lead to high PM10 readings. Approximately fifteen miles to the southeast are the
Blue Island refinery and the Arcelor Mittal steel mill. To the southwest are the ExxonMobil
Joliet refinery, the Citgo Lemont refinery and Corn Products International wet corn milling
operation, all of which generate substantial PM10 emissions. This illustrates our general source
of identification in the city-level model. The identification strategy is similar spirit to that
of Schlenker and Walker (2011), who use wind direction and airport emissions to instrument
for ambient pollution in California to estimate causal health effects. We use the vector-based


                                                 10
speed and power measures in the city-level regressions, as they better capture the magnitude
with which the wind is blowing in the dominant direction.
      We estimate the following IV/2SLS specification:


                                     Pollt   = αWt + βXt + et                                  (1)

                               ln(Crimet )   = γXt + λ Poll
                                                       dt + νt                                 (2)


   Wt includes daily average wind direction in 20-degree bins and the interaction of these bins
with vector-based average daily wind power. Xt is a vector of controls including 5◦ C daily
maximum temperature bins, 5 total daily precipitation bins, vector-based average wind speed,
a first of month indicator, a January 1 indicator, day of week dummies, and month of sam-
ple dummies. Pollt is the average pollution reading across all sample monitors in the city of
Chicago, and Crimet is the total number of (either violent or property) crimes in Chicago on day
t. The identification assumption, E[Wt νt | Xt ] = 0, holds if wind direction and the vector-based
wind power-direction interaction only affect crime directly through the pollution moved in
or out of the city. Wind direction and vector-based power-direction interactions are plausibly
correlated with other weather variables or seasonal variables that affect crime. After condi-
tioning on temperature, precipitation and seasonality, the remaining threat to validity is if the
wind itself directly affects crime. We control for the vector-based wind speed in the second
stage regression, leaving wind direction as the only plausible source of contamination. That
is, our identification assumption may not hold if wind off of Lake Michigan (for example) af-
fects criminal behavior differentially than wind blowing from the west, controlling for wind
speed, temperature, and precipitation. In robustness checks, we also allow the interaction of
temperature and vector-based wind speed to enter the second stage regression.


4.2     Results

Table 2 displays the results from the city-level CO regressions. The first column is a simple
OLS regression of the logarithm of violent crime on mean daily average CO concentration and
a set of controls. The signs on the controls make sense: higher temperatures are associated
with more violent crime, more precipitation is associated with less, and the first of month and
January 1 indicators soak up the reporting anomalies or any “first of the month” effect (Foley,
2011). However, the main effect of pollution on crime is negative and not statistically signif-
icant. In column 2, we turn to our IV strategy. The estimates on the controls are essentially



                                               11
unchanged, but now the effect of CO on violent crime is positive and significant at the 5%
level. Moving from the median CO day to the 90th percentile (0.5 ppb increase) is associated
with nearly 5% more violent crime. The analogous effect on property crime is statistically in-
significant and small. This discrepancy across crime types may suggest that the primary mech-
anism is physiological; that is, the pollution might make people more irritable and impulsive,
thus leading to more violent crime. The first stage regressions are not weak: the F-statistics are
approximately 19.
    Table 3 displays the results from the city-level PM10 regressions. The first column is a simple
OLS regression of the logarithm of violent crime on mean daily average PM10 concentration
and a set of controls. The coefficient estimates on the controls are very similar to those from
the CO regressions. Again, the OLS estimate on violent crime is smaller in magnitude than
the IV estimates, although the OLS estimate is actually positive and statistically significant in
this case. The IV estimates are significant at the 10% level, and translate into nearly 3% more
violent crime on a 90th percentile PM10 day compared with a median day. Again, the property
crime estimates are statistical zeros. The first stage is quite strong in this case: the F-statistics
hover around 30.
    These city-level regressions suggest a causal relationship running from pollution to violent
crime. As a point of comparison, the 5% increase in violent crime from a high-CO day is com-
parable to the estimated effect of moving from the 25-30◦ C (77-86◦ F) maximum temperature
bin to the 30-35◦ C (86-95◦ F) bin (7% increase in violent crime). That is, the increase in violent
crime when moving from a typical CO day to a high-CO day is comparable to the increase as-
sociated with moving from a warm day to a hot day. Still, these results are based on time-series
variation. At the level of a metropolitan area, especially one near a lake, using average weather
and pollution data could introduce considerable measurement error. Thus, we now turn to a
more localized approach that exploits the very detailed location associated with each crime.



5    The micro-geography of pollution and crime

While the city-level regressions provide suggestive evidence of the relationship between pol-
lution and crime, they are identified entirely off of time-series variation. If we fail to control for
unobservables correlated with both wind direction and crime or mis-specify the true relation-
ship between the dependent variable and crime-related observables, we may make incorrect
inferences about the causal relationship between pollution and criminal activity.
    To provide more compelling evidence, we exploit the fact that we know the specific loca-


                                                 12
      tion of each crime reported to the Chicago police. This allows us to estimate the relationship
      between pollution and crime using within-day variation in pollution and criminal activity, by
      comparing local regions within the city of Chicago. As a result, we are able to flexibly control
      for day-to-day unobservables correlated with crime that we might be concerned would bias
      city-level estimates.
          To motivate the identification strategy, consider Figure 7, which summarizes CO readings
      at one of the monitors in our city-level data (31-6004-1). This monitor is located immediately
      north of I-290, which runs due East/West from the Chicago city center to the suburbs of Oak
      Park and Berwyn. Like Figure 6, the shade of the contour plot denotes mean CO pollution
      reading at the monitor as a function of vector-based net wind speed and direction. The vector
      and distance from the origin denote the direction from which the wind is blowing and the av-
      erage wind speed, respectively. For this particular monitor, the concentration of CO is greatest
      when the wind blows from the highway toward the monitor, but not dominantly enough to
      carry the emissions beyond the nearby neighborhood. Conveniently, immediately across the
      highway from the monitor are several cemeteries that occupy an area extending approximately
      one mile south of I-290 and a quarter mile east and west of the location of the pollution monitor.
      Consequently, we attribute the incremental pollution at the monitor when the wind is blowing
      from the south to the pollution from traffic on I-290.9
          Our identification strategy is easiest to explain again using I-290 as an example. I-290 runs
      (essentially) due west from Chicago. To causally estimate the effect of pollution on crime,
      we compare crimes along the north side of I-290 to the south side of I-290 on days when the
      wind is blowing orthogonally to the interstate. On a day when the wind is blowing from
      the south, the pollution impacts the north side of I-290 and vice-versa. This approach better
      addresses the identification concerns arising with the city-level analysis. In essence, the side of
      the interstate from which the wind is blowing acts as a control for unobservable daily variation
      in side-invariant criminal activity. For our estimate to be biased, an omitted variable must
      differentially affect crime on the side of the road to which the pollution is blowing.
          We extend a similar identification strategy to the other expressways in the Chicago area
      by examining crimes within one mile of major interstates on days during which the wind is
      blowing orthogonally to the direction of the interstate. Figure 8 plots the location of all crimes
      in Chicago within one mile of any interstate. For the analysis, we limit the sample of crimes to
   9 Carbon monoxide emissions from mobile sources account for the majority of anthropogenic CO emissions in the

U.S. The National Emissions Inventory in 2011 reports that mobile sources generated 92 percent of carbon monox-
ide emissions in Cook County, 80 percent in Illinois, and 50 percent nationally (75 percent, excluding fires). Source:
http://www.epa.gov/cgi-bin/broker?polchoice=CO& debug=0& service=data& program=dataprog.national 1.sas.


                                                         13
       the colored regions in Figure 8 based on several criteria. First, we drop crimes that are within
       one mile of more than one interstate. These locations may be downwind of more than one
       interstate at a given time and create the possibility for very complicated treatment effects. This
       excludes crime in downtown Chicago (where the major interstates converge) and crime close
       to the interchanges of I-90, I-94, and I-57, both north and south of the city. Second, we drop
       crimes in the extreme northwest and southeast of the city. The northwestern region we exclude
       is proximate to and includes Chicago O’Hare International Airport – criminal activity near an
       airport is unlikely to be representative of criminal activity elsewhere, and the airport itself is a
       significant source of pollution. The southeastern part of the city borders Lake Michigan to the
       east and Lake Calumet to the southwest; the lakes differentially affect the possibility of criminal
       activity on the relevant sides of I-90 and I-94. Finally, we exclude crimes on the western edges
       of I-55 and I-290. Westward of 87.74 W longitude, I-55 exits (and then re-enters) the city and
       I-290 runs along the city limits.
           For a basic specification, we examine crimes within one mile of either side of the interstate
       and on days during which the average wind direction is within sixty degrees of the line or-
       thogonal to the direction of the interstate.10 Thus, for I-290, running east and west, we focus
       on days for which the wind blows from a direction between 300 degrees (roughly NW) and 60
       degrees (roughly NE) or from a direction between 120 degrees (roughly SE) and 240 degrees
       (roughly SW). We relax both of these assumptions in robustness checks.
           Our main specification regresses the number of crimes on side s of interstate i on day t on
       interstate-side FE, interstate-date FE and a dummy variable equal to one if side s is the side
       downwind from interstate i on day t. Formally,


                                   Crimeist = αis + γit + βDownwindist + eist .                             (3)


           Because the nature and motivation of violent and property crimes differ, we separately
       estimate the relationship for each class of crimes. Interstate-side fixed effects (α) control for
       time-invariant unobservables that are correlated with criminal activity on each side of the in-
       terstate. In contrast, the interstate-date fixed effects (γ) control for daily variation in criminal
       activity near each interstate.
           Exploiting the micro-geography of Chicago allows us to address the main identification
       concern with the city-level analysis. Effectively, the upwind side of the interstate acts as a con-
  10 For I-90, which travels northwest then north and then northwest again, we treat each of the three segments of the
interstate separately.



                                                         14
      trol for day-to-day variation in local criminal activity. We identify the effect of being downwind
      from the interstate by comparing criminal activity on opposite sides of the interstate on days
      when one side is downwind and days when the other side is downwind.


      5.1     Main Results

      We present the results for violent crime in Tables 4. column 3 corresponds to the specification
      in equation (3).11 We find that the downwind side of the interstate experiences 0.023 more
      violent crimes per day. When measured relative to the mean number of violent crimes (1.09
      per route-side per day), this represents an increase of approximately 2.2 percent.
          A remaining threat to identification arises if we omit a variable correlated with wind direc-
      tion that differentially affects crime on one side of the interstate. Using I-290 as an example,
      suppose that the wind only blows from the south on hot summer days and houses on the
      north-side of I-290 are much less likely to have air conditioning that houses on the south-side
      of I-290. We might observe a relative increase in crime on the north-side of the I-290 when the
      wind is blowing from the south due not to pollution, but rather to increased exposure to high
      temperatures.
          We do not think this threat to identification is likely to bias our estimates. The seven inter-
      state segments we examine transect different parts of the city of Chicago with different socio-
      economic characteristics. Furthermore, the interstate segments travel in different directions. To
      bias our estimates, such stories like the one in the preceding paragraph would have to hold for
      different regions of the city with different demographics, some of which are east and west of
      an interstate and some of which are north and south of an interstate.
          Nevertheless, we can address the concern directly. In column 4, we allow for the number
      of crimes on each of the fourteen interstate sides to vary independently with temperature and
      precipitation. Going forward, we take this as our preferred specification. Formally, column 4
      estimates:
                             Crimeist = αis + γit + βDownwindist + Λis Xist + eist .                       (4)

      where Xist includes the maximum temperature over the course of the day and precipitation
      over the course of the day.
            We find little evidence that these additional controls explain our results in column 3. When
      we allow for criminal activity on the each side of the road to vary independently with temper-
  11 We also present estimates from very parsimonious specifications in columns 1 and 2 for the purpose of additional

comparison.



                                                         15
    ature and precipitation, our estimates are almost identical: the downwind side again experi-
    ences 0.023 more violent crimes per day, an increase of approximately 2.2 percent relative to
    mean violent crime levels.
          Table 5 presents the results of identical specification for property crime rather than violent
    crime. As in the city-level analysis, we find little evidence that pollution impacts property
    crime. In none of the specifications is the downwind side of the interstate associated with an
    increase (or decrease) in property crime. In fact, the point estimates are smaller in magnitude
    than those for violent crime, despite the much larger baseline incidence of property crime.


    5.2     Testing the mechanisms

    Crime subcategories Although it is convenient to examine aggregated violent and property
    crimes, there are substantial differences in the natures and costs of the different crimes. We can
    further disaggregate the data and estimate effects for the individual index crimes. In doing so,
    we sacrifice power – especially among the rarer crimes such as homicide. Still, the results are
    informative.
          Table 6 presents the results of estimating our preferred specification separately for the vari-
    ous violent crimes in our data. We estimate 7.8 and 3.4 percent increases in rape and homicide,
    respectively, but these are not significantly different from zero. The estimated increase in vio-
    lent crime appears to be driven by aggravated battery arrests. At the same time, the number
    of aggravated assault arrests decreases. An assault is defined as “an unlawful attack by one
    person upon another wherein the offender displays a weapon in a threatening manner, placing
    someone in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.” A battery is defined “an unlawful
    attack by one person upon another wherein the offender uses a weapon or the victim suffers
    obvious severe or aggravated bodily injury involving apparent broken bones, loss of teeth, pos-
    sible internal injury, severe laceration, or loss of consciousness.”12 . That is, a battery subsumes
    an assault in the case that actual bodily injury is sustained. One interpretation of these results
    is that pollution causes a net increase in violent crime, but it also results in marginal assaults
    escalating into batteries.
          Breaking down the property crime (Table 7) results confirms that there is no effect within
    any particular type of crime that is being obscured by an opposite response among another
    type.
12 Definitions of FBI index crimes are given at http://gis.chicagopolice.org/clearmap   crime sums/crime types.html.




                                                       16
Seasonality and specific pollutants It is important to note that we identify the effect of
being downwind of an interstate on violent crime, but cannot definitively distinguish among
the effects of CO emissions, NOx emissions or other emissions generated by mobile sources.
This is a common challenge to much of the literature on pollution and outcomes. Since emis-
sions of different pollutants are often highly correlated, it is difficult to empirically distinguish
the effect of the specific pollutants.
   Although it is not a definitive approach, we can leverage the fact that the emissions profile
for mobile sources tends to change over the course of the year. Carbon monoxide emissions
arise from incomplete combustion and insufficiently-warm catalytic converters, both of which
are greater problems during cold-weather operation. In contrast, NOx emissions from vehi-
cles tend to be greatest during summer months – NOx emissions from mobile sources form
at extremely high combustion temperatures, most commonly when engines operating at high
temperatures are unable to cool down sufficiently.
   As indirect evidence of the impact of specific pollutants, we allow for the treatment effects
in Table 4 to vary by season. We report the coefficient for the season-specific treatment effects
in Table 8. Across the four specifications, the effect of being downwind of the interstate has
the largest impact during the spring and summer months. Relative to the 2.2 percent increase
in violent crimes observed over the entire year, being the downwind side of the interstate
is associated with a four to six percent increase in violent crime in the spring/summer. In
contrast, the winter and fall treatment effects are not statistically distinguishable from zero
in all but the first specification. Although not dispositive, the seasonal treatment effects are
consistent with the conclusion that NOx (or other summer-specific mobile emissions) are the
primary channel influencing the commission of violent crime.


Effect of wind speed A natural extension of our main result is to relate the treatment effect
to the wind speed. In these specifications, we are particularly interested in how wind speed
affects pollution transport and dispersion in a very local sense. To capture this, we use the
scalar-based wind speed measure to understand how the treatment effect varies when pollu-
tants are more or less locally-dispersed in the neighborhood of the highway. This is a more
appropriate measure than the vector-based approach, which captures the net magnitude of the
wind direction.
   To get a sense of what we should expect, consider Figure 10. This figure is analogous to
Figure 7 in that it shows pollution at the CO monitor just north of I-290, except that the radial
dimension now represents scalar-based wind speed, rather than vector-based (or net) wind


                                                 17
       speed. On extremely calm days, there is very little wind-driven pollution dispersion. Thus,
       the monitor reading is very similar no matter what the average wind direction is. As the wind
       speed increases, the pollution reading decays quickly if the monitor is upwind, but more grad-
       ually if the monitor is downwind.
           We bin days based on the scalar-based wind speed for that day. The bins are 2 m/s wide,
       and correspond to the concentric circles in Figure 10. The regressions in Table 10 interact the
       downwind treatment with the wind speed bins. The effect is largest on days when the wind is
       blowing lightly, and almost zero on stagnant days. This is very consistent with the pollution
       pattern in Figure 10. Although stagnant days (those in the smallest circle) are highly polluted,
       the difference in pollution exposure on the upwind and downwind sides of the interstate is
       small. On days in the second-smallest circle, the downwind neighborhood is exposed to sig-
       nificantly more pollution than the upwind neighborhood. The effect grows again as the wind
       picks up, but these are imprecisely estimated as such days are relatively rare.
           These results bolster the case for a causal relationship between pollution and violent crime.
       At the same time, they underscore the importance of interpreting the magnitude of our esti-
       mates as a reduced form relationship, as measuring the exact difference in pollution treatment
       is not straightforward.


       Day of week Another way to gain some insight into the mechanism behind our estimates is
       to consider the average behavior of Chicago residents on a given day. In particular, behavior is
       notably different on weekends than on weekdays.13 People may be more likely to spend time
       inside away from their own neighborhood on weekdays.
           We interact our downwind treatment with whether a sample day is a weekday or a Satur-
       day/Sunday and re-estimate our model. The results are presented in Table 9. The treatment
       effect is consistently driven by increased violent crime on weekends. While it is difficult to
       draw clear-cut conclusions from this result, thinking about a simple model of crime can be in-
       formative. Routine Activity Theory, originally established by Cohen and Felson (1979), posits
       that crime rates are a function of a motivated offender, a suitable target, and the absence of
       a capable guardian. The biological mechanism we propose primarily acts by increasing the
       prevalence of motivated offenders. If more people are outside on weekends than weekdays,
       this effect could be amplified by creating more motivated offenders and more suitable targets.
       Furthermore, people living in neighborhoods close to interstates may work in another loca-
  13 Note that we do include date fixed effects in all of our main specifications. The main treatment effect is not identified

off of differences in pollution and crime on weekends versus weekdays.



                                                             18
        tion during the week, introducing measurement error into treatment effect and attenuating the
        effect of pollution on crime.


        5.3     Robustness checks

        Wind angle and window size Two subjective choices underlie our analysis in Table 4.
        First, when constructing the sample, we include any day in which the wind blows within at
        least 60 degrees of the vector orthogonal to the direction of the road. Second, when counting
        the number of crimes, we include crimes within one mile of either side of the interstate. We
        relax both assumptions and find that our estimates of the downwind effect vary as we would
        expect.
              Table 11 presents the results of estimating Equation (3) as we vary the two inclusion rules.
        Each row-column “cluster” of numbers is the treatment effect coefficient, its robust standard
        error, the number of observations, and the R2 from a separate regression. We use our preferred
        specification, column 4 from Table 4, but the results are similar for the specifications for column
        3 of that table as well. Moving from left to right, we increase the number of degrees around
        the orthogonal vector to the direction of the road from 30 degrees to 90 degrees. Moving from
        top to bottom, we increase the size of the collar around the interstate from one-quarter mile to
        one-half mile to one mile. Our main specification (60 degrees, one mile) is in bold.
              As an illustration of the angle inclusion rule, consider areas near I-290, which runs due east-
        west. In column 1, we would only include days in our estimation during which the wind blows
        between 330 degrees and 30 degrees or between 150 degrees and 210 degrees.14 In contrast, in
        column 5, we would include all the days in the dataset – any day during which the wind blew
        in a northerly direction would be considered a day in which the north side of the road was
        treated and the south side was not.
              As the table illustrates, extending the angle inclusion rule has two effects. First, increasing
        the angle used for inclusion increases the size of the sample and the precision of the estimates.
        Moving from left to right across the table, standard errors monotonically decline. Second,
        increasing the angle for inclusion broadens the set of days during which we consider the north
        side of the road treated. Consider, for instance, the most inclusive rule, column 5. In the case
        of I-290, if, on a day, the wind blows towards 271 degrees, one degree north of due west, we
        consider that day a day on which the treatment applies to the north side of the road, despite the
        fact that pollution from I-290 would likely affect both the north and south sides of the interstate.
14 In   the case of I-290, the vector orthogonal to the direction of the road runs essentially north-south.



                                                             19
      Increasing the inclusion angle tends to attenuate the point estimate of the downwind effect; this
      result is analogous to the attenuation of an intent-to-treat estimate caused by non-compliance.
             Moving down the rows of estimates, the size of the band on either side of the interstate
      varies between one-quarter mile and one mile.15 The estimates increase less than linearly with
      the size of the band, up to one mile, suggesting that the effect of being on the downwind side
      diminishes slightly with distance from the interstate.


      Lagged crime and wind direction Next, we address the possibility that our results are
      driven by short-run autocorrelation. If wind direction and crime are both correlated over time,
      then we would expect to see a relationship between them. Indeed, this dynamic process is the
      primary focus of Jacob et al. (2007). To address this concern, we again re-estimate our preferred
      specification, but include up to three lagged days of crime and treatment status. Table 12 shows
      that while crime does demonstrate positive autocorrelation, controlling for lagged crime and
      wind has only a very small effect on our estimates. In particular, we only find evidence that
      contemporaneous wind direction and pollution affect criminal activity on a given day.


      Alternative identification approach To further test the robustness of our main results,
      we exploit a different source of variation induced by the wind. In the main specification, we
      included route-side and route-date fixed effects. Thus, our estimates came from the response
      of crime in a given neighborhood to being downwind, relative to the corresponding upwind
      neighborhood on the same day.
             In this alternative specification, we essentially use crime (and average wind exposure) at a
      location on the same day of the year in other years as a control for crime at the location on the
      day of interest. That is, when a given route-side is more consistently downwind on July 10th,
      2011 than on the typical July 10th, do we see higher violent crime on that day? In the first three
      columns, the treatment variable calculates the fraction of the day the wind was blowing to
      that side of the road. In the last three columns, the treatment is continuous: the wind blowing
      directly towards one side is a stronger treatment than wind blowing at an angle to the vector
      of orthogonality. The sample size is larger than the main specification because we are able to
      use all days in our data, rather than restricting our sample to only the days in which the wind
      is blowing orthogonally to the interstate on average.
             Table 13 presents the results. On a day that is “unusually downwind” for that calendar
  15 While nothing prevents extending the band beyond one mile to either side of the interstate, the bands around the
sections of the interstate used in the main specification begin to overlap.



                                                         20
date, a neighborhood experiences more violent crime. For a given route-side, a completely
upwind day will have 0.03 more violent crimes than a completely downwind day using the
binary treatment variable. The continuous treatment variable ranges from -1 to 1, so it predicts
that a completely upwind day will have roughly 0.035 more violent crimes than a completely
downwind day.
   These signs and magnitudes are remarkably similar to those in our main specification, even
though the exogenous variation in wind exposure is coming from a comparison with different
implicit control groups. We take this as evidence that our main causal result is not simply an
artifact of our primary specification.


Falsification test As a final piece of evidence, we consider a falsification test of our iden-
tification strategy. To motivate the falsification test, consider the following thought exercise.
Suppose we did not know ex ante the latitude at which I-290 cuts straight east/west through
the city of Chicago. We could estimate downwind coefficients from our model at a number of
different latitudes. We could then examine whether the effect on violent crime of being down-
wind was greatest at the latitude of I-290. If we found large effects at alternative latitudes, we
might worry that our downwind treatment was capturing effects other than pollution from
mobile sources.
   To conduct the falsification test, we focus on the band of crimes at similar longitudes to
the crimes in our sample set for I-290, but extending far north and south of I-290. Figure
11 maps the latitude and longitudes of the crimes we use for the falsification test in green
and the location of the interstates in red. Moving from the south to the north in one mile
increments, we consider alternative latitudes with which we conduct a t-test equivalent to the
main specification in equation (3). For each latitude, we calculate the daily difference in violent
crimes one mile north of the latitude and one mile south of the latitude. We then test whether
the differential at that latitude is greater on days when the wind blows north than when the
wind blows south.
   Figure 12 plots the difference in the north-south violent crime differential on days when
the wind is blowing to north rather than the south at each alternative latitude, adjusted for
the fact that when the wind is blowing to the south, the pollution “treatment” applies to the
southern-side of the latitude. The interpretation is identical to the interpretation of the down-
wind treatment in column 3 of Table 4, although this exercise only examines one of the seven
interstate segments.
   Three points in particular stand out in Figure 12. First, the maximum estimated downwind


                                                21
       effect (in the center of the graph) is exactly at the latitude that I-290 cuts east-west through
       Chicago. Second, just to the right of the peak, corresponding to a latitude slightly of I-290, we
       find the lowest estimated value for the downwind effect. When we consider an alternative lat-
       itude just north of I-290, winds from the south blow pollution from the road onto the south side
       of the alternative latitude and reverse the sign of the downwind effect. Relative to the alterna-
       tive latitude, pollution is from I-290 falls on the upwind side. The sharp rebound at latitudes
       just north of the minimum estimated downwind effect is also reassuring. This suggests that
       the source of pollution is very local to the latitude at which I-290 cuts through Chicago from
       east to west and disperses at latitudes further north. Finally, the second highest peak on the
       graph (at a latitude of roughly 41.84) is on the northern side of I-55 as it exits the sample region
       of the falsification test.


       5.4     Implications for the cost of mobile pollution

       Although we estimate that the effect of mobile pollution on crime is modest in magnitude, the
       annual aggregate costs of crime are significant. Estimates from the literature vary with respect
       to magnitudes: more conservative estimates suggest crime imposes external costs of several
       hundred billion dollars per year annually in the U.S., while the upper end of estimates (e.g.,
       Anderson, 1999) estimates the aggregate cost of crime at over one trillion dollars annually.
             Having estimated the causal effect of mobile pollution on crime, we compute a back-of-the-
       envelope estimate of the cost of pollution-induced crime. McCollister et al. (2010) compute the
       comprehensive cost of each class of index crime. We use only the tangible costs of crime, which
       include medical expenses, cash losses, property theft or damage, and lost earnings because of
       injury, other victimization-related consequences, criminal justice costs, and career crime costs.
       We update their estimates to 2014 USD using the CPI. For the cost of homicide, we add the
       estimated judicial costs to the EPA’s value of statistical life.16
          In constructing our sample, we omit 48% of the crimes that occur within one mile of an in-
       terstate.17 However, in calculating the total cost of pollution, we want to include these areas.18
       If we assume that each of the classes of violent crimes increase according to the estimates from
  16 In 2014 USD, the respective costs of a homicide, a rape, and an assault are $10.3 million; $51,165; and $24,234. The

authors also compute intangible costs, such as pain and suffering. However, as Ranson (2014) notes, these are based
largely on jury awards and may not accurately reflect willingness-to-pay to avoid victimization; thus, we omit these
costs. By excluding these important but difficult-to-estimate components, we likely underestimate the total cost of
pollution-induced crime.
  17 As we note in section 5, we exclude areas within a mile of more than one interstate, as they might be treated more

than once on a given day. We additional exclude regions of the city close to O’hare airport and along Lake Michigan, as
unlikely to be representative.
  18 In principle, areas greater than one mile from an interstate might be affected as well.



                                                           22
Table 6, the total annual cost of pollution-induced crime for the 14 interstate-sides amounts to
$81.1 million. However, this figure is driven by the enormous cost of an additional homicide. If
we assume that all additional violent crimes are, in fact, assault/batteries, the annual estimate
falls to $1.8 million. The true value is likely somewhere between these two bounds as we omit
intangible costs, do not account for the increased costliness of batteries over assaults, and do
not consider the possible impact on non-index (more minor) crimes.
    It is difficult to extrapolate this result to a nationwide calculation, given the diversity of
urban form and density across the nation. To get a sense of the likely magnitude of nationwide
costs, we assume that the pollution impacts of traffic scale up proportionally with population.
The city of Chicago had a 2010 population of 2.7 million, while the total urban population of
the United States in 2010 was 249.3 million (United States Census Bureau, 2010). As a lower
bound, if we assume all additional violent crimes are assaults, the annual cost to the United
States amounts to $178 million per year. In comparison, Currie and Walker (2011) produce
a back-of-the-envelope estimate that pre-term births due to traffic congestion carry costs of
$444 million per year. Clearly, the costs of mobile pollution-induced violent crime are of a
magnitude similar to that of more commonly studied adverse outcomes.



6    Conclusion

In this paper, we provide the first quasi-experimental evidence that air pollution affects vi-
olent criminal activity. Our results suggest that pollution may affect cognition in ways that
extend beyond impairing performance on standardized tests and may influence individual be-
havior in more subtle ways that previously considered. Furthermore, our results suggest that
the external costs of pollution may be greater than previously estimated - implying optimal
policy should more stringently regulate air pollution. We estimate that the downwind side of
interstates experience 2.2 percent more violent crimes than when the wind is blowing in the
opposite direction. Although we estimate that the effect of pollution on crime is modest in
magnitude, our conservative back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that the cost of mobile
pollution-induced crime in the United States is on the order of $100-200 million annually. This
magnitude is comparable to many of the well-studied impacts of traffic on health, and should
be considered in relevant cost-benefit analyses.
    These estimates are particularly important in light of the dramatic decrease in urban air
pollution experienced in the United States over the past several decades. Annual peak carbon
monoxide readings in Chicago fell by two-thirds between 1990 and 2010 from 6 parts per mil-


                                               23
     lion to 2 parts per million.19 . As a rough estimate of the magnitudes of the effect size, in our
     city-level regressions we estimate a 1 ppm increase in CO is associated with a 0.111 increase
     in the log of daily crime. Interpreted in a partial equilibrium, the effect size of the decline in
     pollution on crime in the most polluted hours of the year is considerable.




     References
     Amitai, Yona, Zoli Zlotogorski, Vered Golan-Katzav, Anya Wexler, and Ditza Gross, “Neu-
      ropsychological impairment from acute low-level exposure to carbon monoxide,” Archives
      of Neurology, 1998, 55 (6), 845–848.

     Anderson, Craig A. and Brad J. Bushman, “Human Aggression,” Annual Review of Psychology,
       2002, 53, 27–51.

     Anderson, David A, “The aggregate burden of crime*,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 1999,
       42 (2), 611–642.

     Archsmith, James, “Air Quality and Error Quantity: Impacts of ambient air quality on worker
       productivity and decision-making,” Technical Report 2015.

     Beatty, Timothy KM and Jay P Shimshack, “Air pollution and children’s respiratory health:
       A cohort analysis,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2014, 67 (1), 39–57.

     Beurel, E. and R.S. Jope, “Inflammation and lithium: clues to mechanisms contributing to
       suicide-linked traits,” Translational Psychiatry, 2014, 4 (12).

     Block, Michelle L and Lilian Calderón-Garcidueñas, “Air pollution: mechanisms of neuroin-
       flammation and CNS disease,” Trends in Neurosciences, 2009, 32 (9), 506–516.

     Burke, Marshall B, Edward Miguel, Shanker Satyanath, John A Dykema, and David B Lo-
       bell, “Warming increases the risk of civil war in Africa,” Proceedings of the National Academy
       of Sciences, 2009, 106 (49), 20670–20674.

     Cohen, Lawrence E. and Marcus Felson, “Social Change and Crime Rate Trends: A Routine
       Activity Approach,” American Sociological Review, 1979, 44, 588–608.

     Cohn, Ellen G and James Rotton, “Assault as a function of time and temperature: A
       moderator-variable time-series analysis.,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1997,
       72 (6), 1322–1334.

     Currie, Janet and Reed Walker, “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-
       ZPass,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 65–90.

     Doleac, Jennifer L and Nicholas J Sanders, “Under the Cover of Darkness: The Effect of Day-
      light Saving Time on Violent Crime,” Working Paper, 2012.

     Foley, C. Fritz, “Welfare Payments and Crime,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (1),
       97–112.

     Gilhousen, David B., “A Field Evaluation of NDBC Moored Buoy Winds,” Journal of Atmo-
       spheric and Oceanic Technology, 1987, 4, 94–104.
 19 Reported carbon monoxide readings based on the 2nd highest annual 8-hour average.                 Source:
http://www.epa.gov/airtrends/carbon.html


                                                    24
Hanna, Rema and Paulina Oliva, “The effect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence from a
  natural experiment in Mexico City,” Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 122 (1), 68–79.

Hsiang, Solomon M, Kyle C Meng, and Mark A Cane, “Civil conflicts are associated with the
  global climate,” Nature, 2011, 476 (7361), 438–441.

  , Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel, “Quantifying the influence of climate on human
  conflict,” Science, 2013, 341 (6151).

Iyer, Lakshmi and Petia Topalova, “Poverty and Crime: Evidence from Rainfall and Trade
  Shocks in India,” Working Paper, 2014.

Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren, and Enrico Moretti, “The Dynamics of Criminal Behavior Evidence
  from Weather Shocks,” Journal of Human Resources, 2007, 42 (3), 489–527.

Lavy, Victor, Avraham Ebenstein, and Sefi Roth, “The Impact of Short Term Exposure to Am-
  bient Air Pollution on Cognitive Performance and Human Capital Formation,” Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.

Lim, Youn-Hee, Ho Kim, Jin Hee Kim, Sanghyuk Bae, Hye Yin Park, and Yun-Chul Hong,
  “Air pollution and symptoms of depression in elderly adults,” Environmental Health Perspec-
  tives, 2012, 120 (7), 1023–1028.

McCollister, Kathryn E., Michael T. French, and Hai Fang, “The Cost of Crime to Society: New
 Crime-Specific Estimates for Policy and Program Evaluation,” Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
 2010, 108, 98–109.

Moretti, Enrico and Matthew Neidell, “Pollution, health, and avoidance behavior evidence
 from the ports of Los Angeles,” Journal of Human Resources, 2011, 46 (1), 154–175.

Nattero, Giovanni and Annalisa Enrico, “Outdoor Pollution and Headache,” Headache, 1996,
  36, 243–245.

Ranson, Matthew, “Crime, weather, and climate change,” Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management, 2014, 67 (3), 274–302.

Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw, “Environmental policy as social policy? The impact of childhood lead
  exposure on crime,” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2007, 7 (1).

Rotton, James, “Affective and cognitive consequences of malodorous pollution,” Basic and Ap-
  plied Social Psychology, 1983, 4 (2), 171–191.

   and James Frey, “Psychological costs of air pollution: Atmospheric conditions, seasonal
  trends, and psychiatric emergencies,” Population and Environment, 1984, 7 (1), 3–16.

   and , “Air pollution, weather, and violent crimes: concomitant time-series analysis of
  archival data.,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1985, 49 (5), 1207–1220.

  , Timothy Barry, James Frey, and Edgardo Soler, “Air Pollution and interpersonal Attrac-
  tion1,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 1978, 8 (1), 57–71.

Schlenker, Wolfram and W Reed Walker, “Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous
  health,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2011.

Stafford, Tess M, “Indoor air quality and academic performance,” Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management, 2014, 70, 34–50.

Szyszkowicz, Mieczysław, “Air pollution and emergency department visits for depression in
  Edmonton, Canada,” International Journal of Occupational Medicine and Environmental Health,
  2007, 20 (3), 241–245.


                                             25
  , Jeff B Willey, Eric Grafstein, Brian H Rowe, and Ian Colman, “Air pollution and emer-
  gency department visits for suicide attempts in Vancouver, Canada,” Environmental Health
  Insights, 2010, 4, 79–86.

United States Census Bureau, “2010 Census,” 2010.

Yang, Albert C, Shi-Jen Tsai, and Norden E Huang, “Decomposing the association of com-
  pleted suicide with air pollution, weather, and unemployment data at different time scales,”
  Journal of Affective Disorders, 2011, 129 (1), 275–281.

Zivin, Joshua Graff and Matthew Neidell, “Days of haze: Environmental information disclo-
  sure and intertemporal avoidance behavior,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Manage-
  ment, 2009, 58 (2), 119–128.

   and , “The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity,” The American Economic Review,
  2012, 102 (7), 3652–3673.




                                             26
7   Figures


                Figure 1: Crime share by hour of day




              Figure 2: Average crimes by week of year




                                27
Figure 3: Normalized average annual crimes (2001 levels = 100)




              Figure 4: Crime density heat maps




                             28
                  Figure 5: Seasonality in CO and PM10 emissions




Figure 6: Average PM10 reading as a function of wind direction and vector-based speed




                                         29
Figure 7: Average CO reading as a function of wind direction and vector-based speed




             Figure 8: Sample set for interstate identification strategy




                                         30
             Figure 9: Difference in violent crime, by relative wind vector




      Note: Relative wind direction reflects the difference between the wind direction and the
      vector orthogonal to interstate direction. For example, I290 runs straight East / West.
      A value of 0 corresponds to a northernly wind. A value of 45 would correspond to a
      northwesterly or northeasterly wind. Point estimates are denoted with the solid line.
      95% CI is denoted by the dashed line.




Figure 10: Average CO reading as a function of wind direction and scalar-based speed




                                                31
Figure 11: Sample set for falsification test




                    32
        Figure 12: North-south crime differential, alternative latitudes




Note: The y-axis reports the difference in the number of violent crimes one mile north ver-
sus one mile south of the latitude reported on days when the wind is blowing northernly
rather than southernly. Northernly and southernly are defined as within 60 degrees of
north and south, respectively. The solid line denotes the point estimate of the difference
and the dashed lines denote the upper and lower bounds of the 95% confidence interval
of the t-test. The vertical lines denote the latitudes of I-290 and the average latitude of
I-55.




                                            33
    Table 1: Valid pollution observations by month and by year

               CO                                        PM10

Month       Avg. Obs.   Year   Obs.        Month       Avg. Obs.   Year   Obs.
January       29.3      2001   350         January       26.7      2001   335
February      27.9      2002   362         February      23.5      2002   324
March         29.1      2003   354         March         29.1      2003   341
April         29.3      2004   353         April         28.0      2004   333
May           28.7      2005   355         May           28.1      2005   340
June          28.0      2006   348         June          29.1      2006   348
July          28.6      2007   344         July          30.1      2007   352
August        30.2      2008   352         August        30.4      2008   363
September     29.4      2009   358         September     29.3      2009   317
October       30.6      2010   339         October       27.7      2010   346
November      29.7                         November      29.0
December      30.7                         December      28.9

Total         351.5            3515                      339.9            3399




                                      34
                           Table 2: CO impact on daily log crime, 2001-2010
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
                                           OLS          2SLS        2SLS          OLS         2SLS        2SLS
                                          Violent      Violent    Diff ≤ 1 C    Property    Property    Diff ≤ 1 C
Mean of 4 monitors’ average daily CO      -0.016       0.094**      0.11**        0.011       0.010      0.0093
                                          (0.023)      (0.045)     (0.047)       (0.011)     (0.020)     (0.020)

Speed norm of avg. wind vector           -0.00055**   -0.000015   0.000067      0.000073    0.000070    0.000047
                                          (0.00023)   (0.00029)   (0.00031)    (0.000090)   (0.00013)   (0.00013)

Max temp (-5,0) deg. C                    0.085***    0.084***     0.083***     0.056***     0.056***    0.056***
                                           (0.024)    (0.024)       (0.027)     (0.012)       (0.011)     (0.013)

Max temp (0,5) deg. C                     0.18***      0.18***      0.18***      0.10***     0.10***      0.10***
                                          (0.027)      (0.026)      (0.029)      (0.015)     (0.014)      (0.016)

Max temp (5,10) deg. C                    0.25***      0.25***      0.25***      0.13***     0.13***      0.13***
                                          (0.025)      (0.024)      (0.027)      (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.018)

Max temp (10,15) deg. C                   0.35***      0.34***      0.34***      0.16***     0.16***      0.16***
                                          (0.027)      (0.026)      (0.029)      (0.017)     (0.016)      (0.018)

Max temp (15,20) deg. C                   0.43***      0.42***      0.42***      0.16***     0.16***      0.17***
                                          (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.029)      (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.018)

Max temp (20,25) deg. C                   0.54***      0.53***      0.53***      0.16***     0.16***      0.16***
                                          (0.029)      (0.028)      (0.031)      (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.019)

Max temp (25,30) deg. C                   0.62***      0.61***      0.61***      0.17***     0.17***      0.17***
                                          (0.030)      (0.029)      (0.032)      (0.017)     (0.017)      (0.019)

Max temp (30,35) deg. C                   0.69***      0.67***      0.68***      0.17***     0.17***      0.18***
                                          (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.033)      (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.020)

Max temp > 35 deg. C                      0.69***      0.66***      0.66***      0.20***     0.20***      0.18***
                                          (0.044)      (0.043)      (0.050)      (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.023)

Precip. bin 2                            -0.024***    -0.022***    -0.022***    -0.00047    -0.00048     -0.00052
                                          (0.0080)     (0.0079)     (0.0084)    (0.0043)    (0.0042)     (0.0045)

Precip. bin 3                            -0.064***    -0.062***    -0.061***     -0.0045     -0.0045     -0.0051
                                          (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.0052)     (0.0052)    (0.0054)

Precip. bin 4                             -0.12***     -0.12***    -0.13***      -0.010       -0.010*     -0.012*
                                           (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.0062)     (0.0060)    (0.0065)

Precip. bin 5                             -0.15***     -0.15***    -0.15***     -0.029***   -0.029***    -0.028**
                                           (0.025)      (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.011)     (0.010)      (0.011)
Year*Month FE                                 X            X           X            X           X            X
Day of Week FE                                X            X           X            X           X            X
First Stage F-Stat                                        19.0       18.8                      19.0        18.8
Observations                               3467          3467        3231         3467        3467         3231
R-Squared                                  0.75           0.75       0.75         0.78         0.78        0.78
  Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered on the month of sample. Dependent variable is the
  daily citywide crime count. Excluded instruments are 20 degree bins for daily average wind direction at Midway
  Airport, and a measure of the net daily average wind power vector. Regression also includes first-of-month and
  first-of-year dummies. CO is the mean over monitors 31-63-1, 31-4002-1, 31-3103-1, and 31-6004-1.




                                                       35
                           Table 3: PM10 impact on daily log crime, 2001-2010
                                               (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                              OLS        2SLS        2SLS          OLS          2SLS        2SLS
                                            Violent     Violent    Diff ≤ 1 C   Property     Property     Diff ≤ 1 C
Mean of 2 monitors’ average daily PM10    0.00090***    0.0012*     0.0013*     0.000051     -0.000019    0.000060
                                           (0.00031)   (0.00066)   (0.00069)    (0.00016)    (0.00030)    (0.00031)

Speed norm of avg. wind vector             -0.00035*   -0.00032    -0.00033      0.000011    0.0000050    -0.0000013
                                           (0.00020)   (0.00021)   (0.00022)    (0.000089)   (0.000090)   (0.000092)

Max temp (-5,0) deg. C                      0.11***     0.11***     0.11***      0.057***     0.057***     0.059***
                                            (0.025)     (0.024)     (0.026)      (0.013)       (0.012)      (0.014)

Max temp (0,5) deg. C                       0.21***     0.21***     0.21***      0.10***      0.10***      0.10***
                                            (0.029)     (0.029)     (0.030)      (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.018)

Max temp (5,10) deg. C                      0.28***     0.28***     0.28***      0.13***      0.13***      0.14***
                                            (0.026)     (0.026)     (0.027)      (0.018)      (0.017)      (0.020)

Max temp (10,15) deg. C                     0.36***     0.36***     0.36***      0.16***      0.16***      0.16***
                                            (0.027)     (0.027)     (0.028)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.020)

Max temp (15,20) deg. C                     0.44***     0.44***     0.44***      0.17***      0.17***      0.17***
                                            (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.030)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.021)

Max temp (20,25) deg. C                     0.54***     0.54***     0.54***      0.17***      0.17***      0.17***
                                            (0.030)     (0.030)     (0.032)      (0.019)      (0.020)      (0.022)

Max temp (25,30) deg. C                     0.61***     0.61***     0.60***      0.17***      0.17***      0.17***
                                            (0.031)     (0.034)     (0.036)      (0.019)      (0.021)      (0.024)

Max temp (30,35) deg. C                     0.67***     0.66***     0.66***      0.18***      0.18***      0.18***
                                            (0.034)     (0.040)     (0.043)      (0.021)      (0.024)      (0.028)

Max temp > 35 deg. C                        0.66***     0.65***     0.64***      0.21***      0.21***      0.19***
                                            (0.046)     (0.054)     (0.061)      (0.025)      (0.031)      (0.032)

Precip. bin 2                               -0.016*      -0.015*     -0.016*    -0.00016     -0.00032      -0.00058
                                           (0.0085)     (0.0082)    (0.0087)    (0.0044)     (0.0042)      (0.0045)

Precip. bin 3                              -0.052***   -0.051***   -0.049***      -0.0031     -0.0033      -0.0039
                                            (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.0056)     (0.0057)     (0.0059)

Precip. bin 4                               -0.11***    -0.11***    -0.11***      -0.0087     -0.0091      -0.0094
                                             (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.0058)     (0.0058)     (0.0061)

Precip. bin 5                               -0.15***    -0.15***    -0.16***    -0.030***    -0.030***    -0.031***
                                             (0.024)     (0.023)     (0.024)     (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)
Year*Month FE                                   X           X           X           X            X            X
Day of Week FE                                  X           X           X           X            X            X
First Stage F-Stat                                        30.6        28.1                      30.6         28.1
Observations                                 3351         3351        3117        3351         3351         3117
R-Squared                                    0.75         0.75        0.76        0.78          0.78         0.78
  Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered on the month of sample. Dependent variable is the
  daily citywide crime count. Regression also includes first-of-month and first-of-year dummies. Excluded instruments
  are 20 degree bins for daily average wind direction at Midway Airport, and a measure of the net daily average wind
  power. PM is the mean over monitors 31-22-3 and 31-1016-3.




                                                       36
             Table 4: Violent crime downwind of interstates
                                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
     Treatment (downwind)            0.0694***    0.0231**     0.0231**    0.0234**
                                      (0.0134)    (0.0117)     (0.0110)    (0.0113)
     Route*Side FE                                    X            X           X
     Route*Date FE                                                 X           X
     Route*Side Weather Interact.                                              X
     Observations                     41730         41730       41730       41730
     R-Squared                       0.000644       0.274       0.678        0.680
       Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported.
       The dependent variable is the number of crimes within one mile of one
       side of the interstate. A side of the interstate is considered DOWNWIND
       if the average wind vector over the course of the day is within 60 degrees
       of the vector orthogonal to the direction of the interstate.




            Table 5: Property crime downwind of interstates
                                         (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)
     Treatment (downwind)              0.0108        -0.0101    -0.0101    -0.00457
                                      (0.0509)      (0.0326)    (0.0295)   (0.0304)
     Route*Side FE                                       X          X          X
     Route*Date FE                                                  X          X
     Route*Side Weather Interact.                                              X
     Observations                      41730         41730       41730      41730
     R-Squared                      0.00000107       0.609       0.841       0.843
      Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported. The
      dependent variable is the number of crimes within one mile of one side of
      the interstate. A side of the interstate is considered DOWNWIND if the
      average wind vector over the course of the day is within 60 degrees of the
      vector orthogonal to the direction of the interstate.




   Table 6: Violent crime downwind of interstates, by specific crime
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
Treatment (downwind)            0.00227        0.00309        -0.0119*       0.0300***
                               (0.00185)      (0.00293)      (0.00610)       (0.00861)
Crime Type                     Homicide         Rape        Agg. Assault    Agg. Battery
Dep. Var. Mean                   0.029          0.083           0.338          0.638
Route*Side FE                       X              X              X               X
Route*Date FE                       X              X              X               X
Route*Side Weather Interact.        X              X              X               X
Observations                     41730          41730          41730           41730
R-Squared                        0.510          0.529           0.563          0.651
 Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported. The depen-
 dent variable is the number of crimes within one mile of one side of the interstate. A
 side of the interstate is considered DOWNWIND if the average wind vector over the
 course of the day is within 60 degrees of the vector orthogonal to the direction of the
 interstate.




                                         37
      Table 7: Property crime downwind of interstates, by specific crime
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)                (5)
Treatment (downwind)           0.00482      -0.00358     -0.00799        0.00298           -0.000807
                               (0.0100)     (0.0125)     (0.0221)        (0.0115)          (0.00191)
Crime Type                     Robbery      Burglary     Larceny     Gr. Theft Auto          Arson
Dep. Var. Mean                  0.866         1.269        4.014          1.122              0.033
Route*Side FE                      X            X            X               X                  X
Route*Date FE                      X            X            X               X                  X
Route*Side Weather Interact.       X            X            X               X                  X
Observations                    41730        41730        41730           41730              41730
R-Squared                       0.632         0.661        0.794          0.619              0.507
 Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported. The dependent vari-
 able is the number of crimes within one mile of one side of the interstate. A side of the
 interstate is considered DOWNWIND if the average wind vector over the course of the day is
 within 60 degrees of the vector orthogonal to the direction of the interstate.


                  Table 8: Downwind violent crime, by season
                                              (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
        Treatment (downwind)              0.0953***    -0.0305      -0.0305      0.00225
                                           (0.0218)    (0.0204)     (0.0192)     (0.0206)

        Treatment*Spring                  -0.0521      0.0981***    0.0981***    0.0528*
                                          (0.0349)      (0.0311)     (0.0294)    (0.0302)

        Treatment*Summer                  -0.0252      0.0783**     0.0783**      0.0296
                                          (0.0369)     (0.0321)     (0.0304)     (0.0318)

        Treatment*Autumn                  -0.0261       0.0303       0.0303     -0.00344
                                          (0.0342)     (0.0299)     (0.0283)    (0.0290)
        Main Effects                          X            X
        Route*Side FE                                      X           X            X
        Route*Date FE                                                  X            X
        Route*Side Weather Interact.                                                X
        Observations                       41730        41730        41730        41730
        R-Squared                          0.0216       0.290        0.678        0.680
          Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Reference season in the interaction
          is winter. Robust standard errors reported. The dependent variable is the
          number of crimes within one mile of one side of the interstate.

           Table 9: Downwind violent crime, by weekday/weekend
                                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
         Treatment (downwind)              0.0839***     0.0363     0.0363*     0.0378*
                                            (0.0268)    (0.0232)    (0.0220)    (0.0221)

         Treatment*Weekday                 -0.0201      -0.0185     -0.0185      -0.0200
                                           (0.0309)     (0.0265)    (0.0251)    (0.0250)
         Main Effects                          X            X
         Route*Side FE                                      X          X           X
         Route*Date FE                                                 X           X
         Route*Side Weather Interact.                                              X
         Observations                        41730       41730       41730       41730
         R-Squared                          0.00485      0.278       0.678       0.680
           Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported.
           The dependent variable is the number of crimes within one mile of one
           side of the interstate.


                                              38
             Table 10: Downwind violent crime, by wind bins
                                              (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)
Treatment*(Wind speed 0 - 2 m/s)           -0.0211       -0.0168        -0.00367      0.00959
                                           (0.0458)      (0.0409)       (0.0587)      (0.0587)

Treatment*(Wind speed 2 - 4 m/s)           0.101***     0.0673***       0.0341**      0.0358**
                                           (0.0181)      (0.0155)       (0.0174)      (0.0174)

Treatment*(Wind speed 4 - 6 m/s)          0.0885***      0.0262*         0.0150        0.0135
                                           (0.0181)      (0.0157)       (0.0172)      (0.0175)

Treatment*(Wind speed 6 - 8 m/s)           -0.0290      -0.0817***       0.0132        0.0113
                                           (0.0279)      (0.0240)       (0.0292)      (0.0294)

Treatment*(Wind speed 8 - 10 m/s)           -0.101*     -0.155***        0.0441        0.0382
                                           (0.0542)      (0.0458)       (0.0596)      (0.0596)

Treatment*(Wind speed 10 - 12 m/s)          0.0171       -0.155          0.121         0.109
                                            (0.193)      (0.156)        (0.171)       (0.169)
Route*Side FE                                               X              X             X
Route*Date FE                                                              X             X
Route*Side Weather Interact.                                                             X
Observations                                41730         41730          41730         41730
R-Squared                                  0.00140        0.274          0.678         0.680
 Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported. The depen-
 dent variable is the number of crimes within one mile of one side of the interstate.




Table 11: Downwind violent crime, by treatment angle and distance
from interstate
             Angle width         30         45           60            75             90
  1
  4   mile
             Est.              0.0070    0.0112*      0.0137***     0.0100**       0.0090**
             SE               (0.0076)   (0.0060)      (0.0051)     (0.0044)       (0.0040)
             N                 20608      31250         41730        51924          61362
             R2                 0.578     0.582          0.588        0.587          0.588
  1
  2   mile
             Est.              0.0152    0.0168*      0.0160**      0.0154**       0.0164***
             SE               (0.0117)   (0.0092)     (0.0077)      (0.0067)        (0.0061)
             N                 20608      31250        41730         51924           61362
             R2                 0.637     0.639         0.642         0.641           0.64
  1 mile
             Est.              0.0252    0.0235*      0.0234**       0.0166*       0.0152*
             SE               (0.0170)   (0.0134)     (0.0113)       (0.0099)      (0.0090)
             N                 20608      31250        41730          51924         61362
             R2                 0.676     0.678         0.680         0.680         0.679
      Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported. The
      dependent variable is the number of crimes within one mile of one side of
      an interstate. All specifications include interstate*date fixed effects and inter-
      state*side fixed effects interacted with daily maximum temperature and total
      precipitation.




                                           39
           Table 12: Downwind violent crime, including lagged variables
                                   (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
Treatment (downwind)            0.0234**     0.0263**       0.0256**     0.0255**     0.0262**     0.0261**
                                (0.0113)     (0.0121)       (0.0121)     (0.0121)     (0.0121)     (0.0121)

Downwind, t-1                                -0.00491       -0.00272     -0.00260     -0.00352     -0.00296
                                            (0.00722)      (0.00757)    (0.00757)    (0.00757)    (0.00756)

Downwind, t-2                                              -0.00667      -0.00720    -0.00686      -0.00719
                                                           (0.00708)    (0.00736)    (0.00736)    (0.00735)

Downwind, t-3                                                            0.00161      0.00172      0.00111
                                                                        (0.00709)    (0.00708)    (0.00708)

Number of crimes, t-1                                                                0.0407***    0.0372***
                                                                                     (0.00846)    (0.00846)

Number of crimes, t-2                                                                             0.0357***
                                                                                                  (0.00852)

Number of crimes, t-3                                                                             0.0382***
                                                                                                  (0.00868)
Route*Side FE                      X            X              X            X            X            X
Route*Date FE                      X            X              X            X            X            X
Route*Side Weather Interact.       X            X              X            X            X            X
Observations                     41730        41730          41730        41730        41730        41730
R-Squared                        0.680        0.680          0.680        0.680        0.681        0.682
 Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported. The dependent variable is
 the number of crimes within one mile of one side of the interstate.




       Table 13: Downwind violent crime, alternative identification strategy
                                  (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
   Treatment (binary)          0.0287**    0.0303**      0.0303**
                               (0.0138)    (0.0150)      (0.0146)

   Treatment (continuous)                                             0.0175*      0.0187*      0.0187*
                                                                     (0.00901)    (0.00987)    (0.00956)
   Route*Side*Month FE            X                                      X
   Route*Side*DoY FE                          X             X                        X             X
   Covariate Interactions                                   X                                      X
   Observations                 61362       61362         61362        61362        61362        61362
   R-Squared                    0.301       0.356         0.369        0.301        0.356        0.369
     Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors reported. The dependent
     variable is the number of crimes within one mile of one side of the interstate.




                                                    40
