                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME?

                                         Pierre Azoulay
                                      Christian Fons-Rosen
                                      Joshua S. Graff Zivin

                                      Working Paper 21788
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21788


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2015, Revised June 2018




Address all correspondence to pazoulay@mit.edu. Azoulay and Graff Zivin acknowledge the
financial support of the National Science Foundation through its SciSIP Program (Award
SBE-1460344). Christian Fons-Rosen acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry
of Economy and Competitiveness through a grant (ECO-2014-55555-P) and through the Severo
Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563). Mikka Rokkanen
provided additional research assistance. The project would not have been possible without
Andrew Stellman's extraordinary programming skills (www.stellman-greene.com). We thank
Heidi Williams, Xavier Jaravel, Danielle Li, Sameer Srivastava, Scott Stern, Bruce Weinberg,
and seminar audiences at the NBER, UC Berkeley, National University of Singapore, and
Stanford University for useful discussions. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Pierre Azoulay, Christian Fons-Rosen, and Joshua S. Graff Zivin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Science Advance One Funeral at a Time?
Pierre Azoulay, Christian Fons-Rosen, and Joshua S. Graff Zivin
NBER Working Paper No. 21788
December 2015, Revised June 2018
JEL No. I23,O31,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the extent to which eminent scientists shape the vitality of their areas of scientific
inquiry by examining entry rates into the subfields of 452 academic life scientists who pass away
prematurely. Consistent with previous research, the flow of articles by collaborators into affected
fields decreases precipitously after the death of a star scientist. In contrast, we find that the flow
of articles by non-collaborators increases by 8.6% on average. These additional contributions are
disproportionately likely to be highly cited. They are also more likely to be authored by scientists
who were not previously active in the deceased superstar's field. Intellectual, social, and resource
barriers all impede entry, with outsiders only entering subfields that offer a less hostile landscape
for the support and acceptance of “foreign” ideas. Overall, our results suggest that once in control
of the commanding heights of their fields, star scientists tend to hold on to their exalted position a
bit too long.

Pierre Azoulay                                    Joshua S. Graff Zivin
MIT Sloan School of Management                    University of California, San Diego
100 Main Street, E62-487                          9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
Cambridge, MA 02142                               La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER                                          and NBER
pazoulay@mit.edu                                  jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu

Christian Fons-Rosen
Christian Fons-Rosen
Universitat Pompeu Fabra and CEPR
Barcelona GSE
Carrer Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
christian.fons-rosen@upf.edu
                                                          “A new scientific truth does not triumph by
                                                          convincing its opponents and making them see
                                                          the light, but rather because its opponents
                                                          eventually die, and a new generation grows up
                                                          that is familiar with it.”
                                                                                            Max Planck
                                                                Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers




1         Introduction
        Whether manna from heaven or the result of the purposeful application of research and
development, technological advances play a foundational role in all modern theories of eco-
nomic growth (Solow 1957, Romer 1990, Aghion and Howitt 1992). Only in the latter part
of the nineteenth century, however, did technological progress start to systematically build
upon scientific foundations (Mokyr 1990, 2002). Economists—in contrast to philosophers,
historians, and sociologists (Kuhn 1962, Shapin 1996, Merton 1973)—have devoted surpris-
ingly little effort to understanding the processes and institutions that shape the evolution of
science.1 How do researchers identify problems worthy of study and choose among potential
approaches to investigate them?

        Presumably these choices are driven by a quest for recognition and scientific glory, but
the view that scientific advances are the result of a pure competition of ideas—one where the
highest quality insights inevitably emerge as victorious—has long been considered a Pan-
glossian but useful foil (Kuhn 1962; Akerlof and Michaillat 2017). Indeed, the provocative
quote from Max Planck in the epigraph of this paper underscores that even the most cele-
brated scientist of his era understood that the pragmatic success of a scientific theory does
not entirely determine how quickly it gains adherents, or its longevity.

        Can the idiosyncratic stances of individual scientists do much to alter, or at least delay,
the course of scientific advance? Perhaps for the sort of scientific revolutions that Planck—
the pioneer of quantum mechanics—likely had in mind, but the proposition that established
scientists are slower than novices in accepting paradigm-shifting ideas has received little
empirical support whenever it has been put to the test (Hull et al. 1978; Gorham 1991; Levin
et al. 1995). Paradigm shifts are exceedingly rare, however, and their very nature suggests
    1
   A notable exception is the theoretical model of scientific revolutions developed by Bramoullé and Saint-
Paul (2010).



                                                     1
that once they emerge, it is exceedingly costly to resist or ignore them. In contrast, “normal”
scientific advance—the regular work of scientists theorizing, observing, and experimenting
within a settled paradigm or explanatory framework—may be more susceptible to political
jousting. The absence of new self-evident and far reaching truths means that scientists must
compete in a crowded intellectual landscape, sometime savagely, for the supremacy of their
ideas (Bourdieu 1975).

   In this paper, we use a difference-in-differences setup to test “Planck’s Principle” in the
context of academic biomedical research, an enormous domain which has been the province
of normal scientific change ever since the “central dogma” of molecular biology (Crick 1970)
emerged as a unifying description of the information flow in biological systems. Specifically,
we examine how the premature death of 452 eminent scientists alter the vitality (measured
by publication rates and funding flows) of subfields in which they actively published in
the years immediately preceding their passing, compared to matched control subfields. In
contrast with prior work that focused on collaborators (Azoulay et al. 2010; Oettl 2012;
Jaravel et al. 2018; Mohnen 2018), our work leverages new tools to define scientific subfields
which allows us to expand our focus to the response by scientists who may have similar
intellectual interests with the deceased stars without ever collaborating with them.

   To our surprise, it is not competitors from within a subfield that assume the mantle of
leadership, but rather entrants from other fields that step in to fill the void created by a
star’s absence. Importantly, this surge in contributions from outsiders draws upon a different
scientific corpus and is disproportionately likely to be highly cited. Thus, consistent with the
contention by Planck, the loss of a luminary provides an opportunity for fields to evolve in
novel directions that advance the scientific frontier. The rest of the manuscript is dedicated
to elucidating the mechanisms responsible for this phenomenon.

   It does not appear to be the case that stars use their influence over financial or editorial
resources to block entry into their fields, but rather that the very prospect of challenging
a luminary in the field serves as a deterrent for entry by outsiders. Indeed, most of the
entry we see occurs in those fields that lost a star who was especially accomplished. Even
in those fields that have lost a particularly bright star, entry can still be regulated by key
collaborators left behind. We find suggestive evidence that this is true in fields that have
coalesced around a narrow set of techniques or ideas or where collaboration networks are
particularly tight-knit. We also find that entry is more anemic when key collaborators of



                                               2
the star are in positions that allow them to limit access to funding or publication outlets to
those outside the club that once nucleated around the star.

       To be clear, we are not arguing that stars are a net negative for scientific progress.
Indeed, given the outsized accomplishments of the eminent scientists in our sample, this
seems quite unlikely. Rather, our results suggest that, once in control of the commanding
heights of their fields, star scientists tend to hold on to their exalted position—and to the
power that comes with it—a bit too long. Moreover, the entrants who boost activity into the
subfields formerly occupied by the deceased star are disproportionately likely to be future
stars, providing evidence that the outsiders of today can often turn into the stars of tomorrow.
This “circle of scientific life” underscores the importance of caution when drawing welfare
implications about the existence of stars writ large.

       To our knowledge, this manuscript is the first to examine the dynamics of scientific
evolution using the standard empirical tools of applied microeconomics.2 We conceptualize
the death of eminent scientists as shocks to the structure of the intellectual neighborhoods in
which they worked several years prior to their death, and implement a procedure to delineate
the boundaries of these neighborhoods in a way that is scalable, transparent, and does not
rely on ad hoc human judgment. The construction of our dataset relies heavily on the PubMed
Related Citations Algorithm [PMRA], which groups scientific articles into subfields based
on their intellectual content using abstract words, title words, and very detailed keywords
drawn from a controlled vocabulary thesaurus curated by the National Library of Medicine.
As such, we are able to delineate circumscribed areas of scientific inquiry whose boundaries
are not defined by shared training, collaboration, or citation relationships.

       In addition to providing evidence regarding a central question for scholars studying the
scientific process, our paper is among the very few economic studies that attend to the ways
in which scientists position themselves in intellectual space (cf. Borjas and Doran [2015a,
2015b] and Myers [2018] for other notable examples). As such, our work can be understood
as integrating the traditional concerns of economists—understanding how incentives and
   2
     Considerable work outside of economics has examined the evolution of scientific fields through network
and community detection techniques (e.g., Rosvall & Bergstrom 2008; Börner, Chen, and Boyack 2003; cf.
Fortunato and Hric (2016) for a review of this fast evolving research area). These approaches rely on collab-
oration or citation links to define the vertices of the knowledge network used to partition a scientific space
into subfields. While social scientists have utilized these techniques to explain a wide range of phenomena
(e.g., Foster, Rzhetsky, and Evans 2015), these approaches are less well-suited to our setting where citation
and collaboration are among the primary outcomes of interest.



                                                      3
institutions influence the rate of knowledge production or diffusion—with those of cognate
disciplines such as sociology and philosophy, who have traditionally taken the direction of
scientific change as the central problem to be explained.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we examine the institutional
context and lay out our broad empirical strategy. In section 3, we then turn to data, methods
and descriptive statistics. We report the results in section 4. Section 5 concludes by outlining
the implications of our findings for future work.


2         Institutional Context and Empirical Design
        Our empirical analyses are centered on the academic life sciences. The merits of this
focus are several fold. First, the field has been an important source of scientific discovery
over the past half century. Many modern medical therapies can trace their origins to research
conducted in academic laboratories (Sampat and Lichtenberg 2011; Azoulay, Li, and Sampat
2017). These discoveries, in turn, have generated enormous health and welfare gains for
economies around the world.

        Second, the life science research workforce is exceedingly large and specialized. The Fac-
ulty Roster of the Association of American Medical Colleges lists more than 200,000 faculty
members employed in U.S. medical schools and academic medical centers in 2015.3 More-
over, scientific discoveries over the past half-century have greatly expanded the knowledge
frontier, necessitating increasing specialization by researchers and a greater role for collab-
oration (Jones 2009). If knowledge and techniques remain at least partially tacit long after
their initial discovery, tightly-knit research teams may be able to effectively control entry into
intellectual domains. The size and maturity of this sector, including its extensive variety of
narrowly-defined subfields, makes it an ideal candidate for an inquiry into the determinants
of the direction of scientific effort in general, and how it is influenced by elite scientists in
particular.

        Third, the academic research setting also offers the practical benefits of an extensive
paper trail of research inputs, outputs, and collaboration histories. On the input side,
reliance of researchers on one agency for the majority of their funding raises the possibility
    3
   This figure excludes life science academics employed in graduate schools of arts and science or other non-
medical school settings such as MIT, Rockefeller University, The Salk Institute, UC Berkeley, the intramural
campuses of NIH, etc.


                                                     4
that financial gatekeeping by elite scientists could be used to regulate entry into scientific
fields. Data on NIH funding at the individual level, as well as membership in “study sections”
(the peer-review panels that evaluate the scientific merits of grant applications) will allow us
to examine such concerns directly. Most importantly for our study, the principal output of
researchers—publications—are all indexed by a controlled vocabulary of keywords managed
by the National Library of Medicine. This provides the raw material that helps delineate
scientific subfields without appealing to citation linkages or collaborative relationships (the
specifics of this process are described in detail in Section 3.2 and Appendix C).

    These many virtues, however, may come at the expense of generalizability. While the life
sciences span a wide range of research styles—from small-team data-driven epidemiology,
to medium-size laboratories under the helm of a single principal investigator, to large-scale
multi-institution clinical trials—most biomedical researchers cluster topically and socially in
small, quasi-independent subfields. This broad domain seldom features exceedingly small
research teams (as in pure mathematics) or “big science” efforts where capital needs are so
extensive and specialized as to fully consolidate the field into a single or a handful of large
authorship teams (as in high-energy particle physics, e.g., Aad et al. 2015). As such, one
should refrain from applying our findings to other fields of science where the structure of
collaborative efforts and the degree of intellectual clustering are likely to generate different
patterns of succession, compared to those observed in the life sciences.

    Accounts by practicing scientists indicate that collaboration plays a large role in both the
creation and diffusion of new ideas (Reese 2004), and historians of science have long debated
the role of controversies and competition in shaping the direction of scientific progress and
the process through which new subfields within the same broad scientific paradigm are born
and grow over time (Hull 1988; Morange 1998; Shwed and Bearman 2010). Our study
presents a unique opportunity to test some of their insights in a way that is more systematic
and can yield generalizable insights on the dynamics of field evolution.


3     Empirical Design, Data, and Descriptive Statistics
    Below, we provide a detailed description of the process through which the matched scien-
tist/subfield dataset used in the econometric analysis was assembled. We begin by describing
the criteria used to select our sample of superstar academics, with a particular focus on “ex-
tinction events”; the set of subfields in which these scientists were active prior to their death


                                               5
and the procedure followed to delineate their boundaries. Finally, we discuss the matching
procedure implemented to identify control subfields associated with eminent scientists who
did not pass away but are otherwise similar to our treatment group.


3.1    Superstar sample

   Our basic approach is to rely on the death of “superstar” scientists as a lever to estimate
the extent to which the production of knowledge in the fields in which they were active
changes after their passing. The study’s focus on the scientific elite can be justified both on
substantive and pragmatic grounds. The distribution of publications, funding, and citations
at the individual level is extremely skewed (Lotka 1926; de Solla Price 1963) and only a tiny
minority of scientists contribute, through their published research, to the advancement of
science (Cole and Cole 1972). Stars also leave behind a corpus of work and colleagues with a
stake in the preservation of their legacy, making it possible to trace back their careers, from
humble beginnings to wide recognition and acclaim.

   The elite academic life scientist sample includes 12,935 individuals, which corresponds
to roughly 5% of the entire relevant labor market. In our framework, a scientist is deemed
elite if they satisfy at least one of the following criteria for cumulative scientific achievement:
(1) highly funded scientists; (2) highly cited scientists; (3) top patenters; and (4) members
of the National Academy of Sciences or of (5) the National Academy of Medicine. Since
these criteria are based on extraordinary achievement over an entire scientific career, we
augment this sample using additional criteria to capture individuals who show great promise
at the early and middle stages of their scientific careers (so-called “shooting stars”). These
include: (6) NIH MERIT awardees; (7) Howard Hughes Medical Investigators; and (8) early
career prize winners. Appendix A provides additional details regarding these metrics of
“superstardom” and explores the sensitivity of our core set of results to the type of scientists
(“cumulative stars” vs. “shooting stars”) included in the sample.

   For each scientist, we reconstruct their career from the time they obtained their first
position as independent investigators (typically after a postdoctoral fellowship) until 2006.
Our dataset includes employment history, degree held, date of degree, gender, and depart-




                                                6
ment affiliations as well as complete list of publications, patents and NIH funding obtained
in each year by each scientist.4

       The 452 scientists who pass away prematurely, and who are the particular focus of this
paper, constitute a subset of this larger pool of 12,935. To be included in our sample, their
deaths must intervene between 1975 and 2003 (this allows us to observe at least three years’
worth of scientific output for every subfield after the death of a superstar scientist). Although
we do not impose any age cutoff, the median and mean age at death is 61 with 85% of these
scientists having passed away before the age of 70 (we explore the sensitivity of our results
to the age at death in Appendix E). We also require evidence, in the form of published
articles and/or NIH grants, that these scholars were still in a scientifically active phase of
their career in the period just preceding their death (this is the narrow sense in which we
deem their deaths to have occurred prematurely).

       Within this sample, 229 (51%) of these scientists pass away after a protracted illness,
whereas 185 (41%) die suddenly and unexpectedly. We were unable to ascertain the partic-
ular circumstances of 37 (8.20%) death events.5 Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for
the deceased superstar sample. The median star received her degree in 1957 and died at the
age of 61. 40% of the stars hold an MD degree (as opposed to a PhD or MD/PhD), and
90% of them are male. On the output side, the stars each received an average of roughly
16.6 million dollars in NIH grants, and published 138 papers that garnered 8,341 citations
over the course of their careers (as of 2015).


3.2       Delineating Research Fields

       The source of the publication data is PubMed, an online resource from the National
Library of Medicine that provides fast, free, and reliable access to the biomedical research
literature. PubMed indexes more than 40,000 journals within the life sciences.

       To delineate the boundaries of the research fields in which each deceased star was ac-
tive, we develop an approach based on topic similarity between each article where the star
   4
     Appendix B details the steps taken to ensure that the list of publications is complete and accurate, even
in the case of stars with frequent last names. Though we apply the term of “star” or “superstar” to the
entire group, there is substantial heterogeneity in intellectual stature within the sample (see Table 1).
   5
     Table A3 in Appendix A provides the full list of deceased superstars, together with their year of birth
and death, cause of death, institutional affiliation at the time of their passing, and a short description of
their research expertise.



                                                      7
appeared as a last author in a window of five years prior to her death, and the rest of the
scientific literature.6 Specifically, we use the PubMed Related Citations Algorithm (Lin and
Wilbur 2007) which relies heavily on Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), but not in any way
on citation or collaboration linkages.

       MeSH terms constitute a controlled vocabulary maintained by the National Library of
Medicine that provides a very fine-grained partition of the intellectual space spanned by the
biomedical research literature. Importantly for our purposes, MeSH keywords are assigned
to each publication by professional indexers who focus solely on their scientific content. That
said, the PubMed Related Citations Algorithm (hereafter PMRA) also uses title and abstract
words as inputs, which are selected by the authors, and may reflect their aspirations. While
this raises the possibility that our subfield definitions are not impervious to social influences,
it does offer one advantage, namely that our subfield boundaries can quickly reflect the
emergence of new terms whose inclusion in the official MeSH thesaurus will occur with some
lag.7 Regardless, as will become clear in the next section, our difference-in-differences design
alleviates the concern that idiosyncratic features of PMRA might affect our conclusions,
since these would influence treatment and control subfields in a symmetric fashion.

       We then use the “Related Articles” function in PubMed to harvest journal articles that
are intellectually proximate to the star scientists’ own papers in the last five years of her life.8
Appendix C describes the algorithm in more detail and performs extensive robustness checks.
In particular, we verify that the cutoff rules used by PMRA to generate a set of intellectual
neighbors for a given source article do not induce treated subfields to exhibit idiosyncratic
truncation patterns—from above or from below—compared to control subfields. Using a
tunable version of PMRA, we also assess the robustness of our core results to manipulations
   6
      A robust social norm in the life sciences systematically assigns last authorship to the principal investi-
gator, first authorship to the junior author who was responsible for the conduct of the investigation, and
apportions the remaining credit to authors in the middle of the authorship list, generally as a decreasing
function of the distance from the extremities (Zuckerman 1968; Nagaoka and Owan 2014). Only in the case
of last authorship can we unambiguously associate the star with a subfield.
    7
      Importantly, defining subfields as isomorphic to the set of articles related (in a PMRA-sense) to a source
article does not imply a fixed number of articles per subfield. On the contrary, PMRA-generated subfields
can be of arbitrary large size. In Appendix C, we document the variation in subfield size and explore the
sensitivity of our results to alternate subfield definitions, including those that exclude potentially endogenous
intellectual linkages.
    8
      To facilitate the harvesting of PubMed-related records on a large scale, we have developed an open-source
software tool that queries PubMed and PMRA and stores the retrieved data in a MySQL database. The
software is available for download at http://www.stellman-greene.com/FindRelated/. Prior research
leveraging the intellectual linkages between articles generated by PMRA include Azoulay et al. (2015),
Azoulay et al. (forthcoming), and Myers (2018).


                                                       8
of these cutoff rules. Reassuringly, our results are qualitatively similar regardless of the rule
employed.

   To fix ideas, consider “The transcriptional program of sporulation in budding yeast”
[PubMed ID 9784122], an article published in the journal Science in 1998 originating from the
laboratory of Ira Herskowitz, an eminent UCSF biologist who died in 2003 from pancreatic
cancer. As can be seen in Appendix Figure C4, PMRA returns 72 original related journal
articles for this source publication. Some of these intellectual neighbors will have appeared
before the source to which they are related, whereas others will have only been published after
the source. Some will represent the work of collaborators, past or present, of Herskowitz’s,
whereas others will represent the work of scientists in her field she may never have come in
contact with during her life, much less collaborated with. The salient point is that nothing
in the process through which these related articles are identified biases us towards (or away
from) articles by collaborators, frequent citers of Herskowitz’s work, or co-located researchers.

   Consider now the second most-related article to Herskowitz’s Science paper listed in Fig-
ure C4, “Phosphorylation and maximal activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae meiosis-specific
transcription factor Ndt80 is dependent on Ime2.” Figure C5 in Appendix C displays the
MeSH terms that tag this article along with its source. As a byproduct, PMRA also pro-
vides a cardinal dyadic measure of intellectual proximity between each related article and
its associated source article. In this particular instance, the relatedness score of “Phospho-
rylation...” is 94%, whereas the relatedness score for the most distant related article in
Figure C4, “Catalytic roles of yeast...” is only 62%.

   In the five years prior to his death (1998-2002), Herskowitz was the last author on 12 pub-
lications, the publications most closely associated with his position as head of a laboratory.
For each of these source publications, we treat the set of publications returned by PMRA
as constituting a distinct subfield, and we create a subfield panel dataset by counting the
number of related articles in each of these subfields in each year between 1975 and 2006. An
important implication of this data construction procedure is that the subfields we delineate
are quite limited in scope. One window into the degree of intellectual breadth for subfields
is to gauge the overlap between the articles that constitute any pair of subfields associated
with the same star. In the sample, the 452 deceased stars account for 3,076 subfields, and
21,661 pairwise combination of subfields (we are only considering pairs of subfields associ-
ated with the same individual star). Appendix Figure C6 displays the histogram for the



                                               9
distribution of overlap, which is extremely skewed. A full half of these pairs exhibit exactly
zero overlap, whereas the mean of the distribution is 0.06. To find pairs of subfields that
display substantial amounts of overlap (for example, half of the articles in subfield 1 also
belong in subfield 2), one must reach far into the right tail of the distribution, specifically,
above the 98th percentile.

    As such, the subfields we delineate are relatively self-contained. Performing the analysis
at the level of the subfield—rather than lumping together all the subfields of an individual
star—will provide us with an opportunity to exploit variation in the extent of participation
of the star within each of her subfields. We will also check the validity of the main results
when rolling the data up from the subfield level to the star level in Appendix F. Finally, since
even modest amounts of overlap entail that the observations corresponding to the subfields
of individual stars will not be independent in a statistical sense, we will cluster standard
errors at the level of the star scientist.9


3.3      Identification Strategy

    Given our interests in the effect of superstar death on entry into scientific subfields, our
empirical strategy is focused on changes in published research output after the superstar
passes away, relative to when she was still alive. To ensure that we are estimating the effect
of interest and not some other influence that is correlated with the passage of time, our
specifications include age and period effects, as is the norm in studies of scientific productivity
(Levin and Stephan 1991). These temporal controls are tantamount to using subfields that
lost a superstar in earlier or later periods as an implicit control group when estimating entry
into subfields that currently experienced the death of a superstar. If the death of a superstar
only represented a one-time shift in the level of entry into the relevant subfields, this would
not be problematic. But if these unfortunate events affect trends—and not simply levels—
of scientific activity, this approach may not suffice to filter out the effect of time-varying
omitted variables, even when flexible age and calendar time controls are included in the
econometric specification. One tangible concern about time-varying effects relates to the life
cycle of subfields, where productive potential may initially increase over time before peaking
and then slowly declining.
    9
      The compactness of these subfields likely reflect the technology of research within the life sciences, a simi-
lar exercise performed in a different domain of science, particularly those characterized by large collaborative
projects, might well result in subfields with substantially more overlap.




                                                        10
   To mitigate this threat to identification, our preferred empirical strategy relies on the
selection of a matched scientist/subfield for each treated scientist/subfield. These control
observations are culled from the universe of subfields in which superstars who do not die are
active (see Section 3.1 and Appendix D). Combining the treated and control samples enables
us to estimate the effect of superstar death in a difference-in-differences framework. Appendix
Figure D1 illustrates the procedure used to identify control subfields in the particular case
of the Herskowitz publication highlighted above.

   We begin by looking at all the articles that appeared in the same journal and in the same
year as the treated source articles. From this set of articles, we keep only those that have
one of the still-living superstars in the last authorship position. Then, using a “coarsened
exact matching” procedure detailed in Appendix D, the control source articles are selected
such that (1) the number of authors in the treated and control are approximately similar;
(2) the age of the treated and control superstars differ by no more than five years; and
(3) the number of citations received by the treated and source article are similar. For the
Herskowitz/“sporulation in budding yeast” pair, we can select 10 control articles in this
way. All of these controls were also published in Science in 1998, and have between five and
seven authors. One of these controls is “Hepatitis C Viral Dynamics in Vivo...,” whose last
author is Alan Perelson, a biophysicist at Los Alamos National Lab. Perelson and Herskowitz
obtained their PhD only a year apart. The two papers had received 514 and 344 citations
respectively by the end 2003. Though this is a large difference, this places both well above
the 99th percentile of the citation distribution for 5-year old articles published in 1998.

   One potential concern with the addition of this “explicit” control group is that control
subfields could be affected by the treatment of interest. What if, for instance, a control
source article happens to be related (in a PMRA sense) with the treated source? Because the
subfields identified by PMRA are narrow, this turns out to be very infrequent. Nonetheless,
we remove all such instances from the data. We then find all the intellectual neighbors for
these control source articles using PMRA; a control subfield is defined by the set of related
articles returned by PMRA, in a manner that is exactly symmetric to the procedure used
to delineate treated subfields. When these related articles are parsed below to distinguish
between those published by collaborators and non-collaborators of the star, or between
those by intellectual outsiders and insiders, covariates for treated and control observations
will always be defined with perfect symmetry.




                                              11
3.4       Descriptive Statistics

       The procedure described above yields a total of 34,218 distinct subfields; 3,076 subfields
correspond to one of the 452 dead scientists, whereas 31,142 subfields correspond to one of
5,809 still-living scientists. Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for control and treated
subfields in the baseline year, i.e., the year of death for the deceased scientist.10


Covariate balance. In the list of variables displayed in Table 2, a number of covariates are
balanced between treated and control subfields solely by virtue of the coarsened exact match-
ing procedure—for instance, (star) investigator year of degree, the source article number of
authors, or the source article number of citations at baseline. However, there is nothing
mechanical to explain the balance between treated and control subsamples with respect to
the stock of our main outcome variable: the number of articles in the star’s field. Figure 1
compares the distributions of the cumulative number of articles published in our sample of
subfields up to the year of death, broken down by treatment status. Overall, one can observe
a great deal of overlap between the two histograms; the means and medians are virtually
identical. Of course, balance in the levels of the outcome variable is not technically required
for the validity of the empirical exercise.11 Yet, given the ad hoc nature of the procedure
used to identify control subfields, this degree of balance is reassuring.

       Another happy byproduct of our matching procedure is that treated and control scientists
also appear quite similar in the extent of their eminence at the time of (counterfactual) death,
whether such eminence is measured through NIH funding, the number of articles published,
or the number of citations these articles received.


Collaborators vs.         non-collaborators. One critical aspect of the empirical analysis
is to distinguish between collaborators and non-collaborators of the star when measuring
publishing activity in a subfield. It is therefore crucial to describe how this distinction can
be made in our data. Information about the superstars’ colleagues stems from the Faculty
Roster of the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), to which we secured
licensed access for the years 1975 through 2006, and which we augmented using NIH grantee
information (cf. Azoulay et al. [2010] for more details).
  10
     We can assign a counterfactual year of death for each control subfield, since each control subfield is
associated with a particular treated subfield through the matching procedure described above.
  11
     What is required is that the trends in publication activity be comparable between treated and control
subfields up until the death of the treated scientist. We verify that this is the case below.


                                                    12
       An important implication of our reliance on these sources of data is that we can only iden-
tify authors who are faculty members in U.S. medical schools, or recipients of NIH funding.
We cannot systematically identify scientists working for industrial firms, or scientists em-
ployed in foreign academic institutions.12 The great benefit of using AAMC data, however,
is that they ensure we have at our disposal both demographic and employment information
for every individual in the relevant labor market: their (career) age, type of degree awarded,
place of employment, gender, and research output, whether measured by publications or
NIH grants.

       To identify authors, we match the authorship roster of each related article in one of our
subfields with the AAMC roster.13 We tag as a collaborator any author who appeared as a
co-author of the star associated with the subfield on any publication prior to the death. Each
related article is therefore assigned to one of two mutually-exclusive bins: the “collaborator”
bin comprises the set of publications with at least one identified author who coauthored
with the star prior to the year of death (or counterfactual death); the “non-collaborator”
bin comprises the set of publications with no identified author who coauthored with the star
prior to the year of death (or counterfactual death).14 As can be seen in Table 2, roughly
11% of the publication activity at baseline can be accounted for by collaborators. Moreover,
this proportion is very similar for control and treated subfields.15

A first look at subfield activity. Figure E1 in Appendix E confirms that the treated and
control subfields are on similar trajectories in publication activity up to the time of superstar
death (though they diverge after the death event). This provides suggestive evidence for the
validity of our research design, and is notable since the coarsened exact matching procedure
that generated the sample of control subfields did not make any use of these outcomes.
Moreover, the absence of differential trends can be observed for overall activity, for activity
restricted to collaborators of the star, and for the publishing activity of non-collaborators.
  12
      We can identify trainees who later go on to secure a faculty position, but not those who do not stay in
academia.
   13
      We limit ourselves to authors with relatively infrequent names. Though this may create some measure-
ment error, there is no reason to suspect that the wrongful attribution of articles to authors will impact
treated and control subfields in a differential way.
   14
      We identify the publications in the subfield for which the superstar is an author and eliminate them
from these calculations. As a result, any decrease in activity within the subfield cannot be ascribed to the
mechanical effect of its star passing away.
   15
      We define collaboration status by looking at the authorship roster for the entire corpus of work published
by the star before or in the year of death, and not only with respect to the articles of the star that belong
to the focal subfield.




                                                      13
    More boldly, we can use these averages in the raw data to examine changes in outcomes
after the death. For both treated and control subfields, the curves exhibit a pronounced
inverted U-shaped pattern, with activity first increasing until it reaches a peak roughly two
years before the death of the star (or counterfactual death for the control subfields and their
associated stars). Activity then decreases steadily, but the slope of the decrease appears
more pronounced for control subfields, relative to treated subfields (Panel A). This pattern
is flipped when examining activity due to collaborators (Panel B): the relative decline is much
more pronounced for treated subfields, which is consistent with the results in Azoulay et al.
(2010). Panel C, which focuses on subfield activity limited to non-collaborators, provides
the first non-parametric evidence that the downward-sloping part of the activity curve is less
steep for treated subfields.

    Figure E1 provides a transparent illustration of subfield publication activity over time,
which proceeds directly from averaging the raw data, but the evidence it provides should be
handled with an abundance of caution. First, it conflates calendar time and experimental
time, when in actuality the death events in the data occur at varying frequencies between
the years 1975 and 2003. Second, covariates like field age are not perfectly balanced across
the treated and control groups, since the number of control subfields is not identical across
treated subfields. Finally, it abstracts away from robust inference, and particularly from
clustering: one would expect the subfield outcomes associated with an identical star to be
correlated. Our econometric framework, described below, addresses these limitations and as
a result provides a more solid foundation for the estimation of the causal effect of star death
on the dynamics of subfield activity.


4     Results
    The exposition of the econometric results proceeds in stages. After a review of method-
ological issues, we provide results that pertain to the main effect of superstar death on
subfield growth, measured by publication rates and funding flows. Next, we attempt to
elucidate the mechanism (or set of mechanisms) at work to explain our most robust finding,
that of relative subfield growth in the wake of a star’s passing, a growth entirely accounted
for by contributions from non-collaborators. We do so by examining the characteristics of
the articles published by non-collaborators, before turning to the characteristics of their au-
thors. We also explore heterogeneity in the treatment effect through the interaction of the
post-death indicator variable with various attributes of the stars and the subfields.


                                              14
4.1       Econometric Considerations

       Our estimating equation relates publication or funding activity in subfield i in year t to
the treatment effect of losing a superstar:
                         h
      E [yit |Xit ] = exp β0 + β1 AF T ER DEAT Hit
                                                                                                        i     (1)
                                + β2 AF T ER DEAT Hit × T REATi + f (AGEit ) + δt + γi
where y is a measure of subfield activity, AF T ER DEAT H denotes an indicator variable
that switches to one in the year after the superstar associated with i passes away, T REAT
is an indicator variable for treated subfields, f (AGEit ) corresponds to a flexible function
of the field’s age, the δt ’s stand for a full set of calendar year indicator variables, and the
γi ’s correspond to subfield fixed effects, consistent with our approach to analyze changes in
activity within subfield i following the passing of a superstar.16

       The subfield fixed effects control for many time-invariant characteristics that could influ-
ence research activity, such as the need for capital equipment or the extent of disease burden
(e.g., for clinical fields). A pregnant metaphor for the growth of scientific knowledge has
been that of biological evolution (Hull 1988; Chavalarias and Cointet 2013): a field is born
when new concepts are introduced, resulting in an accelerating production of “offspring”
(articles), until the underlying scientific community loses its thematic coherence, ushering in
an era of decline (or alternatively, splitting or merging events). To flexibly account for such
life cycle effects, we include subfield age indicator variables (where subfield age is computed
as the number of years since the year of publication for the source article). The calendar year
effects filter out the effects of the general expansion of the scientific enterprise as measured
by the number of journals and articles published each year.17

       We follow Jaravel et al. (2018) in including in our specification an indicator for the timing
of death that is common to treated and control subfields (whose effect will be identified by the
coefficient β1 ) in addition to the effect of interest, an interaction between AF T ER DEAT H
and T REAT (whose effect will be identified by the coefficient β2 ). The effects of these two
variables are separately identified because (i) death events are staggered across our obser-
vation period and (ii) control subfields inherit a counterfactual date of death because they
  16
      To avoid confusion, we have suppressed any subscript for the superstars. This is without loss of generality,
since each subfield is uniquely associated with a single star.
   17
      It is not possible to separately identify calendar year effects from age effects in the “within subfield”
dimension of a panel in a completely flexible fashion, because one cannot observe two subfields at the same
point in time that have the same age but were born in different years (Hall et al. 2007).


                                                       15
are uniquely associated with a treated subfield through the matching procedure described
in section 3.3. The inclusion of the common term addresses the concern that age, calendar
year, and subfield fixed effects may not fully account for shifts in subfield activity around
the time of the star’s passing. If this is the case, AF T ER DEAT H will capture the cor-
responding transitory dynamics, while AF T ER DEAT H × T REAT will isolate the causal
effect of interest. Empirically, we find that in some specifications, the common term has
substantial explanatory power, though its inclusion does not radically alter the magnitude
of the treatment effect.


Estimation. The dependent variables of interest, including publication counts and NIH
grants awarded, are skewed and non-negative. For example, 31.40% of the subfield/year
observations in the data correspond to years of no publication activity; the figure climbs to
56.70% if one focuses on the count of NIH grants awarded. Following a long-standing tradi-
tion in the study of scientific and technical change, we present conditional quasi-maximum
likelihood (hereafter QML) estimates based on the conditional fixed effects Poisson model
developed by Hausman et al. (1984). Because the Poisson model is in the linear exponential
family, the coefficient estimates remain consistent as long as the mean of the dependent
variable is correctly specified (Gouriéroux et al. 1984).


Inference. QML (i.e., “robust”) standard errors are consistent even if the underlying data
generating process is not Poisson. In fact the Hausman et al. estimator can be used for any
non-negative dependent variables, whether integer or continuous (Santos Silva and Tenreyro
2006), as long as the variance/covariance matrix is computed using the outer product of the
gradient vector (and therefore does not rely on the Poisson variance assumption). Further,
QML standard errors are robust to arbitrary patterns of serial correlation (Wooldridge 1997),
and hence immune to the issues highlighted by Bertrand et al. (2004) concerning inference
in DD estimation. We cluster the standard errors around superstar scientists in the results
presented below.18
  18
     Knowledge spillovers and scientific breakthroughs, including the adoption of research tools, could en-
courage innovation across related fields. This possibility is not entirely dealt with by clustering inference
at the star level, since spatial dependence in knowledge space could occur between any pair of subfields,
whereas clustering only allows for dependence among the subfields associated with the same star. As it
turns out, the Poisson conditional fixed effects estimator also provides a consistent estimator of the variance
in the presence of time-invariant patterns of spatial auto-correlation (Bertanha and Moser 2016).




                                                      16
Dependent Variables. Our primary outcome variable is publication activity in a subfield.
However, we go beyond this raw measure by assigning the related articles that together
constitute the subfield into a variety of bins. For instance, we can decompose publication
activity in the subfield into two mutually exclusive subfields: articles with a superstar on
the authorship roster vs. articles without a superstar; etc. Articles in each bin can then be
counted and aggregated up to the subfield/year level.

   Capturing funding flows at the field level is slightly more involved. PubMed systemati-
cally records NIH grant acknowledgements using grant numbers. Unfortunately, these grant
numbers are often truncated and omit the grant cycle information that could enable us to
pin down unambiguously the particular year in which the grant was awarded. When it is
missing, we impute the award year using the following rule: for each related publication
that acknowledges NIH funding, we identify the latest year in the three-year window that
precedes the publication during which funding was awarded through either a new award or
a competitive renewal. To measure funding activity in a subfield, we create a count variable
that sums all the awards received in particular year, where these awards ultimately generate
publications in the focal subfield.


4.2    Main effect of superstar death

   Table 3 and Figure 2 present our core results. Overall, we find that publication activity
increases slightly following the death of a star scientist who was an active contributor to it,
but the magnitude of the effect is modest (about 5.2%) and imprecisely estimated (column 1).
Yet, this result conceals a striking pattern that is uncovered when we distinguish between
publications by collaborators and non-collaborators. The decline in publication activity ac-
counted for by previous collaborators of the star is large, on the order of 20.7% (column 2).
This evidence is consistent with previous findings, which showed that coauthors of super-
star scientists who die suffer a drop in output, particularly if their non-collaborative work
exhibited strong keyword overlap with the star, i.e., if they were intellectually connected in
addition to being coauthors (Azoulay et al. 2010, Table VI, column 2).

   A limitation of the previous work focusing on the fate of collaborators after the loss of
an eminent scientist always lied in the failure to distinguish between social and intellectual
channels of influence, since every treated scientist was by definition a collaborator, even if
merely a casual one. In this study, we can relax this constraint, and when we do, we find that


                                              17
relative publication activity by non-collaborators in the subfield increases by a statistically
significant 100 × (e0.082 − 1) = 8.6% (column 3).19

       We also explore the dynamics of the effects uncovered in Table 3. We do so by estimating
a specification in which the treatment effect is interacted with a set of indicator variables
corresponding to a particular year relative to the superstar’s death, and then graphing the
effects and the 95% confidence interval around them (Panels A, B, and C of Figure 2 corre-
spond to columns 1, 2, and 3 in Table 3).20

       Two features of the figure are worthy of note. First, the dynamics amplify the pre-
vious results in the sense that we see the effects increasing (in absolute value) monotoni-
cally over time—there is no indication that the effects we estimated in Table 3 are merely
transitory. Five years after a star’s death, the relative increase in publication activity by
non-collaborators is large enough in magnitude to fully offset the decline in activity by col-
laborators. Second, there is no discernible evidence of an effect in the years leading up to
the death, a finding that validates ex post our identification strategy.

       Nevertheless, the case for the exogeneity of death events with respect to the course of
knowledge growth and decline within a subfield is stronger for sudden causes of deaths than
for anticipated causes of death. Figure E2 in Appendix E provides a version of Figure 2,
Panel C (event study graphs for non-collaborators) broken down by causes of death (antici-
pated vs. sudden). While there is more variability in the estimated path of outcomes in the
years leading up to the death event in the anticipated case (Panel A) than in the sudden
case (Panel B), it is imprecisely estimated and non-monotonic. In both panels, however,
one can observe a slow but steady increase after the event in the rate of contributions by
non collaborators in treated subfields, relative to control subfields. The distinction between
sudden and anticipated events is explored further in section 4.4.

       The last three columns of Table 3 focus on funding flows from the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) rather than publication flows. More precisely, the outcome variable in
columns 4, 5, and 6 is the number of distinct NIH awards that acknowledge a publication
in the subfield in the three-year window before the year of publication for the related article
  19
     The number of observations varies ever so slightly across columns because the conditional fixed effects
specification drops observations corresponding to subfields for which there is no variation in activity over
the entire observation period. This is true as well for the results reported in Tables 4 through 8.
  20
     In these specifications, the AF T ER DEAT H term which is common to treated and control subfields is
also interacted with a complete series of lags and leads relative to the year of death or counterfactual death.



                                                      18
(summing the financial total of grant amounts, as opposed to the number of grants, yields
similar results). The patterns are very similar to those obtained in the case of publication
activity, both in terms of magnitudes and in terms of statistical significance.


4.3       Subfield growth patterns

       In the remainder of the manuscript, we seek to characterize the kind of contribution, and
the type of investigators that give rise to the novel empirical regularity we uncovered: that
of relative growth for subfields following the death of their superstar anchor, a phenomenon
entirely accounted for by research activity undertaken by scientists who never collaborated
with the star while alive. As a consequence, all the results below pertain to contributions
by non-collaborators; any article with even one author who collaborated with the star is
excluded from the count of articles that constitute the dependent variable.


The impact and direction of new research. What characterizes the additional contri-
butions that together lead to increased activity in a subfield after a star has passed on? Are
these in fact important contributions to the subfield? Do they continue to focus on main-
stream topics within the subfield, or should they be understood as taking the intellectual
domain in a novel direction? Tables 4 and 5 explore these issues.

       In Table 4, we parse every related article in the subfields to assign them into one of
six mutually exclusive bins, based on their vintage-specific long-run citation impact: articles
that fall in the bottom quartile of the citation distribution; in the second quartile; in the third
quartile; articles that fall above the 75th percentile, but below the 95th percentile; articles
that fall above the 95th percentile, but below the 99th percentile; articles that fall above the
99th percentile of the citation distribution.21 Each column in Table 4 (with the exception
of the first which simply replicates the effect for all papers, regardless of impact, that was
previously displayed in Table 3, column 3) reports the corresponding estimates. A startling
result is that the magnitude of the treatment effect increases sharply and monotonically as
  21
    A vintage is comprised of all the articles published in a given year. When we are referring to the vintage-
specific, article-level distribution of citations, the relevant universe to compute quantiles is not limited to
the articles that constitute the subfields in our data. Rather, the relevant universe includes the entire set of
17,312,059 articles that can be cross-linked between PubMed and the Web of Science. As a result, there is
no reason to suspect that individual stars, or even our entire set of stars, could ever alter the shape of these
distributions. For example, the article by Sopko et al. highlighted on Figure C5 (in Appendix C) received
40 citations from other articles in PubMed by 2015. This puts this article above the 79th percentile of the
citation distribution for articles published in 2002.



                                                      19
we focus on the rate of contributions with higher impact. In contrast, the number of lower-
impact articles contributed by non-collaborators contracts slightly, though the effect is not
precisely estimated.22

       Table 5 parses the related articles in each subfield to ascertain whether contributions by
non-collaborators constitute a genuine change in intellectual direction. Panel A distinguishes
between contributions that are proximate in intellectual space to the source article from those
that are more distant (though still part of the subfield as construed by PMRA). Because
we have at our disposal both a cardinal and an ordinal measure of intellectual proximity,
we present two sets of estimates. In both cases, the magnitude of the treatment effect
pertaining to PMRA-proximate publication activity is larger, and more precisely estimated
than the magnitude corresponding to PMRA-distant publication activity (relative to the
same patterns for the control group of subfields). We can certainly rule out the conjecture
that non-collaborators enter the field from the periphery. Rather, their contributions appear
to tackle mainstream topics within the subfield.

       Panel B sheds light on the intellectual direction of the field, by examining the cited
references contained in each related article. The first two columns separate related articles
in two groups: publications that cite at least some work which belongs to the subfield
identified by PMRA for the corresponding source and publications that cite exclusively out
of the PMRA subfield. Only articles in the second group appear to experience growth in the
post-death era. The next two columns proceed similarly, except that the list of references is
now parsed to highlight the presence of articles authored by the star (Column 3), as opposed
to all other authors (Column 4). We find that subfield growth can be mostly accounted for
by articles from non-collaborators who do not build on the work of the star.

       Whereas Panel B highlighted the extent to which contributors were bringing new sources
of inspiration into the subfield, Panel C focuses on the extent to which the treated subfields
move closer to the scientific frontier in the wake of the superstar’s passing. The first two
columns do so by distinguishing between contributions that draw on recent versus more
  22
     Table E3 and Figure E3 in Appendix E break down these results further by examining separately the
growth of subfields by cause of death (anticipated vs. sudden). As mentioned earlier, the case for exogeneity
is stronger for sudden death, since when the death is anticipated, it would be theoretically possible for the star
to engage in “intellectual estate planning,” whereby particular scientists (presumably close collaborators)
are anointed as representing the next generation of leaders in the subfield. Our core results continue to
hold when analyzed separately by cause of death. However, we gain statistical power from pooling these
observations, and some empirical patterns would be estimated less precisely if we chose to focus solely on
observations corresponding to subfields for which the star died suddenly and unexpectedly.


                                                       20
dated references. This exercise is repeated in Columns 3 and 4, with a focus on the vintage
of the MeSH term combinations for each article in the subfield.23 Both sets of results indicate
that these new contributions are more likely to build on science of a more recent vintage.

       Taken together, the results presented in Table 5 paint a nuanced picture of directional
change in the wake of superstar passing. The new contributions do not represent a radical
departure from the subfield’s traditional concerns (Panel A). At the same time, the citation
and MeSH evidence (Panels B and C) make it clear that these additional contributions are
more likely to draw on new-to-the-subfield as well as new-to-the-world ideas. In short, they
both rejuvenate the subfield, and alter its angular velocity by shifting its intellectual center
of gravity away from its pre-death position.

       It is important to note, however, that the findings above do not imply that the published
results of entrants necessarily contradict or overturn the prevailing scientific understanding
and assumptions within a subfield. We provide indirect evidence regarding these contribu-
tions’ disruptive impact by leveraging a measure recently proposed by Funk and Owen-Smith
(2017). Their index captures the degree to which an idea consolidates or destabilizes the
status quo, by measuring whether the future ideas that build on the focal idea also rely on
its acknowledged predecessors. The results in Table E4 of Appendix E suggest that these
contributions do not radically disrupt the subfield. Rather, they appear to reflect the impact
of a myriad “small r,” permanent revolutions whereby new ideas come to the fore without
necessarily eclipsing prior approaches.


Outsiders vs. competitors. The next step of the analysis is to investigate the type of
scientists who publish the articles that account for subfield growth in the wake of a star’s
death. We examine the proximity in intellectual space between non-collaborators in the
subfield and the deceased superstar. One possibility is that non-collaborators are competitors
of the star, with much of their publication activity falling into the subfield when the star
was alive. Another possibility is that they are recent entrants into the subfield—intellectual
outsiders. To distinguish these different types of authors empirically, we create a metric of
intellectual proximity for each related author we can match to the AAMC Faculty Roster,
by computing the fraction of their publications that belongs to the star’s subfields up to
  23
    A two-way MeSH term combination is born in the year where an article is annotated by the keyword
pair for the first time.




                                                21
the publication year for each related article.24 The distribution of this field overlap measure
is displayed on Panel A of Figure 3. The distribution is skewed, with a pronounced mass
point at the origin: approximately 50% of the related articles turn out to have authors with
exactly zero intellectual overlap with the star’s subfield, and another 1.24% are authored
by new scientists for whom this publication within the subfield is also their first publication
overall.

   We now use this metric to gauge the extent to which the post-death publication activity
by non-collaborators (relative to the control group) can be attributed to related authors
whose outsider status falls into one of twelve separate bins. This includes one bin for new
scientists, one bin for the bottom half of the overlap distribution, one bin for every five
percentiles above the median (50th to 55th percentile, 55th to 60th percentile,. . . , 95th to 99th
percentile), as well as a top percentile bin. We then compute the corresponding measures
of subfield activity by aggregating the data up to the subfield/year level. These results are
presented graphically in Panel B of Figure 3. Each dot corresponds to the magnitude of
the treatment effect in a separate regression with the outcome variable being the number of
articles in each subfield that belong to the corresponding bin.

   A striking pattern emerges. The authors driving the growth in relative publication activ-
ity following a star’s death are largely outsiders. They do not appear to have been substan-
tially active in the subfield when the star was alive. In other words, they are predominantly
new entrants into these subfields, though not necessarily novice scientists.


4.4        The Nature of Entry Barriers

   The evidence so far points to fields of deceased stars enjoying bursts of activity after
the death event. The influx of outsiders documented above suggests that stars may be
able to regulate entry into their field while alive. In this section, we attempt to uncover
the precise nature of barriers to entry into the subfields where the stars were prominent
prior to their untimely demise. Methodologically, we do so by splitting the sample of fields
across the median for a series of relevant covariates. Because there is no presumption that
death events are exogenous with respect to subfield growth and decline within the strata
  24
     Whenever we match more than one author on a related article, we assign to that article the highest
proximity score for any of the matched authors. Appendix E, Table E9 defines overlap with respect to all
the subfields associated with a given star, rather than simply the focal subfield. This does not alter our
conclusions.



                                                   22
delineated by these covariates, it should be clear that we will only be able to document
conditional correlations, and not causal effects in what follows.25

       While it is tempting to envisage conscious effort by the stars to block entry through the
explicit control of key resources, such as funding and/or editorial goodwill (Brogaard et al.
2014; Li 2017), this explanation appears inconsistent with the facts on the ground. In the
five-year window before death, only three of our stars (out of 452) were sitting on study
sections, the funding panels that evaluate the scientific merits of NIH grant applications.
Another three were journal editors in the same time window. This handful of individuals
could not possibly drive the robust effects we have uncovered.26 If barriers to entry are not
the result of explicit control by stars, what is discouraging entry?


Goliath’s shadow. One possibility is that outsiders are simply deterred by the prospect of
challenging a luminary in the field. The existence of a towering figure may skew the cost-
benefit calculations from entry by outside scholars toward delay or alternative activities.
Table 6 examines this role of implicit barriers to entry by focusing on the eminence of
the star. Eminence is measured through the stars publication count, the stars cumulative
number of citations garnered up to the year of death, and the stars cumulative amount of
NIH funding. We also have a “local” measure of eminence: the star’s importance to the
field, which is defined as the fraction of papers in the subfield that have the star as an
author. Splitting the sample at the median of these measures reveals a consistent pattern
of results. Stars that were especially accomplished appear to be an important deterrent to
entry, with their passing creating a larger void for non-collaborators to fill. Rather than
directly thwarting the efforts of potential entrants, it appears that the mere presence of
a preeminent scholar is sufficient to dissuade intellectual outsiders from engaging with the
field.

       Of course, the accomplishment of the star alone may not be the only factor influencing
entry. We next turn our attention to how the characteristics of the field and the star’s
coauthors may also modulate this relationship. Since entry is largely confined to those fields
that have lost an eminent star, the analysis that follows limits attention to those subfields
  25
      Instead of interacting the treatment effect with covariates, we prefer to estimate our benchmark spec-
ifications on subsamples corresponding to below and above the median of these covariates. For these two
approaches to yield comparable results, one would need to also saturate the specification with interaction
terms between the covariates and year/field age effects. In practice, we have found that the fixed effects
Poisson models fail to converge with this full set of interactions.
   26
      We verified that omitting these scientists from the sample hardly change the core results.


                                                    23
in which the most eminent among the stars were active, as measured by our citation metric
in Table 6.27


Subfield coherence. Entry into a field, even after it has lost its star, may be deterred
if the subfield appears unusually coherent to outsiders. A subfield is likely to be perceived
as intellectually coherent, when the researchers active in it agree on the set of questions,
approaches, and methodologies that propel the field forward. Alternatively, a field might be
perceived as socially coherent, when the researchers active in it form a tightly-knit clique,
often collaborating with each other, and perhaps also reviewing each other’s manuscripts.
To explore these purported barriers to subfield entry, we develop two alternative measures
of intellectual coherence, and one measure of social coherence.

       Our first index of intellectual coherence leverages PMRA to capture the extent to which
articles in the subfield pack themselves into a crowded scientific neighborhood. Recall that
for each article in a subfield, we have at our disposal both a cardinal and an ordinal measure
of intellectual proximity with the source article from which all other articles in the subfield
radiate. Focusing only on the set of articles published in the subfield before the year of
death, we measure intellectual coherence as the cardinal ranking (expressed as a real number
between zero and one) for the 25th most related article in the subfield.28 According to this
metric, subfields exhibit wide variation in their degree of intellectual coherence, with a mean
and median equal to 0.60 (sd = 0.13). The second index of intellectual coherence exploits
the list of references cited in each article in the subfield before the star’s death. In the spirit
of Funk and Owen-Smith (2017), for all related articles published in the five years prior to
the star’s death, we compute the fraction of references that fall within the subfield. Our
contention is that subfields that are more self-referential will tend to dissuade outsiders from
entering. Once again, we observe meaningful variation across subfields using this second
index (mean = 0.05; sd = 0.04).
  27
     More precisely, Table 7 below drops from the sample subfields associated with stars who fall below the
median of cumulative citations garnered by the year of death. Results are qualitatively similar when focusing
on the most eminent stars as defined by publications or NIH funding. Table F6 in Appendix F presents the
results corresponding to the subsample of less-eminent stars.
  28
     The choice of the twenty fifth-ranked article is arbitrary, and also convenient. After purging from each
subfield reviews, editorials, and articles appearing in journals not indexed by WoS, 95% of the subfields
contain 25 articles or more in the period that precedes the star’s death. In those rare cases where the
number of articles is less than twenty-five, we choose as our measure of coherence the cardinal measure for
the least-proximate article in the subfield.




                                                     24
       Our measure of social coherence summarizes the degree of “cliquishness” within a subfield
by computing the clustering coefficient in its coauthorship network. The clustering coefficient
is simply the proportion of closed triplets within the network, an intuitive way to measure
the propensity of scientists in the field to choose insiders as collaborators.29

       Panel A of Table 7 investigates the role of these intellectual and social barriers in modu-
lating the post-death expansion of fields. We find tentative evidence of a role for both types
of barriers, in that the magnitude of the treatment effect for coherent fields is always smaller
than the magnitude for less coherent fields, regardless of how coherence is measured. The
difference between the estimates for more or less coherent subfields does not reach statistical
significance at conventional levels. What seems notable, however, is that the magnitudes are
consistently ordered across the three measures.


Incumbent resource control. While we noted earlier that stars do not appear especially
well positioned to directly block entry through the control of key resources, it is possible
that those resources can be controlled indirectly through the influence of collaborators. If
incumbent scholars within a field serve as gatekeepers of funding and journal access, they may
be able to effectively stave off threats of entry from outsiders. The same may be implicitly
true if collaborators are the recipients of the lion’s share of funding within the field. To
assess financial gatekeeping, we use information regarding the composition of NIH funding
panels, to tabulate, for each star, the number of collaborators who were members of at least
one of these committees in the five years preceding the death of the star. We would like to
proceed in a similar fashion using the composition of editorial boards, but these data are
not easily available for the set of PubMed-indexed journals and the thirty-year time period
covered by our sample. As an alternative, we develop a proxy for editorial position based
on the number of editorials or comments written by every collaborator of the star.30 We
then sum the number of editorials written by coauthors in the five years before the death.
Together, the editorial and study section information allow us to distinguish between the
  29
      The clustering coefficient is based on triplets of nodes (authors). A triplet consists of three authors that
are connected by either two (open triplet) or three (closed triplet) undirected ties. The clustering coefficient
is the number of closed triplets over the total number of triplets (both open and closed, cf. Luce and Perry
[1949]).
   30
      We investigated the validity of this proxy as follows. In the sample of deceased superstars, every indi-
vidual with five editorials or more was an editor. In a random sample of 50 superstars with no editorials
published, only one was an editor (for a field journal). Finally, among the sixteen superstars who wrote
between one and four editorials over their career, we found two whose CV indicate they were in fact editors
for a key journal in their field. We conclude that there appears to be a meaningful correlation between the
number of editorials written and the propensity to be an editor.


                                                       25
stars whose coauthors were in a position to channel resources towards preferred individuals
or intellectual approaches from those stars whose important coauthors had no such power.

   Panel B of Table 7 presents the evidence on the role of indirect control. The results paint
a consistent, if not always statistically significant, picture. While subfield expansion is the
rule, it appears more pronounced when stars have relatively few collaborators in influential
positions, or collectively capture a smaller portion of the funding that supported research in
the subfield. Indirect control therefore appears to be a potential mechanism through which
superstars can exert influence on the evolution of their fields, even from beyond the grave.
Coauthors, either through their direct effort to keep the star’s intellectual flame alive or
simply by their sheer (financial) dominance in the field, erect barriers to entry into those
fields that prevent its rejuvenation by outsiders.

   Taken together, these results suggest that outsiders are reluctant to challenge hegemonic
leadership within a field when the star is alive. They also highlight a number of factors that
constrain entry even after she is gone. Intellectual, social, and resource barriers all impede
entry, with outsiders only entering subfields whose topology offers a less hostile landscape
for the support and acceptance of “foreign” ideas.


4.5    Welfare considerations

   What are the implications of our results for welfare? We approach this question with
a great deal of caution, since much of the evidence presented thus far pertains to changes
in the direction, rather than the rate, of scientific progress. Making welfare statements in
this context is tantamount to valuing the importance of the new directions in which related
authors take their fields (compared to the prior agenda inherited from the superstar), as
well as ascertaining the fate of fields that the new entrants departed, and the agenda they
otherwise might have pursued had the star remained alive. Such an exercise is fraught
with peril. Below we synthesize the results that already speak to these questions, and
provide a number of additional pieces of evidence. Together, this collage of results builds a
circumstantial case for the view that once securely ensconced at the helm of their field, stars
leverage their power for longer than a benevolent social planner might prefer.

   Our earlier evidence suggests that entrants bring different and more recent ideas into the
subfields they enter to create highly impactful output (Tables 4 and 5). In Appendix E we



                                              26
further show that the subfields that experience the largest post-death boost in activity are
those in which the star was presiding over an empire that was losing momentum in the years
immediately preceding the star’s death (Tables E5 and E8). These subfields are also those
in which the star’s close collaborators were less able to regulate entry (Table 7B).

       It is important to note, however, that the additional output by entrants in treated sub-
fields is largely offset by commensurate declines in output by the star’s collaborators (Ta-
ble 3). Moreover, these new contributions appear to come at the expense of the entrants’
prior agenda. In Appendix G, we examine changes in total output at the related author
level, using a difference-in-differences set-up that parallels our analyses at the subfield level.
The results in Table G1 show that non-collaborators do not increase their overall output,
measured in terms of publications and NIH grants awarded. Since we know from our main
analysis that related authors are contributing more within the subfields of dead superstars,
the absence of changes in total output imply that this additional work is displacing work
they were doing in other subfields. Their new output replaces, at least in part, articles that
these authors would have written in other intellectual domains had the star remained alive.31

       As a whole, these results imply that entrants are moving subfields in productive directions
relative to the period immediately preceding the passing of the star, but without increasing
scientific output in the aggregate.

       However, the impacts in the final years of a star’s life are not necessarily indicative of their
contributions writ large. Indeed, the lofty accomplishments which earned them superstar
status suggest that their net contribution to society is likely positive. A longer view would
also recognize that the scientific journeymen of today may well become the stars of tomorrow
with a career that slowly builds to an apex of socially valuable accomplishments, that will
someday experience a similar decline (see Figure E4 in Appendix E).

       One lens into this phenomenon is to examine the status of scientists that produce new
contributions in a subfield. In the first two columns of Table 8, we parse every article by
non-collaborators, distinguishing between those that have a star author from those for which
none of the authors are stars. We find that the effect is driven by related articles where none
  31
     We also estimate a dynamic version of these specifications and display the corresponding event study-
style graphs in Figure G1 (publication output) and Figure G2 (grant output). In general, it appears from
these figures that the total output of related authors neither expands nor contracts in the wake of a star’s
passing.




                                                    27
of the authors is particularly famous. One limitation of this dichotomy is that it fails to take
into account long-run career trajectories, since it lumps together mediocre scientists with
those that have not yet made their mark, but will do so in the future.

   We can explore this dynamic by taking advantage of the fact that roughly 20% of the
eminent life scientists in our sample have a clear date attached to their accession to star
status: the year of appointment as a Howard Hughes Medical Investigator, or the year of
election to the National Academy of Science or the National Academy of Medicine. These
events mark their recipients as among the most celebrated within the superstar sample. With
this more rarefied definition of stardom, we can now distinguish between related authors who
are “never stars,” “current stars,” and “future stars.” The next three columns of Table 8 show
that future star authors are disproportionately likely to contribute to treated subfields after
the star has passed away, consistent with the idea that the outsiders of today can sometimes
turn into the stars of tomorrow—a phenomenon we refer to as the circle of academic life.

   In light of these and our earlier results, we refrain from drawing any strong welfare
conclusions. An aggregate assessment of the value of stars would require us to integrate
accomplishments over the lifecourse of stars and everyone else who followed in their footsteps,
with a particular focus on the fate of the fields from which new entrants divest. That does
not leave us completely empty handed. In the next section, we offer some modest policy
recommendations that focus on accelerating idea churn in fields dominated by scientists in
the twilight of their careers.


4.6    Extensions and robustness

   Appendix E presents results pertaining to extensions of the main analyses. Appendix F
provides a number of robustness checks. In the interest of space, we only call out a sub-
set of the analyses presented therein, but we have written these appendices as stand-alone
documents, such that the interested reader can consult them for additional details.

Impact of research infrastructure needs. Our analysis is limited to the life sciences.
Though this area accounts for a large fraction of publicly funded, civilian research funding
in the United States, it is not necessarily representative of all fields of science. In particular,
some domains of research require access to expensive and specialized capital equipment.
When capital needs are large and lumpy, the evolution of subfields in the wake of an eminent



                                                28
scientist’s death will likely depend on the institutions that govern access to the scarce capital
equipment.

    Within biomedical research, large-scale clinical trials most closely—albeit imperfectly—
resemble the characteristics of capital-intensive scientific fields. These require a large infras-
tructure of data collection, monitoring, and management, which is why these activities are
often consolidated in large cooperative groups such as the AIDS Clinical Trials Group, the
Children’s Oncology Group, or the Framingham Heart Study. PubMed has a “publication
type” field which allows us to identify the subfields that are clinical-trial intensive (10% of
the subfields) versus those that are not (the remaining 90%). Table E6 replicates the results
of Table 3 separately for these two subsamples. Although our ability to estimate statistically
significant effects is limited by sample size, the magnitudes are very similar.


Impact of star age and experience. As explained earlier, we do not impose a strict age
cutoff for the deceased star, we merely insist that they exhibit tangible signs of research activ-
ity, such as publishing original articles, obtaining NIH grants, and training students. Among
our 452 departed superstars, the median age at death is 61, the seventy-fifth percentile 67,
and the top decile 73. How do the core results change when the scientists who passed away
at an advanced age are excluded from the sample? As can be observed in Table E7, the
subfields of stars who passed away more prematurely are responsible for most of the effect.
The effect for the fields associated with older stars is small in magnitude and imprecisely
estimated. We chose to keep these older stars in the sample because a larger sample af-
fords us opportunities to explore mechanisms without losing power to detect nuanced effects
statistically.


Star level analyses. In Table F1, we probe the robustness of the core results presented
in Table 3 after rolling up the data to the level of the star scientist (deceased or control).
Recall that the treatment variable exhibits variation at the level of the star scientist, and
not at the level of a single subfield. In this robustness check, we lump all related articles
for each star together as if they belonged to a single subfield. The results in Table F1 are
quite similar to those in Table 3, both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance.
One exception is the coefficient on the effect of entry by collaborators, which is negative
as expected, but smaller in magnitude, relative to the corresponding coefficient in Table 3.
The corresponding event-study graphs, displayed in Figure F3, also display patterns fully
consistent with those observed for our benchmark set of results. As explained in Section 3.2,


                                               29
we strongly prefer performing the analyses at the the subfield level, for two reasons. First,
the subfields delineated by PMRA exhibit limited overlap (see Figure C6 in Appendix C),
and as a result the within-star, between subfield variation in publication activity can be
exploited meaningfully. Second, we can track the differential position of the star across the
subfields in which she was active. The covariates that leverage these differences help us shed
light on mechanisms, as in Tables 7, E5, and E8.


Alternate functional forms. In Table F2, we examine the sensitivity of our benchmark
set of results to the choice of alternative functional forms. In the three columns to the left,
we simply use the “raw” number of articles in the subfield as the outcome, and perform
estimation by OLS. Of course, the estimates are not directly interpretable in terms of elas-
ticities. At the mean of the data, however, the treatment effect in the third column implies
that subfield entry by non-collaborating authors expands by 0.409/3.335 = 12.26%, which
is not all that different from the 8.2% reported in Table 3. In the three columns to the
right, we report results corresponding to OLS estimation, but this time with the outcome
variables transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function (Burbidge et al. 1988). In
this case, coefficient estimates can be interpreted as elasticities, as an approximation. They
are quite similar once again to those reported in Table 3, except for the effect on entry by
collaborators, which is smaller in magnitude.


5     Conclusion
    In this paper, we leverage the applied economist’s toolkit, together with a novel approach
to delineate the boundaries of scientific fields, to explore the effect that the passing of an
eminent life scientist exerts on the dynamics of growth—or decline—for the fields in which
she was active while alive. We find that publications and grants by scientists that never
collaborated with the star surge within the subfield, absent the star. Interestingly, this surge
is not driven by a reshuffling of leadership within the field, but rather by new entrants that
are drawn from outside of it. Our rich data on individual researchers and the nature of their
scholarship allows us provide a deeper understanding of this dynamic.

    In particular, this increase in contributions by outsiders appears to tackle the mainstream
questions within the field but by leveraging newer ideas that arise in other domains. This
intellectual arbitrage is quite successful—the new articles represent substantial contributions,



                                              30
at least as measured by long-run citation impact. Together, these results paint a picture of
scientific fields as scholarly guilds to which elite scientists can regulate access, providing them
with outsized opportunities to shape the direction of scientific advance in that space.

   We also provide evidence regarding the mechanisms that enable the regulation of entry.
While stars are alive, entry appears to be effectively deterred where the shadow they cast
over the fields in which they were active looms particularly large. After their passing, we
find evidence for influence from beyond the grave, exercised through a tightly-knit “invisible
college” of collaborators (de Solla Price and Beaver 1966; Crane 1972). The loss of an elite
scientist central to the field appears to signal to those on the outside that the cost/benefit
calculations on the avant-garde ideas they might bring to the table has changed, thus en-
couraging them to engage. But this occurs only when the topology of the field offers a
less hostile landscape for the support and acceptance of “foreign” ideas, for instance when
the star’s network of close collaborators is insufficiently robust to stave off threats from
intellectual outsiders.

   In the end, our results lend credence to Planck’s infamous quip that provides the title
for this manuscript. Yet its implications for social welfare are ambiguous. While we can
document that eminent scientists restrict the entry of new ideas and scholars into a field,
gatekeeping activities could have beneficial properties when the field is in its inception; it
might allow cumulative progress through shared assumptions and methodologies, and the
ability to control the intellectual evolution of a scientific domain might, in itself, be a prize
that spurs much ex ante risk taking. Because our empirical exercise cannot shed light on
these countervailing tendencies, we must remain guarded in drawing policy conclusions from
our results. Yet, the fact that the presence of a tutelar figurehead can freeze patterns of
participation into a scientific field increases the appeal of policies that bolster access to less
established or less well-connected investigators. Examples of such policies include caps on
the amount of funding a single laboratory is eligible to receive, “bonus points” for first-time
investigators in funding programs, emeritus awards to induce senior scientists to wind down
their laboratory activities, and double-blind refereeing policies (Kaiser 2011, Berg 2012, Deng
2015).

   All of the evidence we have presented pertains to the academic life sciences. It is un-
clear how the lessons from that setting might apply to other fields inside the academy. In
particular, when frontier research requires access to expensive and highly-specialized capital



                                                31
equipment—as is sometimes the case in the physical sciences—the rules governing access to
that capital are likely to favor succession by insiders. At the other end of the spectrum, more
atomistic fields where scientists generally work alone or in very small groups may evolve in
a more frictionless manner. Whether our findings apply to industrial research and devel-
opment is also an open question. In that setting, the choice of problem-solving approaches
is guided by market signals (however imperfectly, cf. Acemoglu [2012]), and thus likely to
differ from those selected under the more nuanced system of pecuniary and non-pecuniary
incentives that characterizes academic research (Feynman 1999; Aghion, Dewatripont, and
Stein 2008). Assessing the degree to which our results extend to other settings, and the
reasons they might differ, represents a fruitful area for future research.




                                              32
                                         References

Aad, Georges et al. 2015. “Combined Measurement of the Higgs Boson Mass in pp Collisions at
      √s=7 and 8 TeV with the ATLAS and CMS Experiments.” Physical Review Letters
      114(191803): 1-33.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2012. “Diversity and Technological Progress.” In Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern
      (Eds.), The Rate & Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited, pp. 319-356. Chicago, IL:
      University of Chicago Press.
Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2008. “Academic Freedom, Private
      Sector Focus, and the Process of Innovation.” RAND Journal of Economics 39(3): 617-
      635.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.”
      Econometrica 60(2): 323-351.
Akerlof, George, and Pascal Michaillat. 2017. “Beetles: Biased Promotion and Persistence of False
       Belief.” NBER Working Paper #23523.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 2010. “Superstar Extinction.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 125(2): 549-589.
Azoulay, Pierre, Jeffrey L. Furman, Joshua L. Krieger, and Fiona Murray. 2015. “Retractions.”
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(5): 1118-1136.
Azoulay, Pierre, Danielle Li, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2015. “Public R&D
      Investment and Private Sector Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding Rules.”
      Forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies. Also NBER Working Paper #20889.
Azoulay, Pierre, Danielle Li, and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2017. “The Applied Value of Public
      Investments in Biomedical Research.” Science 356(6333): 78-81.
Bertanha, Marinho, and Petra Moser. 2016. “Spatial Errors in Count Data Regressions.” Journal
       of Econometric Methods 5(1): 49-69.
Berg, Jeremy M. 2012. “Science Policy: Well-funded Investigators Should Receive Extra
      Scrutiny.” Nature 489(7415): 203.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
       Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 249-275.
Borjas, George J., and Kirk B. Doran. 2015a. “Which Peers Matter? The Relative Impacts of
       Collaborators, Colleagues, and Competitors.” Review of Economics and Statistics 97(5):
       1104-1117.
Borjas, George J., and Kirk B. Doran. 2015b. “Cognitive Mobility: Labor Market Responses to
       Supply Shocks in the Space of Ideas.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1): S109-S145.
Börner, Katy, Chaomei Chen, and Kevin W. Boyack. 2003. “Visualizing Knowledge
       Domains.” Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 37(1): 179-255.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1975. “La Spécificité du Champ Scientifique et les Conditions Sociales du Progrès
       de la Raison.” Sociologie et Sociétés 7(1): 91-118.
Bramoullé, Yann, and Gilles Saint-Paul. 2010. “Research Cycles.” Journal of Economic Theory
      145(5): 1890-1920.



                                                33
Brogaard, Jonathan, Joseph Engelberg, and Christopher Parsons. 2014. “Network Position and
      Productivity: Evidence from Journal Editor Rotations.” Journal of Financial Economics
      111(1): 251-270.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee and A. Leslie Robb, 1988. “Alternative Transformations to
      Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable.” Journal of the American Statistical
      Association 83(401): 123-127.
Chavalarias, David, and Jean-Philippe Cointet. 2013. “Phylomemetic Patterns in Science
      Evolution—The Rise and Fall of Scientific Fields.” PLoS one 8(2): e54847.
Cole, Jonathan R., and Stephen Cole. 1972. “The Ortega Hypothesis.” Science 178(4059): 368-
       375.
Crane, Diana. 1972. Invisible Colleges: Diffusion of Knowledge in Scientific Communities. Chicago,
       IL: University of Chicago Press.
Crick, Francis. 1970. “Central Dogma of Molecular Biology.” Nature 227(5258): 561.
de Solla Price, Derek J. 1963. Little Science, Big Science. New York: Columbia University Press.
de Solla Price, Derek J., and Donald D. Beaver. 1966. “Collaboration in an Invisible College.”
       American Psychologist 21(11): 1011-1018.
Deng, Boar. 2015. “NIH Ponders Emeritus Grants.” Nature 518(7538): 146-147.
Feynman, Richard P. 1999. The Pleasure of Finding Things Out. New York: Basic Books.
Fortunato, Santo and Darko Hric. 2016. “Community Detection in Networks: A User Guide.”
   Physics Reports 659: 1-44.
Foster, Jacob G., Andrey Rzhetsky, and James A. Evans. 2015. “Tradition and Innovation in
        Scientists’ Research Strategies.” American Sociological Review 80(5): 875-908.
Funk, Russell J., and Jason Owen-Smith. 2017. “A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological
      Change.” Management Science 63(3): 791-817.
Gorham, Geoffrey. 1991. “Planck’s Principle and Jeans’s Conversion.” Studies in History &
      Philosophy of Science 22(3): 471-497.
Gouriéroux, Christian, Alain Montfort, and Alain Trognon. 1984. “Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
       Methods: Applications to Poisson Models.” Econometrica 53(3): 701-720.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Laure Turner. 2007. “Identifying Age, Cohort and Period
        Effects in Scientific Research Productivity: Discussion and Illustration Using Simulated
        and Actual Data on French Physicists.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology
        16(2): 159-177.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. “Econometric Models for Count Data
     with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship.” Econometrica 52(4): 909-938.
Hull, David L. 1988. Science as a Process. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hull, David L., Peter D. Tessner, and Arthur M. Diamond. 1978. “Planck’s Principle.” Science
       202(4369): 717-723.
Jaravel, Xavier, Neviana Petkova, and Alex Bell. 2018. “Team-Specific Capital and
       Innovation.” American Economic Review 108(4-5): 1034-1073.
Jones, Benjamin F. 2009. “The Burden of Knowledge and the ‛Death of the Renaissance Man’: Is
       Innovation Getting Harder?” Review of Economic Studies 76(1): 283-317.

                                               34
Kaiser, Jocelyn. “Darwinism vs. Social Engineering at NIH.” Science 334(6057): 753-754.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
      Press.
Levin, Sharon G., and Paula E. Stephan. 1991. “Research Productivity over the Life Cycle:
       Evidence for Academic Scientists.” American Economic Review 81(1): 114-32.
Levin, Sharon G., Paula E. Stephan, and Mary Beth Walker. 1995. “Planck’s Principle Revisited:
       A Note.” Social Studies of Science 25(2): 275-283.
Li, Danielle. 2017. “Expertise vs. Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH.” American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics 9(2): 60-92.
Lin, Jimmy, and W. John Wilbur. 2007. “PubMed Related Articles: A Probabilistic Topic-based
       Model for Content Similarity.” BMC Bioinformatics 8(423): 1-14.
Lotka, Alfred J. 1926. “The Frequency Distribution of Scientific Productivity.” Journal of the
       Washington Academy of Sciences 16(12): 317-323.
Luce, R. Duncan, and Albert D. Perry. 1949. “A Method of Matrix Analysis of Group Structure.”
       Psychometrika 14(2): 95-116.
Merton, Robert K. 1973. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.
      Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mohnen, Myra. 2017. “Stars and Brokers: Knowledge Spillovers Among Medical Scientists.”
      Working Paper, Working Paper, University of Essex.
Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. New
      York: Oxford University Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2002. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy. Princeton,
      NJ: Princeton University Press.
Morange, Michel. 1998. A History of Molecular Biology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
      Press.
Myers, Kyle. 2018. “The Elasticity of the Direction of Science.” Working Paper, National Bureau
       of Economic Research.
Nagaoka, Sadao, and Hideo Owan. 2014. “Author Ordering in Scientifice Research: Evidence from
      Scientists Survey in the US and Japan.” IIR Working Paper #13-23, Hitotsubashi
      University, Institute of Innovation Research.
Oettl, Alexander. 2012. “Reconceptualizing Stars: Scientist Helpfulness and Peer Performance.”
       Management Science 58(6): 1122-1140.
Reese, Thomas S. 2004. “My Collaboration with John Heuser.” European Journal of Cell Biology
       83(6): 243-244.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy 98(5):
      S71-S102.
Rosvall, Martin, and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2008. “Maps of Random Walks on Complex Networks
   Reveal Community Structure.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105(4): 1118-
   1123.
Sampat, Bhaven N., and Frank R. Lichtenberg. 2011. “What Are the Respective Roles of the
      Public and Private Sectors in Pharmaceutical Innovation?” Health Affairs 30(2): 332-339.


                                               35
Santos Silva, J.M.C., and Silvanna Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” Review of Economics
       and Statistics 88(4): 641-658.
Shapin, Steven. 1996. The Scientific Revolution. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Shwed, Uri, and Peter S. Bearman. 2010. “The Temporal Structure of Scientific Consensus
      Formation.” American Sociological Review 75(6): 817-840.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” Review of
       Economics and Statistics 39(3): 312-320.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1997. “Quasi-Likelihood Methods for Count Data.” In M. Hashem Pesaran,
      and Peter Schmidt (Eds.), Handbook of Applied Econometrics, pp. 352-406. Oxford:
      Blackwell.
Zuckerman, Harriet A. 1968. “Patterns of Name Ordering Among Authors of Scientific Papers: A
      Study of Social Symbolism and Its Ambiguity.” American Journal of Sociology 74(3): 276-
      291.




                                               36
Figure 1: Cumulative Stock of Publications at Time of Death




      Note: We compute the cumulative number of publications, up to the year that
            immediately precedes the year of death (or counterfactual year of death),
            between 3,076 treated subfields and 31,142 control subfields.




                                            37
                                                           Figure 2
                               Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline

                    A. All Authors                                             B. Collaborators                                        C. Non-Collaborators




Note: The dark blue dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication
      flows in subfields are regressed onto year effects, subfield age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before/after the
      death event (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms
      common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death. The 95% confidence interval
      (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around star scientist) around these estimates is plotted with vertical light blue lines; Panel A corresponds to a
      dynamic version of the specification in column (1) of Table 3; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in column (2) of Table 3; Panel C
      corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in column (3) of Table 3.




                                                                                       38
                                                    Figure 3
                         Characteristics of Related Authors: Competitors or Outsiders?

           A. Distribution of Intellectual Proximity                                                                                                 B. Entering Authors & Field Overlap




                                                                                          Estimated % Change in the number of papers
                                                                                            in the superstar's field after his/her death



                                                                                                                                                      s



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                            tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                            tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.



                                                                                                                                                                             tl.
                                                                                                                                                        t


                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc



                                                                                                                                                                          pc
                                                                                                                                                     is
                                                                                                                                                   nt


                                                                                                                                                              th



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                        h



                                                                                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                                                                 ie




                                                                                                                                                                      5t



                                                                                                                                                                     0t



                                                                                                                                                                     5t



                                                                                                                                                                      0t



                                                                                                                                                                     5t



                                                                                                                                                                     0t



                                                                                                                                                                     5t



                                                                                                                                                                     0t



                                                                                                                                                                     5t



                                                                                                                                                                     9t
                                                                                                                                                            50




                                                                                                                                                                    99
                                                                                                                                               Sc




                                                                                                                                                                   /5



                                                                                                                                                                   /6



                                                                                                                                                                   /6



                                                                                                                                                                   /7



                                                                                                                                                                   /7



                                                                                                                                                                   /8



                                                                                                                                                                   /8



                                                                                                                                                                   /9



                                                                                                                                                                   /9



                                                                                                                                                                   /9
                                                                                                                                                         w



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                 th



                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                           ew




                                                                                                                                                                ov
                                                                                                                                                       lo


                                                                                                                                                               50



                                                                                                                                                               55



                                                                                                                                                               60



                                                                                                                                                               65



                                                                                                                                                               70



                                                                                                                                                               75



                                                                                                                                                               80



                                                                                                                                                               85



                                                                                                                                                               90



                                                                                                                                                               95
                                                                                                                                                     be
                                                                                                                                           N




                                                                                                                                                              ab
Note: Panel A displays the distribution of overlap between the past output of related authors and each star’s subfield. For each author on a related article matched
      to the AAMC Faculty Roster, we create a metric of intellectual proximity by computing the fraction of their publications that belongs to the star’s subfield.
      Slightly more than half of related articles have authors with zero overlap, i.e., this related article is their first contribution to the star’s subfield. 1.24% of
      related articles are authored by new scientists for whom this publication within the subfield is also their first publication overall. Using this information, we
      aggregate the number of related articles in a particular subfield and in a particular year, e.g., “the number of articles in the subfield in year t that have
      authors above the 95th percentile in our measure of field overlap.” In Panel B, each dot corresponds to the magnitude of the treatment effect in a separate
      regression where the dependent variable is the number of articles in each subfield authored by scientists who belong to a particular bin of intellectual
      proximity, as measured by field overlap above.




                                                                                   39
Table 1: Summary Statistics — Deceased Superstar Scientists (N=452)
                                        Mean                 Median              Std. Dev.               Min.                 Max.
 Year of Birth                        1930.157                1930                11.011                 1899                 1959
 Degree Year                          1957.633                1957                11.426                 1928                 1986
 Year of Death                        1991.128                1992                 8.055                 1975                 2003
 Age at Death                           60.971                  61                 9.778                  34                    91
 Female                                 0.102                   0                  0.303                   0                    1
 MD Degree                              0.403                   0                  0.491                   0                    1
 PhD Degree                             0.489                   0                  0.500                   0                    1
 MD/PhD Degree                          0.108                   0                  0.311                   0                    1
 Sudden Death                           0.409                   0                  0.492                   0                    1
 Nb. of Subfields                       6.794                   4                  7.305                  1                    57
 Career Nb. of Pubs.                   138.221                 112                115.704                 12                  1,380
 Career Nb. of Citations                8,341                 5,907                8,562                 120                 72,122
 Career NIH Funding                  $16,637,919           $10,899,139          $25,441,933                0              $329,968,960
 Sits on NIH Study Section              0.007                   0                  0.081                  0                     1
 Career Nb. of Editorials               0.131                   0                  0.996                   0                   17
Note: Sample consists of 452 superstar life scientists who died while still actively engaged in research. See Appendix A for more details on
     sample construction.




                                                                                  40
Table 2: Summary Statistics — Control & Treated Subfields at Baseline
                                                                                Mean          Median          Std. Dev.        Min.          Max.
 Control Subfields (N=31,142)
 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field                                76.995             59             64.714          0           384
 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field, Non-Collaborators             68.390             51             60.222          0           381
 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field, Collaborators                  8.604             5              10.358          0           125
 Source Article Nb. of Authors                                                   3.970             4              1.901           1            15
 Source Article Citations at Baseline                                           16.331             8              30.305          0           770
 Source Article Long-run Citations                                              70.427             38            116.108          1           4495
 Investigator Gender                                                             0.067             0              0.249           0            1
 Investigator Year of Degree                                                   1960.546          1962             10.998        1926          1991
 Death Year                                                                    1991.125          1991             7.968         1975          2003
 Age at Death                                                                   58.100             58             8.795          34            91
 Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Publications                                      164             131              123            1          1,109
 Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline                              $18,784,517     $11,904,846      $25,160,518        0       $387,558,656
 Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Citations                                       12,141           8,010            12,938          9         157,581
 Treated Subfields (N=3,076)
 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field                                76.284             58             64.046          0            368
 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field, Non-Collaborators             67.752             51             59.725          0            357
 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field, Collaborators                  8.532             5              9.841           0             86
 Source Article Nb. of Authors                                                   3.987             4              1.907           1             14
 Source Article Citations at Baseline                                           16.694             8              36.334          0            920
 Source Article Long-run Citations                                              70.432             35            180.528          1           6598
 Investigator Gender                                                             0.099             0              0.299           0             1
 Investigator Year of Degree                                                   1960.141          1961             10.898        1928          1986
 Death Year                                                                    1991.125          1991             7.970         1975          2003
 Age at Death                                                                   58.100             58             8.796          34             91
 Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Publications                                      170             143              118           12           1,380
 Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline                              $17,637,726     $12,049,690      $24,873,018        0       $329,968,960
 Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Citations                                       11,580           8,726            10,212         120         72,122

Note: The sample consists of subfields for 452 deceased superstar life scientists and their matched control subfields. See Appendix D for details on the
      matching procedure. All time-varying covariates are measured in the year of superstar death.




                                                                               41
Table 3: Effect of Superstar Death on Subfield Entry Rates
                                             Publication Flows                                NIH Funding Flows (Nb. of Awards)
                                                                       Non-                                                             Non-
                                                Collaborators                                                 Collaborators
                               All Authors                         Collaborators             All Authors                           Collaborators
                                                    Only                                                          Only
                                                                       Only                                                             Only
                                     (1)              (2)               (3)                       (4)                  (5)               (6)
                                   0.051†          -0.232**           0.082**                    0.046              -0.265**          0.110**
 After Death
                                  (0.029)          (0.057)            (0.029)                   (0.035)             (0.076)           (0.033)
 Nb. of Investigators              6,260            6,124              6,260                     6,215               5,678             6,202
 Nb. of Fields                    34,218            33,096            34,218                    33,912               29,163            33,806
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.         1,259,176         1,217,905         1,259,176                 1,049,942            902,873           1,046,678
 Log Likelihood                 -2,891,116        -729,521          -2,768,257                -1,350,208           -472,329         -1,223,915
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total number of publications
      in a subfield in a particular year (columns 1, 2, and 3), or the total number of NIH grants that acknowledge a publication in a subfield
      (columns 4, 5, and 6). All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated
      and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year and individual fixed
      effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from
      one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimates in column (3) imply that treated subfields see an increase in
      the number of contributions by non-collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100×(exp[0.082]-1)=8.55%.
      The number of observations varies slightly across columns because the conditional fixed effects specification drops observations
      corresponding to subfields for which there is no variation in activity over the entire observation period.
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                                  42
Table 4: Scientific Impact of Entry
                                                                            Vintage-specific long-run citation quantile
                                                                                                                    Btw. 75th and    Btw. 95th and      Above 99th
                                    All Pubs          Bttm. Quartile         2nd Quartile      3rd Quartile
                                                                                                                      95th pctl.       99th pctl.         pctl.
                                     0.082**               -0.028                0.008             0.031                0.125**         0.232**            0.320**
 After Death
                                     (0.029)              (0.036)               (0.033)           (0.032)               (0.035)         (0.049)            (0.081)
 Nb. of Investigators                 6,260                6,222                 6,260             6,257                 6,255           6,161              5,283
 Nb. of Fields                       34,218                33,714               34,206            34,212                34,210           33,207            21,852
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.            1,259,176             1,240,802            1,258,738         1,258,954             1,258,880        1,221,952          804,122
 Log Likelihood                    -2,768,257            -689,467             -1,125,554        -1,432,227            -1,469,094       -542,731           -156,519
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non-collaborators
      in a subfield in a particular year, where these publications fall in a particular quantile bin of the long-run, vintage-adjusted citation distribution for the
      universe of journal articles in PubMed. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated
      and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers
      interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimates in column (1), Panel A, imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of contributions
      by non-collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100×(exp[0.082]-1)=8.55%.
       Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                                   43
Table 5: Entry and Research Direction
 Panel A                                      Cardinal Measure                               Ordinal Measure
                                            Intllct.        Intllct.                      Intllct.        Intllct.
                                          Proximate         Distant                     Proximate         Distant
                                            Articles        Articles                      Articles        Articles
                                            0.091**          0.028                        0.117**          -0.024
 After Death
                                            (0.030)         (0.035)                       (0.028)         (0.037)
 Nb. of Investigators                        6,228           6,099                         6,260           6,017
 Nb. of Fields                              33,375          32,232                        34,218          31,712
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.                    1,228,157       1,186,589                     1,259,176       1,167,423
 Log Likelihood                           -1,628,374      -1,816,449                    -1,893,982      -1,628,170
                                                  In-field vs.                           Backward Citations to
 Panel B
                                          Out-of-field References                          the Star’s Bibliome
                                          w/ in-field      w/o in-field               w/ references       w/o references
                                          references        references                 to the star         to the star
                                             -0.023       0.128**                          0.078*        0.152**
 After Death
                                            (0.041)       (0.031)                         (0.036)        (0.034)
 Nb. of Investigators                        6,195         6,260                           6,247          6,259
 Nb. of Fields                              32,721        34,218                          34,179         34,147
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.                    1,204,315     1,259,176                       1,257,747      1,256,576
 Log Likelihood                            -792,803     -2,510,350                      -1,914,447     -1,767,579
                                               Vintage of Cited                         Vintage of 2-way MeSH
 Panel C
                                                  References                                term combinations
                                            Young                 Old                     Young                 Old
                                                   *                                            **
                                             0.071             -0.010                     0.090                 0.029
 After Death
                                            (0.035)           (0.034)                     (0.033)              (0.036)
 Nb. of Investigators                        6,260             6,260                       6,258                6,260
 Nb. of Fields                              34,218            34,214                      34,206               34,210
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.                    1,259,176         1,259,044                   1,258,732            1,258,906
 Log Likelihood                           -2,124,598        -1,613,454                  -1,853,064           -1,784,279
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. In Panel A, the dependent variable
       is the total number of publications by non-collaborators in a subfield in a particular year, where these
       publications can either be proximate in intellectual space to the star’s source publication, or more distant (in
       the PMRA sense). Since PMRA generates both a cardinal and an ordinal measure of intellectual proximity, we
       parse the related articles using both measures, yielding a total of four different specifications. For the cardinal
       measure, a related article is deemed proximate if its similarity score is above .58, which corresponds to the
       median of relatedness in the sample. For the ordinal measure, a related article is deemed proximate if its
       similarity rank is below 90, which also corresponds to the median of similarity in the sample. In Panel B, we
       focus on whether the content of entrants’ contributions in the subfield change after the superstar passes away.
       Each cited reference in a related article can either belong to the subfield, or fall outside of it; it can cite a
       publication of the star scientist associated with the subfield, or fail to cite any of the star’s past contributions.
       In Panel C, the dependent variable is the total number of publications by non-collaborators in a subfield in a
       particular year, where these publications can either be “fresh” (citing young references, or being annotated by
       MeSH terms of recent vintage) or stale (citing old references, or being annotated by MeSH terms of distant
       vintage). All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common
       to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating
       the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimates
       in the first column of Panel A imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of PMRA-proximate
       contributions by non-collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100×(exp[0.091]-
       1)=9.53%. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p <
       0.05, **p < 0.01.



                                                             44
Table 6: Breakdown by Star Scientist Characteristics
                                                                                                                                             Importance
                                      Publications                        Citations                          Funding
                                                                                                                                             to the Field
                                   Below          Above              Below         Above               Below                Above         Below         Above
                                 Median          Median            Median         Median             Median                Median       Median         Median
                                   0.059           0.116*            0.036         0.125**             0.014                0.162**       0.063*        0.123**
 After Death
                                  (0.037)         (0.050)           (0.042)        (0.040)            (0.040)               (0.052)      (0.031)        (0.045)
 Nb. of Investigators              2,901           4,836             2,792          4,619              3,048                 4,287        5,019          4,493
 Nb. of Fields                    17,210          17,008            17,328         16,890             15,731                15,487       16,985         17,233
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.          632,089         627,087           636,750        622,426            578,277               570,665      625,140        634,036
 Log Likelihood                 -1,377,741      -1,387,648        -1,367,337     -1,396,654         -1,268,567            -1,252,952   -1,462,541     -1,257,972
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non-
      collaborators in a subfield in a particular year. Each pair of columns splits the sample across the median of a particular covariate for the sample of fields
      (treated and control) in the baseline year. The table examines differences in the extent to which the eminence of the star at death (respectively
      counterfactual year of death for controls) influences the rate at which non-collaborators enter the field after the star passes away. Eminence is measured
      through the star’s cumulative number of publications, the star’s cumulative number of citations garnered up to the year of death, and the star’s cumulative
      amount of NIH funding. We also have a “local” measure of eminence: the star’s importance to the field, which is defined as the proportion of articles in
      the subfield up to the year of death for which the star is an author. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as
      a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients and
      differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimate in the second column implies that treated subfields see an
      increase in the number of contributions by non-collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100×(exp[0.116]-1)=12.30%.
       Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                                  45
Table 7: The Nature of Entry Barriers
                                                                                  Subfield Coherence
 Panel A
                                       PMRA-based definition                            Citation-based definition                         Cliquishness
                                                               Above                                                                  Below          Above
                                   Below Median                                  Below Median         Above Median
                                                               Median                                                                Median          Median
                                       0.202**                  0.067                 0.161**              0.096*                    0.129**          0.064
 After Death
                                       (0.038)                 (0.048)                (0.053)             (0.041)                    (0.049)         (0.052)
 Nb. of Investigators                   3,353                   3,203                  3,422               3,157                      2,865           3,561
 Nb. of Fields                          9,062                   7,828                  8,731               8,159                      8,044           8,846
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.               334,142                 288,284                321,826             300,600                    296,704         325,722
 Log Likelihood                       -711,335                -664,170               -760,842            -631,287                   -692,330        -685,682
                                                                   Indirect Control through Collaborators
 Panel B
                                                                                                                                       Fraction of Subfield
                                           Editorial Channel                        NIH Study Section Channel
                                                                                                                                          NIH Funding
                                                               Above                                                                  Below           Above
                                   Below Median                                  Below Median         Above Median
                                                               Median                                                                Median           Median
                                       0.147**                  0.086†                0.134**              -0.078                    0.174**           0.084
 After Death
                                       (0.056)                 (0.048)                (0.043)             (0.095)                    (0.051)          (0.051)
 Nb. of Investigators                   3,452                   2,068                  4,385                664                       3,558            2,526
 Nb. of Fields                         11,110                   5,780                 15,338               1,552                      9,860            7,030
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.               410,025                 212,401                565,219              57,207                    363,584          258,842
 Log Likelihood                       -951,705                -461,769              -1,293,997           -125,950                   -840,666         -545,869
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non-
      collaborators in a subfield in a particular year. The sample is limited to the subfields in which the most eminent among the stars were active
      (specifically, above the median of the “cumulative citations up to the year of death” metric). Each pair of columns splits the sample across the median
      of a particular covariate for the sample of subfields (treated and control) in the baseline year. For example, the first two columns of Panel B compare
      the magnitude of the treatment effect for stars whose collaborators have written an above-median number of editorials in the five years preceding the
      superstar’s death, vs. a below-median number of editorials. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term
      common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing
      from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimates in the first column of Panel B imply that treated subfields see an
      increase in the number of contributions by non-collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100×(exp[0.147]-1)=15.84%.
       Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                                   46
Table 8: The Eminence of Entrants—The Circle of Life
                                               Star Related Author                                        Elite Related Author

                                                  No                   Yes                      Never                     Current          Future
                                                       **                    †                        *
                                               0.103                  0.055                     0.066                   0.077             0.205**
After Death
                                               (0.036)               (0.030)                   (0.029)                 (0.052)            (0.074)
Nb. of Investigators                            6,254                 6,260                     6,260                   5,721              5,886
Nb. of Fields                                  34,160                34,218                    34,218                  28,992             29,650
Nb. of Field-Year Obs.                        1,257,053             1,259,176                 1,259,176               1,067,107          1,091,439
Log Likelihood                               -1,287,272            -2,324,369                -2,615,424               -373,036           -377,540
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total number of publications by
      non-collaborators in a subfield in a particular year, where these publications have scientists on their authorship roster with certain demographic
      characteristics. The first two columns examine the differential effect of the publications in the subfield having a star author vs. no star author.
      We rely on our home-grown definition of star—a fixed universe of 12,935 individuals that are in some sense “born” as stars. In the next two
      columns, we focus on two of our metrics of stardom: becoming a Howard Hughes Medical Investigator and or becoming a member of the
      National Academy of Science/Medicine. At a given point of time, every related author either (i) is already a member of this rarefied elite; (ii)
      will be member of it in the future; or (iii) will never become a member of it, and this taxonomy provides a basis to split the output of each
      subfield into three non-overlapping categories in each year. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as
      a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients
      and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimates in the first column imply that treated subfields
      see an increase in the number of contributions by non-stars after the superstar passes away—100×(exp[0.103]-1)=10.85%.
       Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05,   **p   < 0.01.




                                                                                   47
                            Supplementary Online Material

                                 Appendix A:
           Criteria for Delineating the Set of 12,935 “Superstars”

Highly Funded Scientists. Our first data source is the Consolidated Grant/Applicant File (CGAF) from
the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH). This dataset records information about grants awarded to
extramural researchers funded by the NIH since 1938. Using the CGAF and focusing only on direct costs
associated with research grants, we compute individual cumulative totals for the decades 1977-1986, 1987-
1996, and 1997-2006, deflating the earlier years by the Biomedical Research Producer Price Index. We also
recompute these totals excluding large center grants that usually fund groups of investigators (M01 and P01
grants). Scientists whose totals lie above the 95th percentile of e‘ither distribution constitute our first group
of superstars. In this group, the least well-funded investigator garnered $10.5 million in career NIH funding
and the most well-funded $462.6 million.i

Highly Cited Scientists. Despite the preeminent role of the NIH in the funding of public biomedical
research, the above indicator of “superstardom” biases the sample towards scientists conducting relatively
expensive research. We complement this first group with a second composed of highly cited scientists
identified by the Institute for Scientific Information. A Highly Cited listing means that an individual was
among the 250 most cited researchers for their published articles between 1981 and 1999, within a broad
scientific field.ii

Top Patenters. We add to these groups academic life scientists who belong in the top percentile of the
patent distribution among academics—those who were granted 17 patents or more between 1976 and 2004.

Members of the National Academy of Science and of the Institute of Medicine. We add to
these groups academic life scientists who were elected to the National Academy of Science or the Institute
of Medicine between 1970 and 2013.

MERIT Awardees of the NIH. Initiated in the mid-1980s, the MERIT Award program extends fund-
ing for up to 5 years (but typically 3 years) to a select number of NIH-funded investigators “who have
demonstrated superior competence, outstanding productivity during their previous research endeavors and
are leaders in their field with paradigm-shifting ideas.” The specific details governing selection vary across
the component institutes of the NIH, but the essential feature of the program is that only researchers holding
an R01 grant in its second or later cycle are eligible. Further, the application must be scored in the top
percentile in a given funding cycle. We add to this category the NIH Director’s Pioneer Awardees. Part
of the “High-Risk, High-Reward Research” program, since 2004 the award has supported “scientists with
outstanding records of creativity pursuing new research directions to develop pioneering approaches to major
challenges in biomedical and behavioral research.”

Former and current Howard Hughes Medical Investigators (HHMIs). Every three years, the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute selects a small cohort of mid-career biomedical scientists with the potential
to revolutionize their respective subfields. Once selected, HHMIs continue to be based at their institutions,
     i
       We perform a similar exercise for scientists employed by the intramural campus of the NIH. These scientists are not eligible
to receive extramural funds, but the NIH keeps records of the number of “internal projects” each intramural scientist leads. We
include in the elite sample the top five percentiles of intramural scientists according to this metric.
    ii
       The relevant scientific fields in the life sciences are microbiology, biochemistry, psychiatry/psychology, neuroscience, molec-
ular biology & genetics, immunology, pharmacology, and clinical medicine.




                                                                  i
typically leading a research group of 10 to 25 students, postdoctoral associates and technicians. Their
appointment is reviewed every five years, based solely on their most important contributions during the
cycle.iii

Early career prize winners. We also included winners of the Pew, Searle, Beckman, Rita Allen, and
Packard scholarships for the years 1981 through 2000. Every year, these charitable foundations provide seed
funding to between 20 and 40 young academic life scientists. These scholarships are the most prestigious
accolades that young researchers can receive in the first two years of their careers as independent investigators.

Consolidated categories. Why use 8 different criteria to delineate the set of stars? There are two reasons
to do so. First, there is of course no agreed-upon definition of stardom in academic science, and choosing
an eclectic set of metric makes it less likely that our analysis will be biased by the idiosyncrasies of any
particular metric. For example, the funding metric will tend to bias the set of stars towards scientists doing
relatively expensive research (e.g., clinical research, or research on monkeys/other mammals vs. research
on invertebrates such as the nematode worm c. elegans). Table A1 documents the overlap between each of
the eight metrics. Some metrics are highly negatively correlated (e.g., ECPW and high NIH funding) while
most correlations between individual metrics are modest in magnitude.

Second, if we focused on a single, incontrovertible metric such as election to the National Academy of
Sciences, we would not have enough statistical power to identify the main effect of death on subfield growth.
To examine the effect of star death across stars of different types, we consolidate the eight metrics into three
mutually exclusive categories:

   (i) “Cumulative stars,” who enter the sample on the basis of cumulative achievement (high NIH grant re-
       ceipt, highly cited scientists, top patenters, and members of the National Academy of Science/Medicine
       (N = 6, 858 or 53%);
  (ii) “Shooting stars,” who enter the sample on the basis of a specific contribution (appointment as a
       Howard Hughes Medical Investigator; NIH MERIT/Director Pioneer awardees; Early career prize
       winners), with no presumption that this mark of elevated status will endure over the entire career
       (N = 3, 859 or 30%);
 (iii) “Cumulative⊕Shooting stars,” who enter the sample based on at least one cumulative metric, and at
       least one “burst” metric (N = 2, 218 or 17%).

We also create a subsample limited to the members of the National Academies of Science/Medicine and
Investigators of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. One can think of this rarefied subset (which de facto
subsumes Nobel prize winners and Lasker awardees) as “the elite within the elite” of academic biomedical
research (N=3,325 or 26% of the total).

In Table A2, we run our benchmark specification (number of papers in the field by non-collaborators, as in the
third column of Table 3) separately on these four subsamples. All the coefficients are positive in magnitude,
but some of them are imprecisely estimated. Table A3 lists all of the 452 extinct stars in the sample, along
with basic demographic information, cause of death, institutional affiliation, and a short description of their
research expertise.




  iii
        See Azoulay et al. (2011) for more details and an evaluation of this program.



                                                                 ii
Table A1: Star Decomposition
                          Highly       Highly        Top
                                                                    NAS        NAM      MERIT      HHMI       ECPW
                          Funded       Cited       Patenter
 Highly Funded             7,822         886          189            942       1,033     1,540       221        128
 Highly Cited               886         1,921          96            385        355       442        141        58
 Top Patenter               189          96           606             88        55         86        29         14
 NAS                        942          385           88           1,843       430       561        295        151
 NAM                       1,033         355          55             430       1,933      368        176        68
 MERIT                     1,540         442          86             561        368      2,898       196        145
 HHMI                       221          141           29            295        176       196        866        179
 ECPW                       128          58           14             151        68        145        179       1,114
Note: Metrics of stardom and their distribution in the sample of 12,935 eminent scientists. NAS=National Academy of
     Sciences; NAM=National Academy of Medicine; MERIT=Method to Extend Research In Time, an exceptional
     NIH grant category; HHMI=Howard Hughes Medical Investigator; ECPW=Early Career Prize Winners.




Table A2: Impacts by Type of Star
                                                                                   Shooting &
                                         Shooting            Cumulative                                “Elite of the
                                                                                   Cumulative
                                          Stars                Stars                                      Elite”
                                                                                       Stars
 After Death                                0.047                    0.079*            0.154*                0.032
                                           (0.056)                  (0.038)           (0.069)               (0.052)
 Nb. of Investigators                       1,551                    3,164             1,545                 1,708
 Nb. of Fields                              6,584                   16,095            11,539                11,855
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.                   242,409                  592,030           424,737               436,081
 Log Likelihood                           -535,715                -1,345,402         -938,102              -952,496
Note:   Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the
        total number of publications by non-collaborators in a subfield in a particular year, contributed by non-
        collaborators. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term
        common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to
        address the concern that age, year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry
        around the time of death for the deceased star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield
        numbers interpretable as elasticities.

        Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist.
        †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                            iii
Table A3: List of 452 Extinct Superstars
Investigator Name                                        Cause of death if known               Institution at the time of death                                    Scientific domain
Richard C. Parker           [1952-1986]   PhD, 1979      lymphoma                              Columbia University                                                 properties of cellular and viral src genes
Richard E. Weitzman         [1943-1980]   MD, 1968       cancer                                Harbor-UCLA Medical Center                                          arginine vasopressin metabolism
Eva U.J. Paucha             [1949-1988]   PhD, 1976      cancer                                Dana Farber Cancer Institute                                        mechanism of transformation by SV40 large T antigen
Kiertisin Dharmsathaphorn   [1950-1990]   MD, 1972       AIDS                                  University of California — San Diego                                intestinal secretory mechanisms and antidiarrheal drugs
Ernest G. Peralta           [1959-1999]   PhD, 1986      brain cancer                          Harvard University                                                  signal transduction mechanisms of muscarinic receptors
Roderich Walter             [1937-1979]   PhD, 1964      malignant melanoma                    University of Illinois                                              solid-phase peptide synthesis
JoAnn E. Franck             [1950-1992]   PhD, 1981      cancer                                University of Washington School of Medicine                         hippocampal damage as a cause of epilepsy
Thomas K. Tatemichi         [1952-1995]   MD, 1978       non hodgkin’s lymphoma                Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons                mechanisms and syndromes of dementia related to stroke
Bruce S. Schoenberg         [1942-1987]   MD, 1968       cancer                                NIH                                                                 prevention and control of neurological disorders
George Khoury               [1943-1987]   MD, 1970       lymphoma                              NIH                                                                 genetics of simian virus 40, human papovavirus and HIV
Leonard N. Horowitz         [1947-1992]   MD, 1972       cancer                                University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                       diagnosing and treatment of ventricular arrythmia
W. Alden Spencer            [1931-1977]   MD, 1956       long illness                          Columbia University                                                 plasticity of the simplest neuronal pathways
Jerome T. Pearlman          [1933-1979]   MD, 1957       prolonged illness                     UCLA                                                                laboratory studies of retinal degenerations
Joram Heller                [1934-1980]   MD/PhD, 1965   brain cancer                          UCLA                                                                biochemical and biophysical investigation of rhodopsin
B. Frank Polk               [1942-1988]   MD, 1967       brain cancer                          Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                         epidemiology of HIV infection
Ronald D. Fairshter         [1942-1988]   MD, 1968       rapidly metastatic melanoma           University of California — Irvine                                   clinical studies in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Cornelia P. Channing        [1938-1985]   PhD, 1966      breast cancer                         University of Maryland School of Medicine                           mechanism of luteinization in vitro and in vivo
Joel D. Meyers              [1944-1991]   MD, 1970       colon cancer                          University of Washington/FHCRC                                      infections caused by suppression of the immune system in organ transplant and AIDS patients
Richard L. Lyman            [1927-1975]   PhD, 1957      terminal illness for months           University of California — Berkeley                                 protein, trypsin inhibitors and pancreatic secretion
James N. Gilliam            [1936-1984]   MD, 1964       cancer                                University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas           cutaneous lupus erythematosus pathogenesis mechanisms
Gordon M. Tomkins           [1926-1975]   MD/PhD, 1953   brain surgery to remove a tumor       University of California — San Francisco                            pleiotypic response in regulation of cell growth
Muriel R. Steele            [1930-1979]   MD, 1957       metastatic disease                    University of California — San Francisco                            surgical treatment of liver trauma
Allastair M. Karmody        [1937-1986]   MD, 1963       gastric cancer                        Albany Medical College                                              novel procedures for difficult vascular surgical problems
Chaviva Isersky             [1937-1986]   PhD, 1967      cancer                                NIH/NIDDK                                                           Characterization of the protein responsible for amyloidosis
Melvin L. Marcus            [1940-1989]   MD, 1966       colon cancer                          UMASS                                                               cardiology, heart disease, coronary vascular adaptations to myocardial hypertrophy
Alan S. Morrison            [1943-1992]   PhD, 1972      cancer                                Brown University Medical School                                     hormones in the epidemiology of prostatic hyperplasia
Sidney Futterman            [1929-1979]   PhD, 1954      prolonged illness                     University of Washington School of Medicine                         biochemistry of the retina and pigment epithelium
Loretta L. Leive            [1936-1986]   PhD, 1963      cancer                                NIH/NIDDK                                                           role of bacterial cell surface in microbial physiology and pathogenesis
Philip G. Weiler            [1941-1991]   MD, 1965       terminal illness                      University of California — Davis                                    coronary heart disease & stroke in the elderly
Ira M. Goldstein            [1942-1992]   MD, 1966       metastatic lung cancer                University of California — San Francisco                            pancreatitis, complement and lung injury
Harold Weintraub            [1945-1995]   MD/PhD, 1973   brain cancer                          University of Washington/FHCRC                                      characterization and function of MyoD gene
Richard K. Gershon          [1932-1983]   MD, 1959       lung cancer                           Yale University                                                     immunologic responses to tumor grafts
Edward J. Sachar            [1933-1984]   MD, 1956       stroke three years ago                Columbia University                                                 psychoendocrine studies of schizophrenic reactions
Catherine Cole-Beuglet      [1936-1987]   MD, 1962       colon cancer                          University of California — Irvine                                   ultrasonography of the breast
Theodore S. Zimmerman       [1937-1988]   MD, 1963       lung cancer                           Scripps Research Institute                                          platelet/plasma protein interaction in blood coagulation
Markku Linnoila             [1947-1998]   MD/PhD, 1974   cancer                                NIH                                                                 studies on the biological bases of impulsivity and aggression
William J. Mellman          [1928-1980]   MD, 1952       lymphoma                              University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                       human genetics and pediatrics
Dennis Slone                [1930-1982]   MD, 1956       long illness                          Boston University School of Medicine                                intensive inpatient psychiatric monitoring program
Roger O. Eckert             [1934-1986]   PhD, 1960      melanoma                              UCLA                                                                ionic and metabolic mechanisms in neuronal excitability
Michael Solursh             [1942-1994]   PhD, 1968      AIDS                                  University of Iowa School of Medicine                               extracellular matrix and cell migration
Larry C. Clark              [1948-2000]   PhD, 1981      prostate cancer                       University of Arizona                                               nutritional prevention of cancer
Robert F. Spencer           [1949-2001]   PhD, 1974      gastric carcinoma                     Medical College of Virginia                                         neuroanatomy of the oculomotor system
Carl C. Levy                [1928-1981]   PhD, 1957      leukemia                              NIH/NCI                                                             regulation of intracellular messenger RNA
Marshall H. Becker          [1940-1993]   PhD, 1968      intractable illness                   University of Michigan, Ann Arbor                                   elaboration of the health belief model
Samuel W. Perry, 3rd        [1941-1994]   MD, 1967       pancreatic cancer                     Cornell University — Weill Medical College                          psychological course of prolonged infection among AIDS patients
Michael A. Kirschenbaum     [1944-1997]   MD, 1969       long illness                          University of California — Irvine                                   prostaglandins and kidney medicine
Janis V. Giorgi             [1947-2000]   PhD, 1977      uterine cancer                        UCLA                                                                cellular immunology of resistance to HIV
Herbert F. Hasenclever      [1924-1978]   PhD, 1953      cancer                                NIH/NIAID                                                           mannan polysaccharides of pathogenic fungi
Edward C. Franklin          [1928-1982]   MD, 1950       brain cancer                          New York University School of Medicine                              structure and properties of rheumatoid antibodies
Robert M. Joy               [1941-1995]   PhD, 1969      cancer                                University of California — Davis                                    pesticide induced changes in central nervous function
Lois K. Miller              [1945-1999]   PhD, 1972      melanoma                              University of Georgia                                               genetics and molecular biology of baculoviruses
Gerald T. Babcock           [1946-2000]   PhD, 1973      cancer                                Michigan State University                                           bioenergetic mechanisms in multicenter enzymes
John G. Gambertoglio        [1947-2001]   PharmD, 1972   multiple sclerosis                    University of California — San Francisco                            pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers and subjects with renal insufficiency and on hemodialysis
John C. Cassel              [1921-1976]   MD, 1946                                             University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill                         Contribution of the social environment to host resistance
Ernst A. Noltmann           [1931-1986]   MD, 1956       severe health problems                University of California — Riverside                                biochemical and physical characterization of phosphoglucose isomerase
Edward A. Smuckler          [1931-1986]   MD/PhD, 1963   barrett’s disease/oesophagal cancer   University of California — San Francisco                            cytochemical studies in liver injury
Joseph W. St. Geme, Jr.     [1931-1986]   MD, 1956       cardiac myopathy                      University of Colorado Health Sciences Center                       studies of cellular resistance to virus infection
Edwin H. Beachey            [1934-1989]   MD, 1962       cancer                                University of Tennessee                                             chemistry and immunology of streptococcal m proteins
Ora M. Rosen                [1935-1990]   MD, 1960       breast cancer                         Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research                       Cloning and characterization of gene for human insulin receptor
Tai-Shun Lin                [1939-1994]   PhD, 1970      non hodgkin’s lymphoma                Yale University                                                     synthesis and development of nucleoside analogs as antiviral and anticancer compounds
Judith G. Pool              [1919-1975]   PhD, 1946      brain tumor                           Stanford University                                                 pathophysiology of hemophilia
Ardie Lubin                 [1920-1976]   PhD, 1951      serious illness for months            Naval Health Research Center                                        repeated measurement design in psychopharmacology
William H. Hildemann        [1927-1983]   PhD, 1956      amyotrophic lateral sclerosis         UCLA                                                                mechanisms of immunoblocking versus tumor immunity
Murray Rabinowitz           [1927-1983]   MD, 1950       muscular dystrophy                    University of Chicago                                               mitochondrial assembly and replication
Paul A. Obrist              [1931-1987]   PhD, 1958      3 year illness                        University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill                         blood pressure control: relation to behavioral stress
C. Richard Taylor           [1939-1995]   PhD, 1963      heart failure                         Harvard University                                                  locomotion–idling metabolism and gait dynamics
Helene S. Smith             [1941-1997]   PhD, 1967      breast cancer                         University of California — San Francisco                            malignant progression of the human breast/predictors of breast cancer prognosis
Bruce W. Erickson           [1942-1998]   PhD, 1970      cancer                                University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill                         engineering of nongenetic beta proteins
Norton B. Gilula            [1944-2000]   PhD, 1971      lymphoma                              Scripps Research Institute                                          cell junction biosynthesis and biogenesis/cell-cell communication
John M. Eisenberg           [1946-2002]   MD, 1972       high-grade malignant glioma           Georgetown University Medical Center                                health services research
Elizabeth A. Bates          [1947-2003]   PhD, 1974      pancreatic cancer                     University of California — San Diego                                cross-linguistic studies of language development, processing and breakdown in aphasia
Ira Herskowitz              [1946-2003]   PhD, 1971      pancreatic cancer                     University of California — San Francisco                            genetics of yeast mating type
Wallace P. Rowe             [1926-1983]   MD, 1948       colon cancer                          NIH                                                                 genetic basis of disease in murine leukemia viruses
J. Weldon Bellville         [1926-1983]   MD, 1952       cancer                                UCLA                                                                dynamic isolation studies of control of respiration
Peter W. Lampert            [1929-1986]   MD, 1955       lymphoma                              University of California — San Diego                                pathogenesis of virus-induced brain disease
Sheldon D. Murphy           [1933-1990]   PhD, 1958      cancer                                University of Washington School of Medicine                         biochemical and physiologic response to toxic stress
Allan C. Wilson             [1934-1991]   PhD, 1961      leukemia                              University of California — Berkeley                                 use of molecular approaches to understand evolutionary change
Bernard N. Fields           [1938-1995]   MD, 1962       pancreatic cancer                     Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women’s Hospital                   genetic and molecular basis of viral injury to the nervous system
Priscilla A. Campbell       [1940-1998]   PhD, 1968      cervical cancer                       University of Colorado Health Sciences Center/Natl. Jewish Center   cell biology of the immune response to bacteria
Ethan R. Nadel              [1941-1998]   PhD, 1969      cancer                                Yale University                                                     thermoregulation during exercise and heat exposure
Peter A. Kollman            [1944-2001]   PhD, 1970      cancer                                University of California — San Francisco                            free energy perturbation calculations and their application to macromolecules




                                                                                                                           iv
Investigator Name                                       Cause of death if known                       Institution at the time of death                            Scientific domain
David Tapper               [1945-2002]   MD, 1970       long battle with renal cell carcinoma         University of Washington School of Medicine                 determination of a new growth factor in breast milk
Cyril S. Stulberg          [1919-1977]   PhD, 1947      multiple sclerosis                            Wayne State University School of Medicine                   characterization and preservation of cell strains
Dorothy T. Krieger         [1927-1985]   MD, 1949       breast cancer                                 Mount Sinai School of Medicine                              CNS-pituitary-adrenal interactions
Aaron Janoff               [1930-1988]   PhD, 1959      long illness                                  SUNY HSC at Stony Brook                                     pathology of smoking and emphysema
Wylie J. Dodds             [1934-1992]   MD, 1960       brain cancer                                  Medical College of Wisconsin                                esophageal motor function in health and disease
Oscar A. Kletzky           [1936-1994]   MD, 1961       lung cancer                                   UCLA                                                        ameliorating effects of estrogen replacement therapy on cerebral blood flow and sleep
Nelson Butters             [1937-1995]   PhD, 1964      Lou Gehrig’s disease                          University of California — San Diego                        cognitive deficits related to chronic alcoholism
Elizabeth M. Smith         [1939-1997]   PhD, 1978      cancer                                        Washington University in St. Louis                          psychiatric problems among disaster survivors
David G. Marsh             [1940-1998]   PhD, 1964      glioblastoma                                  Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 genetics of allergy and asthma
George C. Cotzias          [1918-1977]   MD, 1944       lung cancer                                   Cornell University Medical College                          studies of extrapyramidal & related behavioral disorders
Robert D. Allen            [1927-1986]   PhD, 1953      pancreatic cancer                             Dartmouth Medical School                                    cytoplasmic rheology of motile cells
Marilyn Bergner            [1933-1992]   PhD, 1970      ovarian cancer                                Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health            cost and efficacy of home care for COPD patients
G. Harrison Echols, Jr.    [1933-1993]   PhD, 1959      lung cancer                                   University of California — Berkeley                         Genetic and chemical studies of phage lambda development
Milton H. Stetson          [1943-2002]   PhD, 1970      prolonged and courageous fight with illness   University of Delaware                                      environmental regulation of reproduction and the onset of puberty
Nicholas R. DiLuzio        [1926-1986]   PhD, 1954      extended illness                              Tulane University School of Medicine                        role recognition factors and macrophages in neoplasia
Lauran D. Harris           [1927-1987]   MD, 1947       long illness                                  Boston University School of Medicine                        sphincter strength–its measurement and control
Charles W. Mays            [1930-1990]   PhD, 1958      cancer                                        National Cancer Institute                                   reducing cancer risk by radionuclide chelation
Lawrence H. Piette         [1932-1992]   PhD, 1957      cancer                                        Utah State University                                       electron spin resonance spectroscopy
Mehdi Tavassoli            [1933-1993]   MD, 1961       heart failure                                 University of Mississippi Medical Center                    hematopoietic stem cell purification and biology
Howard M. Temin            [1934-1994]   PhD, 1959      lung cancer                                   University of Wisconsin                                     molecular biology and genetics of tumor viruses
Mette Strand               [1937-1997]   PhD, 1964      cancer                                        Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 parasite immunochemistry and vaccine development
William L. Chick           [1938-1998]   MD, 1963       diabetes complications                        UMASS                                                       studies of islet and beta cells in pancreatic transplantation
Robert A. Mendelson, Jr.   [1941-2001]   PhD, 1968      lung cancer                                   University of California — San Francisco                    molecular mechanism of muscle contraction
Susan M. Sieber            [1942-2002]   PhD, 1971      breast cancer                                 National Cancer Institute                                   biochemical epidemiology and cancer
Joachim G. Liehr           [1942-2003]   PhD, 1968      pancreatic cancer                             University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston             mechanism of estrogen-induced carcinogenesis
Charles A. Janeway, Jr.    [1943-2003]   MD, 1969       B-cell lymphoma                               Yale University                                             innate immunity and T lymphocyte biology
Edward Herbert             [1926-1987]   PhD, 1953      pancreatic cancer                             Oregon Health & Science University                          regulation of expression of opioid peptides and receptors
Thomas W. Smith            [1936-1997]   MD, 1965       mesothelioma                                  Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women’s Hospital           Mechanism and reversal studies of digitalis
Roy H. Steinberg           [1935-1997]   MD/PhD, 1965   multiple myeloma                              University of California — San Francisco                    pigment epithelium interactions with neural retina
David W. Fulker            [1937-1998]   PhD, 1967      pancreatic cancer                             University of Colorado at Boulder                           adoption studies of development in middle childhood
Donald J. Cohen            [1940-2001]   MD, 1966       ocular melanoma                               Yale University                                             Tourette’s syndrome and autism in children
Harvey D. Preisler         [1941-2002]   MD, 1965       lymphoma                                      Rush Medical College                                        clinical and biological studies of myeloid leukemias
Carl M. Pearson            [1919-1981]   MD, 1946       cancer                                        UCLA                                                        studies in adjuvant-induced arthritis
Morton I. Grossman         [1919-1981]   MD/PhD, 1944   esophageal cancer                             UCLA                                                        studies on the etiology of peptic ulcer
Mones Berman               [1920-1982]   PhD, 1957      cancer                                        National Cancer Institute                                   quantitative, model-based problems in metabolism and endocrinology
Henry R. Mahler            [1921-1983]   PhD, 1948      heart failure                                 Indiana University                                          respiratory enzymes–structure, function, & biosynthesis
Milton Kern                [1925-1987]   PhD, 1954      lung cancer                                   NIH                                                         ribonucleic acids of specifically isolated ribosomes
Thoralf M. Sundt, Jr.      [1930-1992]   MD, 1959       bone marrow cancer                            Mayo Clinic                                                 surgical techniques for intracranial aneurysms
John C. Liebeskind         [1935-1997]   PhD, 1962      cancer                                        UCLA                                                        behavioral and electrophysiological studies of pain
Marian W. Fischman         [1939-2001]   PhD, 1972      colon cancer                                  Columbia University                                         behavioral pharmacology of cocaine
David S. Sigman            [1939-2001]   PhD, 1965      brain cancer                                  UCLA                                                        enzymology and gene targeting
Charles D. Heidelberger    [1920-1983]   PhD, 1946      carcinoma of nasal sinus                      University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine   effects of fluorinated pyrimidines on tumors
Sidney H. Ingbar           [1925-1988]   MD, 1947       lung cancer                                   Harvard Medical School/Beth Israel Medical Center           physiology of the thyroid gland and its clinical diseases
Kiichi Sagawa              [1926-1989]   MD/PhD, 1958   cancer                                        Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 modelling the mechanics of cardiac chamber contraction
Sydney E. Salmon           [1936-1999]   MD, 1962       pancreatic cancer                             University of Arizona                                       quantitative method for evaluating changes in myeloma tumor mass
Eva J. Neer                [1937-2000]   MD, 1963       breast cancer                                 Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women’s Hospital           regulation and cellular levels of G protein subunits
Lawrence D. Jacobs         [1938-2001]   MD, 1965       cancer                                        SUNY Buffalo                                                recombinant b interferon as treatment for Multiple Sclerosis
Richard J. Wyatt           [1939-2002]   MD, 1964       lung cancer                                   NIH                                                         biochemistry of schizophrenia
Robert J. Fass             [1939-2002]   MD, 1964       lung cancer                                   Ohio State University                                       In vitro methods to test antimicrobial susceptibility of infectious agents
Michael Doudoroff          [1911-1975]   PhD, 1939      cancer                                        University of California — Berkeley                         taxonomy and phylogeny of pseudomonads
Arnold M. Seligman         [1912-1976]   MD, 1937       prolonged terminal illness                    Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 drug development for prostatic carcinoma
Frederick H. Carpenter     [1918-1982]   PhD, 1944                                                    University of California — Berkeley                         mechanism of leucine aminopeptidase
Harvey M. Patt             [1918-1982]   PhD, 1942                                                    University of California — San Francisco                    ultra-high dose rates in experimental radiotherapy
Teruzo Konishi             [1920-1984]   MD/PhD, 1955   cancer                                        NIEHS                                                       physiological and biophysical functions of the inner ear
Mortimer B. Lipsett        [1921-1985]   MD, 1951       brain tumor                                   NIH                                                         steroid metabolic conversions in human subjects
Andrew C. Peacock          [1921-1985]   PhD, 1949      cancer                                        NIH/NCI                                                     materials and methods for polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
Harold Edelhoch            [1922-1986]   PhD, 1947      cancer                                        NIH/NIDDK                                                   fluorescence methods for the study of protein structures
Gerald L. Klerman          [1928-1992]   MD, 1954       diabetes                                      Cornell University — Weill Medical College                  phsychological studies of depression, schizophrenia and panic and other anxiety disorders
Nina S. Braunwald          [1928-1992]   MD, 1952       cancer                                        Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women’s Hospital           development of prosthetic heart valves for children
Amico Bignami              [1930-1994]   MD, 1954       brain cancer                                  Harvard Medical School                                      brain specific protein in astrocytes
Frank A. Oski              [1932-1996]   MD, 1958       prostate cancer                               Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 erythrocyte metabolism in the newborn infant
Richard P. Bunge           [1932-1996]   MD, 1960       esophageal cancer                             University of Miami                                         schwann cell biology and human spinal cord injury
Harold C. Neu              [1934-1998]   MD, 1960       glioblastoma                                  Columbia University                                         surface enzymes in bacteria
Jiri Palek                 [1934-1998]   MD, 1958       2 year illness                                Tufts University                                            membrane properties of abnormal red cells
Irving Kupfermann          [1938-2002]   PhD, 1964      Creutzfeldt-Jacob’s disease                   Columbia University                                         Behavioral and neural analysis of learning in aplaysia
Merton Bernfield           [1938-2002]   MD, 1961       Parkinson’s Disease                           Harvard Medical School/Children’s Hospital                  nature and interactions of cell surface proteoglycans during morphogenesis
Eleanor M. Saffran         [1938-2002]   PhD, 1968      amyotrophic lateral sclerosis                 Temple University School of Medicine                        cognitive deficits in brain-damaged patients
Barbara J. Lowery          [1938-2002]   PhD, 1973      ovarian cancer                                University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine               understanding stress responses of people who were physically ill
Elizabeth Stern            [1915-1980]   MD, 1940       cancer                                        UCLA                                                        effects of steroid contraception on the ovary
Joseph Stokes, 3rd         [1924-1989]   MD, 1949       cancer                                        Boston University School of Medicine                        epidemiological studies of coronary heart disease
W. Dean Warren             [1924-1989]   MD, 1950       cancer                                        Emory University                                            cirrhosis, shunt surgery, and nitrogen metabolism
Edward W. Purnell          [1928-1993]   MD, 1957       lung cancer                                   Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine          study of eye physiology and disease by ultrasound
Leo J. Neuringer           [1928-1993]   PhD, 1957      cancer                                        MIT                                                         NMR studies of normal and transformed cell membranes
Frank Lilly                [1930-1995]   PhD, 1965      prostate cancer                               Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University   role of hereditary factors in governing susceptibility to cancer-causing agents
Edwin L. Bierman           [1930-1995]   MD, 1955       bone cancer                                   University of Washington School of Medicine                 Metabolism of particulate fat in diabetes and atherosclerosis
Kenneth W. Sell            [1931-1996]   MD/PhD, 1968   complications from diabetes                   Emory University School of Medicine                         human tissue banking and transplantation
Edgar Haber                [1932-1997]   MD, 1956       multiple myeloma                              Harvard University School of Public Health                  biological regulation of the renin-angiotensin system
J. Christian Gillin        [1938-2003]   MD, 1966       esophageal cancer                             University of California — San Diego                        serotenergic mechanisms in sleep and depression
Albert Dorfman             [1916-1982]   MD/PhD, 1944   kidney failure                                University of Chicago                                       biochemistry of connective tissues
Henry S. Kaplan            [1918-1984]   MD, 1940       lung cancer                                   Stanford University                                         radiation-induced leukemia in the C57BL mouse
Charlotte Friend           [1921-1987]   PhD, 1950      lymphoma                                      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                              tissue studies of murine virus-induced leukemia
William H. Tooley          [1925-1992]   MD, 1949       long illness                                  University of California — San Francisco                    prevention and treatment of respiratory distress in neonates
Charles G. Moertel         [1927-1994]   MD, 1953       Hodgkin’s Disease                             Mayo Clinic                                                 clinical treatments of gastrointestinal cancer
Barbara H. Bowman          [1930-1996]   PhD, 1959      cancer                                        University of Texas HSC at San Antonio                      genetic control of the structure of human proteins
J. Calvin Giddings         [1930-1996]   PhD, 1955      prolonged battle with cancer                  University of Utah                                          biomedical separations: field-flow fractionation




                                                                                                                                  v
Investigator Name                                       Cause of death if known                     Institution at the time of death                            Scientific domain
John R. Williamson        [1934-2000]   PhD, 1959       cancer                                      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine               molecular mechanisms of hormonal signal transduction
John S. O’Brien           [1934-2001]   MD, 1960        postpolio complications                     University of California — San Diego                        discovery of the gene responsible for Tay-Sachs disease
Jon I. Isenberg           [1937-2003]   MD, 1963        cancer                                      University of California — San Diego                        duodenal mucosal bicarbonate secretion in human
George G. Glenner         [1927-1995]   MD, 1953        systemic senile amyloidosis                 University of California — San Diego                        molecular structure of the amyloid protein
J. Kiffin Penry           [1929-1996]   MD, 1955        complications of diabetes                   Bowman Gray School of Medicine at Wake Forest University    controlled clinical trials of anticonvulsant and anti-epileptic drugs
Paul C. MacDonald         [1930-1997]   MD, 1955        cancer                                      University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas   origin and interconversion of gonadal and adrenal streoid hormones
John Gibbon               [1934-2001]   PhD, 1967       cancer                                      Columbia University                                         CNS functions underlying the interval time sense in animals and humans
Donald F. Summers         [1934-2001]   MD, 1959        cancer                                      NIH                                                         composition, assembly and replication of RNA viruses
R. Gordon Gould           [1910-1978]   PhD, 1933       cancer                                      Stanford University                                         internal medicine and cardiology
Sol Spiegelman            [1914-1983]   PhD, 1944       pancreatic cancer                           Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons        nucleic acid hybridization
Frederick S. Philips      [1916-1984]   PhD, 1940       cancer                                      Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research               pharmacological properties of chemotherapeutic agents and chemical carcinogenesis
Cyrus Levinthal           [1922-1990]   PhD, 1951       lung cancer                                 Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons        colinearity of genes and proteins, and the nature of messenger RNA
Sidney Leskowitz          [1923-1991]   PhD, 1950       brain tumor                                 Tufts University                                            cellular aspects of tolerance & delayed hypersensitivity
Kenneth M. Moser          [1929-1997]   MD, 1954        cancer                                      University of California — San Diego                        clinical outcomes after pulmonary thromboendarterectomy
Donald A. Pious           [1930-1998]   MD, 1956        cancer                                      University of Washington School of Medicine                 somatic cell genetic analysis of human immune response genes
Louis V. Avioli           [1931-1999]   MD, 1957        cancer                                      Washington University in St. Louis                          mineral and skeletal metabolism in diabetes, kidney, and gastrointestinal disorders
Joseph E. Coleman         [1930-1999]   MD/PhD, 1963    cancer                                      Yale University                                             structure and function of metalloenzyme synthesis
Harvey C. Knowles, Jr.    [1915-1984]   MD, 1942        cancer                                      University of Cincinnati/Children’s Hospital                clinical studies of gestational diabetes
Joseph Cochin             [1916-1985]   MD/PhD, 1955    leukemia                                    Boston University School of Medicine                        factors in tolerance to the narcotic analgesics
Albert L. Lehninger       [1917-1986]   PhD, 1942       complications from asthma                   Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 structure and function of mitochondria
Charles W. Todd           [1918-1987]   PhD, 1943       long illness                                City of Hope Medical Center                                 immunology & immunochemistry of tumor antigens
David H. Blankenhorn      [1924-1993]   MD, 1947        prostate cancer                             University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine   control of risk factors in atherosclerosis
Paul M. Gallop            [1927-1996]   PhD, 1953       cancer                                      Harvard Medical School/Children’s Hospital                  Protein structure and collagen maturation
David J.L. Luck           [1929-1998]   MD/PhD, 1962    lymphoma                                    Rockefeller University                                      microtubular systems in human cells
Edward W. Moore           [1930-1999]   MD, 1955        aspergillosis                               Medical College of Virginia                                 Pathophysiology of the billiary tract and gallbladder
Donald J. Reis            [1931-2000]   MD, 1956        hepatic cancer                              Cornell University — Weill Medical College                  neural control of blood circulation
Julius Marmur             [1926-1996]   PhD, 1951       lymphoma                                    Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University   genetics and biochemistry of cellular regulation
Nemat O. Borhani          [1926-1996]   MD, 1949        acute leukemia                              University of Nevada at Reno                                multicenter clinical studies of hypertension and cardiovascular disease
Russell Ross              [1929-1999]   DDS/PhD, 1962   cancer                                      University of Washington School of Medicine                 response-to-injury origins of atherosclerosis
Richard A. Carleton       [1931-2001]   MD, 1955        cancer                                      Brown University Medical School                             clinical studies of diet and smoking as cardiovascular disease risk factors
Gilda H. Loew             [1931-2001]   PhD, 1957       breast cancer                               Molecular Research Institute                                computational investigation of the structural and functional aspects of heme proteins and enzymes
N. Raphael Shulman        [1925-1996]   MD, 1947        cancer                                      NIH/NIDDK                                                   mechanisms of autoimmune, alloimmune, and drug-dependent cytopenias
George Winokur            [1925-1996]   MD, 1947        pancreatic cancer                           University of Iowa School of Medicine                       genetics of bipolar disease, mania, alcoholism and other psychiatric diseases
Giovanni Di Chiro         [1926-1997]   MD, 1949        lung cancer                                 NIH                                                         interventional neuroradiology
Norman P. Salzman         [1926-1997]   PhD, 1953       pancreatic cancer                           NIH                                                         glycosylation of SIV gp120–role in the immune response
Fritz E. Dreifuss         [1926-1997]   MD, 1950        lung cancer                                 University of Virginia School of Medicine                   clinical investigations of childhood epilepsy
Dante G. Scarpelli        [1927-1998]   MD/PhD, 1960    esophageal adenocarcinoma                   Northwestern University                                     metabolism of pancreatic carcinogens
Hans J. Müller-Eberhard   [1927-1998]   MD, 1953        cancer                                      Scripps Research Institute                                  identification of proteins and reaction mechanisms of the complement system
Miriam M. Salpeter        [1929-2000]   PhD, 1953       thyroid cancer                              Cornell University                                          neurobiology of myasthenia gravis
Gerald Cohen              [1930-2001]   PhD, 1955       cancer                                      Mount Sinai School of Medicine                              H2O2 and oxy-radical stress in catecholamine neurons
James K. McDougall        [1931-2003]   PhD, 1971       gastric cancer                              University of Washington/FHCRC                              role of DNA viruses in cancer
Edward H. Kass            [1917-1990]   MD/PhD, 1947    lung cancer                                 Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women’s Hospital           mechanism of toxic shock syndrome
Norman Kretchmer          [1923-1995]   MD/PhD, 1952    kidney cancer                               University of California — Berkeley                         regulation of metabolism during developement
Adolph I. Cohen           [1924-1996]   PhD, 1954       leukemia                                    Washington University in St. Louis                          biochemistry and pharmacology of the retina
John L. Doppman           [1928-2000]   MD, 1953        cancer                                      NIH                                                         flow dynamics in anterior spinal artery
David E. Green            [1910-1983]   PhD, 1934       cancer                                      University of Wisconsin                                     molecular biology of membrane systems
Alton Meister             [1922-1995]   MD, 1945        complications from a stroke                 Cornell University — Weill Medical College                  amino acid and glutathione biochemistry
Gisela Mosig              [1930-2003]   PhD, 1959       undergoing cancer treatment for two years   Vanderbilt University                                       dna replication and recombination in bacteriophages
Choh Hao Li               [1913-1987]   PhD, 1938       cancer of the pharynx                       University of California — San Francisco                    isolation and synthesis the human pituitary growth hormone
Robert H. Abeles          [1926-2000]   PhD, 1955       Parkinson’s disease                         Brandeis University                                         rational design of small-molecule inhibitors of enzymes
Alfred P. Wolf            [1923-1998]   PhD, 1953       lengthy illness                             Brookhaven National Laboratory                              synthesis of simple molecules in pure form and high specific activity for PET
Marian E. Koshland        [1921-1997]   PhD, 1949       lung cancer                                 University of California — Berkeley                         biochemical methods to examine the immune response
Timothy J. Regan          [1924-2001]   MD, 1952        colon cancer                                UMDNJ Newark                                                myocardial function and metabolism in chronic disease
Thomas C. Chalmers        [1917-1995]   MD, 1943        prostate cancer                             Mount Sinai School of Medicine                              inter-hospital cooperative studies of cirrhosis
Mortimer M. Elkind        [1922-2000]   PhD, 1953       long illness                                Colorado State University                                   cell radiation response of cultured mammalian cells
Hamish N. Munro           [1915-1994]   MD/PhD, 1956    died in a nursing home. Parkinson           Tufts University                                            nutritional regulation of protein metabolism
Ruth Sager                [1916-1997]   PhD, 1948       bladder cancer                              Harvard Medical School/DFCI                                 role of tumor suppressor genes in breast cancer
David M. Maurice          [1922-2002]   PhD, 1951       liver cancer                                Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons        interference theory of corneal transparency
Robert A. Good            [1922-2003]   MD/PhD, 1947    esophageal cancer                           University of South Florida College of Medicine             role of the thymus in immune system development
Harland G. Wood           [1907-1991]   PhD, 1935       lymphoma                                    Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine          heterotrophic carbon dioxide fixation
Hans Popper               [1903-1988]   MD/PhD, 1944    pancreatic cancer                           Mount Sinai School of Medicine                              correlation of structure and function in liver disease
Fritz A. Lipmann          [1899-1986]   MD/PhD, 1928    natural reasons                             Rockefeller University                                      glucose transport in normal and malignant cells
Paul J. Scheuer           [1915-2003]   PhD, 1950       leukemia                                    University of Hawaii                                        structure and properties of spinochromes
Berta V. Scharrer         [1906-1995]   PhD, 1930       natural causes                              Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University   immunocytochemical study of invertebrate nervous system
Michael W. Pozen          [1945-1981]   MD/PhD, 1974    heart attack                                Boston University School of Medicine                        confirmation parameters to assess EMT’s decisions
Ronald E. Talcott         [1947-1984]   PhD, 1973       automobile accident                         University of California — San Francisco                    carboxylesterases of toxicologic significance
Nathaniel A. Young        [1939-1979]   MD, 1962        drowned in British Virgin Islands           National Cancer Institute                                   oncology and molecular pathology
Ahmad I. Bukhari          [1943-1983]   PhD, 1971       heart attack                                Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory                               life cycle of mutator phage μ
Alan P. Wolffe            [1959-2001]   PhD, 1984       car accident                                NIH                                                         role of DNA methylation in regulating gene expression in normal and pathological states
Shu-Ren Lin               [1936-1979]   MD, 1962        plane crash                                 University of Rochester                                     imaging studies of cerebral blood flow after cardiac arrest
William D. Nunn           [1943-1986]   PhD, 1972       sudden cardiac arrest                       University of California — Irvine                           regulation of fatty acid/acetate metabolism in e. coli
John L. Kemink            [1949-1992]   MD, 1975        murder                                      University of Michigan, Ann Arbor                           vestibular diagnosis and surgery, acoustic neuromas, and cochlear implants
Stanley R. Kay            [1946-1990]   PhD, 1980       heart attack                                Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University   symptoms and diagnostic tests of schizophrenia
Roberta D. Shahin         [1953-1997]   PhD, 1985       sudden accute illness                       Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research                mouse model of respiratory B. pertussis infection in mice
Robert M. Pratt, Jr.      [1942-1987]   PhD, 1970       died in his sleep                           NIEHS/University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill           craniofacial development of the fetus
Howard J. Eisen           [1942-1987]   MD, 1969        suicide                                     NIH/NICHD                                                   mechanism of action of cortisol and related glucocorticoid hormones
Joaquim Puig-Antich       [1944-1989]   MD, 1967        asthma attack                               University of Pittsburgh                                    psychobiology and treatment of child depression
Elizabeth A. Rich         [1952-1998]   MD, 1977        traffic accident                            Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine          natural history of lymphocytic alveolitis in hiv disease
Jeffrey M. Hoeg           [1952-1998]   MD, 1977        renal cancer                                NIH/NHLBI                                                   lipoprotein metabolism and its connection to cardiovascular disease
Matthew L. Thomas         [1953-1999]   PhD, 1981       died while travelling                       Washington University in St. Louis                          function and regulation of leukocyte surface glycoproteins
Mu-En Lee                 [1954-2000]   MD/PhD, 1984    complications from routine surgery          Harvard Medical School/MGH                                  characterization of vascular smooth muscle LIM protein
Tsunao Saitoh             [1949-1996]   PhD, 1977       murdered                                    University of California — San Diego                        altered protein kinases in alzheimer’s disease
James W. Prahl            [1931-1979]   MD/PhD, 1964    rock climing accident                       University of Utah                                          structural basis of the functions of human complement
Pokar M. Kabra            [1942-1990]   PhD, 1972       plane crash                                 University of California — San Francisco                    application of liquid chromatography to therapeutic drug monitoring
Harold A. Menkes          [1938-1987]   MD, 1963        car accident                                Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 occupational and environmental lung disease




                                                                                                                              vi
Investigator Name                                        Cause of death if known                             Institution at the time of death                                      Scientific domain
Richard E. Heikkila         [1942-1991]   PhD, 1969      murder                                              UMDNJ Robert Wood Johnson Medical School                              oxidation-reduction reactions and the dopamine receptor system
Howard S. Tager             [1945-1994]   PhD, 1971      heart attack                                        University of Chicago                                                 biochemical structure, action, regulation and degradation of the insulin and glucagon molecules
Sukdeb Mukherjee            [1946-1995]   MD, 1971       short illness                                       Medical College of Georgia                                            neuroleptic effects on regional cerebral blood flow
John J. Wasmuth             [1946-1995]   PhD, 1973      heart attack                                        University of California — Irvine                                     human-hamster somatic cell hybrids/localization of Hnyington’s disease gene
Richard P. Nordan           [1949-1998]   PhD, 1983      cerebral aneurysm                                   NIH                                                                   immunologist and molecular biologist
Roland L. Phillips          [1937-1987]   MD/PhD, 1971   glider plane accident                               Loma Linda University School of Medicine                              role of lifestyle in cancer and cardiovascular disease among Adventists
Samuel A. Latt              [1938-1988]   MD/PhD, 1971   heart attack                                        Harvard Medical School/Children’s Hospital                            genetic and cytogenetic studies of mental retardation
Emil T. Kaiser              [1938-1988]   PhD, 1959      complications from kidney transplant                Rockefeller University                                                mechanism of carboxypeptidase action
D. Michael Gill             [1940-1990]   PhD, 1967      heart attack                                        Tufts University                                                      biochemistry of cholera toxin and other pathogenic toxins
John P. Merlie              [1945-1995]   PhD, 1973      heart failure                                       Washington University in St. Louis                                    molecular genetics of the acetylcholine receptor
Robert S. Krooth            [1929-1980]   MD/PhD, 1957   suicide/self-inflicted gunshot wound                Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons                  biochemical deffects in inherited metabolic disorders
Takeo Kakunaga              [1937-1988]   PhD, 1966      lung cancer with a brain metastasis                 NIH/NCI                                                               malignant transformation of mammalian cells by chemical carcinogens
Abraham Worcel              [1938-1989]   MD, 1963       suicide                                             University of Rochester                                               structure of interphase and metaphase chromosomes
Roland D. Ciaranello        [1943-1994]   MD, 1970       heart attack                                        Stanford University                                                   molecular neurobiology and developmental disorders
Gary J. Miller              [1950-2001]   MD/PhD, 1978   heart attack                                        University of Colorado Health Sciences Center                         vitamin D receptors in the growth regulation of prostate cancer cells
William B. Reed             [1924-1976]   MD, 1952                                                           University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine             cutaneous genetic disorders
James R. Neely              [1936-1988]   PhD, 1966      heart attack                                        Penn State University                                                 effects of diabetes and oxygen deficiency in regulation of metabolism in the heart
Mary Lou Clements           [1946-1998]   MD, 1972       airplane crash                                      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                           development of AIDS vaccines
John B. Penney, Jr.         [1947-1999]   MD, 1973       heart attack                                        Harvard Medical School/MGH                                            receptor mechanisms in movement disorder pathophysiology
Lynn M. Wiley               [1947-1999]   PhD, 1975      plane crash                                         University of California — Davis                                      morphogenesis in early mammalian embryos
Trudy L. Bush               [1949-2001]   PhD, 1977      heart attack                                        University of Maryland School of Medicine                             postmenopausal estrogen/progestins interventions
Arend Bouhuys               [1926-1979]   MD/PhD, 1956   heart attack                                        Yale University                                                       community studies of obstructive lung disease
Erhard Gross                [1928-1981]   PhD, 1958      automobile collision                                NIH/NICHD                                                             structural analysis of naturally-occuring peptide antibiotics
Richard C. Lillehei         [1928-1981]   MD/PhD, 1960   died while jogging                                  University of Minnesota                                               mechanisms of RES stimulation in experimental shock
Hymie L. Nossel             [1930-1983]   MD/PhD, 1962   heart attack                                        Columbia University                                                   causes of thrombosis and the nature of hemostasis
James C. Steigerwald        [1935-1988]   MD, 1961                                                           University of Colorado Health Sciences Center                         internal medicine / rheumatology
Simon J. Pilkis             [1942-1995]   MD/PhD, 1971   heart attack                                        University of Minnesota                                               carbohydrate metabolism and diabetes
James Olds                  [1922-1976]   PhD, 1952      swimming accident                                   California Institute of Technology                                    pharmacology of motivational mechanisms
Peter W. Neurath            [1923-1977]   PhD, 1950      heart attack                                        Tufts University                                                      chromosomal variants of cells converted by viruses
Emanuel M. Bogdanove        [1925-1979]   PhD, 1953      killed in an accident                               Medical College of Virginia                                           endocrine-influencing centers in the hypothalamus
Harold A. Baltaxe           [1931-1985]   MD, 1960       heart attack                                        University of California — Davis                                      development of new coronary angiographic techniques
Roy D. Schmickel            [1936-1990]   MD, 1961       died tragically                                     University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine                         isolation and characterization of human ribosomal DNA
Fredric S. Fay              [1943-1997]   PhD, 1969      heart attack                                        UMASS                                                                 generation and regulation of force in smooth muscle
Roger R. Williams           [1944-1998]   MD, 1971       airplane crash                                      University of Utah                                                    genetics and epidemiology of coronary artery diseases
Jeffrey M. Isner            [1947-2001]   MD, 1973       heart attack                                        Tufts University                                                      therapeutic angiogenesis in vascular medicine, cardiovascular laser phototherapy
Gustavo Cudkowicz           [1927-1982]   MD, 1952       brief illness                                       SUNY Buffalo                                                          controls of proliferation specific for leukemias
John C. Seidel              [1933-1988]   PhD, 1961      heart attack                                        Boston Biomedical Research Institute                                  actin-myosin interaction in pulmonary smooth muscle
William L. McGuire          [1937-1992]   MD, 1964       scuba-diving accident                               University of Texas HSC at San Antonio                                mechanisms of hormonal control and growth and regression of mammary carcinoma
Eric Holtzman               [1939-1994]   PhD, 1964      ingestion of potassium cyanide, self-administered   Columbia University                                                   dynamic of cell membranes
Julio V. Santiago           [1942-1997]   MD, 1967       heart attack                                        Washington University in St. Louis                                    role of social factors, lifestyle practices, and medication in the onset of type II diabetes
John J. Pisano              [1929-1985]   PhD, 1955      heart attack                                        NIH/NHLBI                                                             isolation of active peptides
Dale E. McFarlin            [1936-1992]   MD, 1961       heart attack                                        NIH                                                                   neuroimmunological studies of multiple sclerosis
Walter F. Heiligenberg      [1938-1994]   PhD, 1964      plane crash                                         University of California — San Diego                                  neuroethological studies of electrolocation
George J. Schroepfer, Jr.   [1932-1998]   MD/PhD, 1961   heart attack                                        Rice University                                                       regulation of the formation and metabolism of cholesterol
Thomas A. McMahon           [1943-1999]   PhD, 1970      complications from routine surgery                  Harvard University                                                    orthopedic biomechanics
Joseph F. Foster            [1918-1975]   PhD, 1943      heart attack                                        Purdue University                                                     configurational changes in protein molecules
Gerald P. Rodnan            [1927-1983]   MD, 1949       complications after vascular surgery                University of Pittsburgh                                              renal transport if uric acid and protein
George Streisinger          [1927-1984]   PhD, 1953      scuba-diving accident                               University of Oregon                                                  genetic mutations and the nervous system development in lower vertebrates
Lucien B. Guze              [1928-1985]   MD, 1951       sudden cardiac arrest                               UCLA                                                                  pathogenesis of experimental pyelonephritis
Lubomir S. Hnilica          [1929-1986]   PhD, 1952      automobile accident                                 Vanderbilt University                                                 nuclear antigens in human colorectal cancer
Charles L. Wittenberger     [1930-1987]   PhD, 1959      motorcycle accident                                 NIH/NINDR                                                             regulation of the pathways of intermediary metabolism
D. Martin Carter            [1936-1993]   MD/PhD, 1971   dissecting aortic aneurysm                          Rockefeller University                                                susceptibility of pigment and cutaneous cells to DNA injury by UV
Verne M. Chapman            [1938-1995]   PhD, 1965      died suddenly while attending meeting               Roswell Park Cancer Institute/SUNY Buffalo                            development of cumulative multilocus map of mouse chromosomes
Dolph O. Adams              [1939-1996]   MD/PhD, 1969   unexpected                                          Duke University                                                       development and regulation of macrophage activation
Lee A. Lillard              [1943-2000]   PhD, 1972      heart attack                                        University of Michigan, Ann Arbor                                     aging and retirement studies
Don C. Wiley                [1944-2001]   PhD, 1971      accidental fall                                     Harvard University                                                    viral membrane and glycoprotein structure
Lonnie D. Russell, Jr.      [1944-2001]   PhD, 1974      swimming accident                                   Southern Illinois University School of Medicine                       filament regulation of spermatogenesis
Herbert J. Rapp             [1923-1981]   PhD, 1955                                                          National Cancer Institute                                             immunologist and cancer research
Eugene C. Jorgensen         [1923-1981]   PhD, 1953      murdered                                            University of California — San Francisco                              structure/activity relationships of compounds related to thyroxin
Margaret O. Dayhoff         [1925-1983]   PhD, 1948      heart attack                                        Georgetown University Medical Center                                  computer study of sequences of amino acids in proteins
Norman Geschwind            [1926-1984]   MD, 1951       heart attack                                        Harvard Medical School/Beth Israel Medical Center                     relationship between the anatomy of the brain and behavior
Laurence M. Sandler         [1929-1987]   PhD, 1956      heart attack                                        University of Washington School of Medicine                           cytogenetics of meiosis and development in drosophila
L. Rao Chervu               [1930-1988]   PhD, 1962      brutally murdered                                   Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University             improved radiopharmaceuticals for nephrology and urology
Peter M. Steinert           [1945-2003]   PhD, 1972      heart attack                                        NIH                                                                   structures and interactions of the proteins characteristic of epithelial cells
Arnold Lazarow              [1916-1975]   MD/PhD, 1941   brief illness                                       University of Minnesota                                               fetal endocrinology and study of diabetes & pregnancy
Edward V. Evarts            [1926-1985]   MD, 1948       heart attack                                        NIH                                                                   electrophysiological activity of in vivo neurons in waking and sleeping states
Anthony Dipple              [1940-1999]   PhD, 1964      heart attack                                        NIH                                                                   metabolic activation and DNA interactions of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon carcinogens
Gerald L. Stoner            [1943-2002]   PhD, 1974      complications following a fall                      NIH/NINDS                                                             neuropathology and molecular epidemiology of the human polyomavirus
G. Scott Giebink            [1944-2003]   MD, 1969       heart attack                                        University of Minnesota                                               pathogenesis of otitis media and immunizations
Daniel A. Brody             [1915-1975]   MD, 1940       heart attack                                        University of Tennessee                                               generator properties of isolated mammalian hearts
Michelangelo G.F. Fuortes   [1917-1977]   MD, 1941                                                           NIH/NINDS                                                             study of the peripheral visual system in vertebrate animals
Sidney Riegelman            [1921-1981]   PhD, 1948      drowned while scuba diving                          University of California — San Francisco                              intersubject variation in first pass effect of drugs
Lewis W. Wannamaker         [1923-1983]   MD, 1948       heart attack                                        University of Mississippi Medical Center                              clinical and epidemiologic aspects of streptococcal infections
Donald J. Magilligan, Jr.   [1929-1989]   MD, 1965       short illness                                       Henry Ford Health Sciences Center                                     natural history and limitations of porcine heart valves
Ronald G. Thurman           [1941-2001]   PhD, 1967      massive heart attack                                University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill                           hepatic metabolism, alcoholic liver injury and toxicology
F. Brantley Scott, Jr.      [1930-1991]   MD, 1955       plane crash                                         Baylor University College of Medicine/St. Luke’s Episcopal Hospital   development of the penile prosthesis
DeWitt S. Goodman           [1930-1991]   MD, 1955       pulmonary embolism                                  Columbia University                                                   lipid metabolism and its role in the development of heart and artery disease
Donald C. Shreffler         [1933-1994]   PhD, 1961      heart attack                                        Washington University in St. Louis                                    organization and functions of H-2 gene complex
A. Arthur Gottlieb          [1937-1998]   MD, 1961       pulmonary embolus following surgery                 Tulane University School of Medicine                                  role of macrophage nucleic acid in antibody production
John N. Whitaker            [1940-2001]   MD, 1965       injuries following a bycicle race                   University of Alabama at Birmingham                                   molecular immunopathogenesis of demyelinating disease
Christopher A. Dawson       [1942-2003]   PhD, 1969      suddenly                                            Medical College of Wisconsin                                          pulmonary hemodynamics
Maurice S. Raben            [1915-1977]   MD, 1939                                                           Tufts University                                                      humoral and metabolic aspects of cardiac function
Josiah Brown                [1923-1985]   MD, 1947       tragic accident                                     UCLA                                                                  biochemical studies of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism
John H. Walsh               [1938-2000]   MD, 1963       heart attack                                        UCLA                                                                  gastrointestinal hormones, gastric acid production and peptic ulcer disease
Jerome R. Vinograd          [1913-1976]   PhD, 1940                                                          California Institute of Technology                                    biochemistry and molecular biology




                                                                                                                                        vii
Investigator Name                                         Cause of death if known                           Institution at the time of death                            Scientific domain
Merton F. Utter             [1917-1980]   PhD, 1942                                                         Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine          structure and function of pep carboxykinase isozymes
E. Jack Wylie               [1918-1982]   MD, 1943        heart attack                                      University of California — San Francisco                    development of techniques for the treatment and management of chronic visceral ischemia
Kwan C. Tsou                [1922-1985]   PhD, 1950       heart attack                                      University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine               development of serum nuclease isozyme test for cancer
Norbert Freinkel            [1926-1989]   MD, 1949        heart attack                                      Northwestern University                                     metabolic regulation in normal and diabetic pregnancies
Edgar C. Henshaw            [1929-1992]   MD, 1956        complications from early-stage cancer treatment   University of Rochester                                     intermediary metabolism in animals and in man
Donald T. Witiak            [1935-1998]   PhD, 1961       stroke                                            University of Wisconsin                                     stereochemical studies of hypocholesterolemic agents
Thomas P. Dousa             [1937-2000]   MD/PhD, 1968    heart attack                                      Mayo Clinic                                                 cellular action of vasopressin in the kidney
Thomas F. Burks, II         [1938-2001]   PhD, 1967       heart attack                                      University of Texas HSC at Houston                          central and peripheral neuropeptide pharmacology
Robert M. Macnab            [1940-2003]   PhD, 1969       accidental fall                                   Yale University                                             sequence analysis and function of bacterial flagellar motor
David Pressman              [1916-1980]   PhD, 1940                                                         Roswell Park Cancer Institute/SUNY Buffalo                  structure and function of antibody molecules and tissue antigens of the HLA system
Abraham M. Lilienfeld       [1920-1984]   MD, 1944        heart attack                                      Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health            epidemiological methods for the study of chronic diseases
Marion I. Barnhart          [1921-1985]   PhD, 1950       traffic accident                                  Wayne State University School of Medicine                   cellular sites for synthesis of blood proteins
Thomas R. Johns, 2nd        [1924-1988]   MD, 1948        refractory arrhythmia                             University of Virginia School of Medicine                   physiological studies of myasthenia gravis
Gerald D. Aurbach           [1927-1991]   MD, 1954        hit in a head by a stone                          NIH                                                         bone metabolism and calcium homeostasis
Demetrios Papahadjopoulos   [1934-1998]   PhD, 1963       adverse drug reaction/multi-organ failure         University of California — San Francisco                    phospholipid-protein interactions, lipid vesicles, and membrane function
Takis S. Papas              [1935-1999]   PhD, 1970       unexpected and sudden                             Medical University of South Carolina                        characterization of ETS genes and retroviral onc genes
John J. Jeffrey, Jr.        [1937-2001]   PhD, 1965       stroke                                            Albany Medical College                                      mechanism of action and the physiologic regulation of mammalian collagenases
Victor J. Ferrans           [1937-2001]   MD/PhD, 1963    complications from diabetes                       NIH                                                         myocardial and vascular pathobiology
James N. Davis              [1939-2003]   MD, 1965        airplane crash                                    SUNY HSC at Stony Brook                                     mechanisms underlying neuronal injury after brain ischemia
Frederick B. Bang           [1916-1981]   MD, 1939        heart attack                                      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 cell virus relationships in respiratory mucosae
James M. Felts              [1923-1988]   PhD, 1955       heart failure                                     University of California — San Francisco                    synthesis and processing of plasma lipoproteins
Ernst Freese                [1925-1990]   PhD, 1954       cerebral hemorrhage                               NIH/NINDS                                                   studies of environmental mutagenesis
Lucien J. Rubinstein        [1924-1990]   MD, 1948        ruptured intracranial aneurysm                    University of Virginia School of Medicine                   differentiation and stroma-induction in neural tumors
George B. Craig, Jr.        [1930-1995]   PhD, 1956       heart attack                                      University of Notre Dame                                    genetics and reproductive biology of aedes mosquitoes
James R. Klinenberg         [1934-1999]   MD, 1959        intracerebral hemorrhage                          UCLA                                                        pathophysiology of gout and hyperuricemia
Paul B. Sigler              [1934-2000]   MD/PhD, 1967    heart attack                                      Yale University                                             structural analysis of biological macromolecules
Sandy C. Marks, Jr.         [1937-2002]   DDS/PhD, 1968   heart attack                                      UMASS                                                       vitamin D and bone modeling
Albert H. Coons             [1912-1978]   MD, 1937        coronary disease and congestive heart failure     Harvard Medical School                                      studies on antibody formation
Henry G. Kunkel             [1916-1983]   MD, 1942        complications after vascular surgery              Rockefeller University                                      identification of MHC Class II molecules
Edgar E. Ribi               [1920-1986]   PhD, 1948       plane crash                                       NIH/NIAID                                                   fine structure of immunologically-active cell constituents for the development of vaccines
Bertram Sacktor             [1922-1988]   PhD, 1949       heart attack                                      National Institute on Aging in Baltimore                    mechanisms of hormonal regulation of cellular pH and mineral metabolism in the kidney
Lucille S. Hurley           [1922-1988]   PhD, 1950       complications from open heart surgery             University of California — Davis                            genetic and nutritional interactions in development
Paul Margolin               [1923-1989]   PhD, 1956       heart attack                                      City College of New York                                    mutation and suppressor studies of a bacterial gene
Zanvil A. Cohn              [1926-1993]   MD, 1953        aortic dissection                                 Rockefeller University                                      macrophage in cell biology and resistance to infectious disease
Carl Monder                 [1928-1995]   PhD, 1956       brief illness, acute fulminating leukemia         Population Council                                          corticosteroid metabolism in juvenile hypertension
Gordon Guroff               [1933-1999]   PhD, 1959       car accident                                      NIH/NICHD                                                   biochemical and molecular biological studies of nerve growth factor
Gerald P. Murphy            [1934-2000]   MD, 1959        heart attack                                      Roswell Park Cancer Institute/SUNY Buffalo                  detection, immunotherapy, and prognostic indicators of prostate cancer
Alvito P. Alvares           [1935-2001]   PhD, 1966       killed by a car                                   Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences        biochemical manifestations of toxicity in gold therapy
Patricia S. Goldman-Rakic   [1937-2003]   PhD, 1963       struck by a car                                   Yale University                                             development and plasticity of the primate frontal lobe
Stephen W. Kuffler          [1913-1980]   MD, 1937        heart attack                                      Harvard University                                          microphysiology of synaptic transmission
John P. Merrill             [1917-1984]   MD, 1942        drowned                                           Harvard Medical School/Brigham & Women’s Hospital           role of the immune system in kidney transplantation
Abraham I. Braude           [1917-1984]   MD/PhD, 1950    heart attack                                      University of California — San Diego                        pathogenesis and treatment of life-threatening septic shock
Susumu Hagiwara             [1922-1989]   PhD, 1951       bacterial infection                               UCLA                                                        evolutionary and developmental properties of calcium channels in cell membranes
Daniel Rudman               [1927-1994]   MD, 1949        complications from brain surgery                  Medical College of Wisconsin                                adipokinetic substances of the pituitary gland
Thomas G. Smith, Jr.        [1931-1998]   MD, 1960        heart attack                                      NIH/NINDS                                                   fractal analysis of central nervous system neuron and glial cell morphology
Richard N. Lolley           [1933-2000]   PhD, 1961       heart attack                                      University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine   maturation of metabolism in normal & dystrophic retina
Joseph H. Ogura             [1915-1983]   MD, 1941        heart attack                                      Washington University in St. Louis                          physiology of the larynx analog
Manfred M. Mayer            [1916-1984]   PhD, 1946       heart attack                                      Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 immunochemistry of the complement system
Albert Segaloff             [1917-1985]   MD, 1942        brief illness                                     Tulane University School of Medicine                        hormonal treatment of advanced breast cancer
F. Blair Simmons            [1930-1998]   MD, 1956        heart attack                                      Stanford University                                         development of a cochlear prothesis system for hearing loss
Henryk M. Wisniewski        [1931-1999]   MD/PhD, 1960    heart failure                                     SUNY Downstate Medical Center College of Medicine           pathogenesis of inflammatory demyelinating diseases
V. Everett Kinsey           [1909-1978]   PhD, 1937       stroke                                            Institute of Biological Sciences at Oakland University      intraocular fluid dynamics
Frederic C. Bartter         [1914-1983]   MD, 1940        stroke                                            University of Texas HSC at San Antonio                      interaction between the kidney and various endocrine systems
Nathan O. Kaplan            [1917-1986]   PhD, 1943                                                         University of California — San Diego                        isolation and structure determination of coenzyme A
David T. Imagawa            [1922-1991]   PhD, 1950       heart attack                                      Harbor-UCLA Medical Center                                  morphological conversion with leukemia viruses
Robert H. Williams          [1909-1979]   MD, 1934        on an airline en route to Philadelphia            University of Washington School of Medicine                 diabetes etiology, pathogenesis, and management
Toichiro Kuwabara           [1920-1991]   MD/PhD, 1952    heart failure                                     Harvard Medical School                                      ultrastructure of retina and retinal disease
William F. Harrington       [1920-1992]   PhD, 1952       heart failure                                     Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 myosin thick filament structure and assembly
G. Jeanette Thorbecke       [1929-2001]   MD/PhD, 1954    stung by a Portuguese man-of-war jellyfish        New York University School of Medicine                      histologic and functional aspects of lymphoid tissue development
Felix T. Rapaport           [1929-2001]   MD, 1954        coronary heart disease                            SUNY HSC at Stony Brook                                     induction of unresponsiveness to allografts
Marian W. Kies              [1915-1988]   PhD, 1944       pancreatitis                                      NIH/MIMH                                                    study of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis
Menek Goldstein             [1924-1997]   PhD, 1955       stroke                                            New York University School of Medicine                      purification of enzymes in the catecholamine synthetic pathway
Andrew P. Somlyo            [1930-2003]   MD, 1956        heart attack                                      University of Virginia School of Medicine                   vasomotor function of smooth muscle and their relation to heart disease
Koloman Laki                [1909-1983]   PhD, 1936       heart attack                                      NIH/NIDDK                                                   purification of fibrinogen
Paul A. Srere               [1925-1999]   PhD, 1951       complications from liver surgery                  University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas   cell metabolism and the krebs tca cycle
D. Eugene Strandness, Jr.   [1928-2002]   MD, 1954        pulmonary failure                                 University of Washington School of Medicine                 ultrasonic duplex scanner for noninvasive vascular disease diagnosis
Vincent Massey              [1926-2002]   PhD, 1953       heart attack                                      University of Michigan, Ann Arbor                           biological oxidation mechanisms of proteins that contain riboflavin
Murray B. Bornstein         [1918-1995]   MD, 1952        cardiac aneurysm                                  Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University   copolymer as a protective treatment for the exacerbation of multiple sclerosis
Clarence J. Gibbs, Jr.      [1924-2001]   PhD, 1962       cardiac disease                                   NIH/NINDS                                                   infectuous diseases of the nervous system
Russell L. De Valois        [1926-2003]   PhD, 1952       automobile accident                               University of California — Berkeley                         brain mechanisms underlying color vision
Efraim Racker               [1913-1991]   MD, 1938        stroke                                            Cornell University                                          identifying and purifying Factor 1, the first part of the ATP synthase enzyme
Walsh McDermott             [1901-1981]   MD, 1934        heart attack                                      Cornell University Medical College                          latent and dormant microbial infections
Jonas E. Salk               [1914-1995]   MD, 1939        heart failure                                     Salk Institute                                              effective vaccine for polio
Lawrence Bogorad            [1921-2003]   PhD, 1949       stroke while on vacation                          Harvard University                                          determinants of transcript longevity
Herman M. Kalckar           [1908-1991]   MD/PhD, 1939    pneumonia                                         Boston University School of Medicine                        genes, enzymes, nucleotides, and carbohydrate patterns
Eugene M. Farber            [1917-2000]   MD, 1943        brief illness                                     Stanford University                                         biologic effects of photochemotherapy in psoriasis
Henry Rapoport              [1918-2002]   PhD, 1943       pneumonia                                         University of California — Berkeley                         total synthesis of heterocyclic drugs
Norman R. Davidson          [1916-2002]   PhD, 1939       brief illness                                     California Institute of Technology                          physical chemistry of nucleic acids
Karl A. Folkers             [1906-1997]   PhD, 1931       heart failure                                     University of Texas at Austin                               peptide antagonists of LHRH as gonadotropin inhibitors
Margaret J. Sullivan        [1957-2001]   PhD, 1986                                                         University of Missouri at Columbia                          role of peptide neurotransmitters in body fluid homeostasis
Leonard R. Axelrod          [1927-1975]   PhD, 1952                                                         Environmental Protection Agency                             studies in steroid intermediate metabolism
Sidney R. Cooperband        [1931-1979]   MD, 1956                                                          Boston University School of Medicine                        lymphocyte proliferation inhibitory factor
James L. Lehr               [1940-1989]   MD, 1968                                                          University of Chicago                                       modular computer-mediated radiology system
Alberto DiMascio            [1928-1978]   PhD, 1966                                                         Tufts University                                            follow-up of maintenance treatment for depression
William B. Kinter           [1926-1978]   PhD, 1955                                                         Mount Desert Island Biological Lab                          membrane toxicity theory and environmental pollutants




                                                                                                                                     viii
Investigator Name                                  Cause of death if known   Institution at the time of death                            Scientific domain
Alfred A. Smith       [1928-1980]   MD, 1956                                 New York Medical College                                    respiratory-depressive effects of ethanol
Leah M. Lowenstein    [1931-1984]   MD/PhD, 1958                             Thomas Jefferson University Medical College                 regulation of renal compensatory adaptation
S. Morris Kupchan     [1922-1976]   PhD, 1945                                University of Virginia School of Medicine                   chemistry of tumor-inhibitory natural products
Edward C. Heath       [1930-1985]   PhD, 1955                                University of Iowa School of Medicine                       molecular biology of tumor cells
Arnold F. Brodie      [1923-1981]   PhD, 1952                                University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine   mechanisms of oxidative energy generation in bacteria
Alvin Nason           [1919-1978]   PhD, 1952                                Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine                 enzymology of nitrate respiration and assimilation
Andrew G. Morrow      [1923-1982]   MD, 1946                                 NIH/NHLBI                                                   surgical correction of obstructive subaortic hypertrophy
Elijah Adams          [1918-1979]   MD, 1942                                 University of Maryland School of Medicine                   tyrosinases and tyrosine hydroxylases
Myron L. Bender       [1924-1988]   PhD, 1948                                Northwestern University                                     mechanism of action of proteases
Kenneth J.W. Taylor   [1939-2003]   MD/PhD, 1975                             Yale University                                             diagnostic ultrasound imaging
Brigitte A. Prusoff   [1926-1991]   PhD, 1978                                Yale University                                             follow-up of maintenance treatment for depression
Edwin D. Murphy       [1917-1984]   MD, 1943                                 NIH/NCI                                                     gene mechanisms in autoimmunity and lymphoproliferation
Henry Kamin           [1920-1988]   PhD, 1948                                Duke University                                             biological oxidations in mitochondria and microsomes
Henry A. Schroeder    [1906-1975]   MD, 1933                                 Dartmouth Medical School                                    abnormal trace metals in cardiovascular diseases
Carl L. Larson        [1909-1978]   MD, 1939                                 University of Montana at Missoula                           specific and nonspecific resistance caused by t. bacilli
David F. Waugh        [1915-1984]   PhD, 1940                                MIT                                                         protein interactions and physico-chemical properties
John W. Porter        [1915-1984]   PhD, 1942                                University of Wisconsin                                     regulation of lipogenesis by insulin and glucagon
Thomas F. Gallagher   [1905-1975]   PhD, 1931                                Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University   metabolic transformation of steroid hormones
Benjamin Alexander    [1908-1978]   MD, 1934                                 NY Blood Center                                             coagulation, hemorrhage, and thrombosis
Bernard Saltzberg     [1919-1989]   PhD, 1972                                University of Houston                                       electrophysiological analysis of learning disabilities
Georges Ungar         [1906-1977]   MD, 1939                                 University of Tennessee                                     chemical transfer of drug tolerance and learned behavior
Harold Koenig         [1921-1992]   MD/PhD, 1949                             Northwestern University                                     molecular mechanisms of blood-brain barrier dysfunction
Albert S. Kaplan      [1917-1989]   PhD, 1952                                Vanderbilt University                                       metabolism of cells infected with nuclear DNA viruses
Tsoo E. King          [1917-1990]   PhD, 1949                                University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine               bioenergetic apparatus in heart mitochondria
Arthur Cherkin        [1913-1987]   PhD, 1953                                Sepulveda VA Medical Center                                 role of cholinergic drugs in reducing the memory loss
Peter D. Klein        [1927-2001]   PhD, 1954                                Baylor College of Medicine                                  metabolism of 13C compounds in digestive diseases
Alex B. Novikoff      [1913-1987]   PhD, 1938                                Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University   histochemical studies of the Golgi apparatus
Walter E. Brown       [1918-1993]   PhD, 1949                                American Dental Association Health Foundation               chemistry of calcium phosphates
C. Clark Cockerham    [1921-1996]   PhD, 1952                                North Carolina State University                             the statistics of genetic systems
Leo T. Samuels        [1899-1978]   PhD, 1930                                University of Utah                                          steroid hormone metabolism and tumorogenic action
Peter N. Magee        [1921-2000]   MD, 1945                                 Thomas Jefferson University Medical College                 genetic basis of carconogenesis




                                                                                                         ix
       Appendix B: Linking Scientists with their Journal Articles

The source of our publication data is PubMed, a bibliographic database maintained by the U.S. National
Library of Medicine that is searchable on the web at no cost.iv PubMed contains over 14 million citations
from 4,800 journals published in the United States and more than 70 other countries from 1950 to the present.
The subject scope of this database is biomedicine and health, broadly defined to encompass those areas of
the life sciences, behavioral sciences, chemical sciences, and bioengineering that inform research in health-
related fields. In order to effectively mine this publicly-available data source, we designed PubHarvester,
an open-source software tool that automates the process of gathering publication information for individual
life scientists (see Azoulay et al. 2006 for a complete description of the software). PubHarvester is fast,
simple to use, and reliable. Its output consists of a series of reports that can be easily imported by statistical
software packages.

This software tool does not obviate the two challenges faced by empirical researchers when attempting
to accurately link individual scientists with their published output. The first relates to what one might
term “Type I Error,” whereby we mistakenly attribute to a scientist a journal article actually authored by
a namesake; The second relates to “Type II error,” whereby we conservatively exclude from a scientist’s
publication roster legitimate articles:

Namesakes and popular names. PubMed does not assign unique identifiers to the authors of the
publications they index. They identify authors simply by their last name, up to two initials, and an optional
suffix. This makes it difficult to unambiguously assign publication output to individual scientists, especially
when their last name is relatively common.

Inconsistent publication names. The opposite danger, that of recording too few publications, also looms
large, since scientists are often inconsistent in the choice of names they choose to publish under. By far the
most common source of error is the haphazard use of a middle initial. Other errors stem from inconsistent
use of suffixes (Jr., Sr., 2nd, etc.), or from multiple patronyms due to changes in spousal status.

To deal with these serious measurement problems, we opted for a labor-intensive approach: the design of
individual search queries that relies on relevant scientific keywords, the names of frequent collaborators,
journal names, as well as institutional affiliations. We are aided in the time-consuming process of query
design by the availability of a reliable archival data source, namely, these scientists’ CVs and biosketches.
PubHarvester provides the option to use such custom queries in lieu of a completely generic query (e.g,
"azoulay p"[au] or "graff zivin js"[au]). As an example, one can examine the publications of Scott A.
Waldman, an eminent pharmacologist located in Philadelphia, PA at Thomas Jefferson University. Waldman
is a relatively frequent name in the United States (with 208 researchers with an identical patronym in the
AAMC faculty roster); the combination "waldman s" is common to 3 researchers in the same database.
A simple search query for "waldman sa"[au] OR "waldman s"[au] returns 377 publications at the time
of this writing. However, a more refined query, based on Professor Waldman’s biosketch returns only 256
publications.v

The above example also makes clear how we deal with the issue of inconsistent publication names. Pub-
Harvester gives the end-user the option to choose up to four PubMed-formatted names under which
publications can be found for a given researcher. For example, Louis J. Tobian, Jr. publishes under "tobian
l", "tobian l jr", and "tobian lj", and all three names need to be provided as inputs to generate a
complete publication listing. Furthermore, even though Tobian is a relatively rare name, the search query
needs to be modified to account for these name variations, as in ("tobian l"[au] OR "tobian lj"[au]).
  iv
    http://www.pubmed.gov/
   v
    (((("waldman sa"[au] NOT (ether OR anesthesia)) OR ("waldman s"[au] AND (murad OR philadelphia[ad] OR west
point[ad] OR wong p[au] OR lasseter kc[au] OR colorectal))) AND 1980:2013[dp])



                                                        x
   Appendix C: PubMed Related Citations Algorithm [PMRA]

Algorithm overview. The PubMed Related Citations Algorithm [PMRA] underlies the “related articles”
search feature in PubMed. Lin and Wilbur (2007) develop a topic-based similarity model designed to help
a typical user search through the literature by presenting a set of records topically related to a focal article
returned by a PubMed search query.

Specifically, PMRA relies on Bayes’ Theorem to estimates the probability that an individual is interested in
document a given expressed interest in document b. They focus on the following relationship:
                                                N
                                                X
                                    Pr(a|b) ∝         Pr(a|sj ) Pr(b|sj ) Pr(sj ),
                                                j=1

where {s1 , ..., sN } denotes the entire set of mutually exclusive topics that could possibly be contained within
a, b, or any other document of interest. Lin and Wilbur (2007) then make assumptions about the underlying
arrival rates of terms within documents and how likely the occurrence of a term within a document actually
reflects the true nature of that document. From these assumptions, the authors arrive at a topic weighting
function, wj,x , that describes how important a topic sj is to any document x, and a document scoring
function, Sim(a, b), that quantifies the similarity between a and b, given by:
                                                               s
                                                                   1
                                                  wj,x =λj,x ×
                                                                  fj
                                                          N
                                                          X
                                          Sim(a, b) =           wj,a × wj,b ,
                                                          j=1

where fj is the frequency of topic sj in the entire corpus and λj,x is based on a series of Poisson arrival
rate parameters and the number of times topic sj occurs within document x. Intuitively, two documents
are more likely to be similar when they both use topics that are rare (fj is low) many times (λj,x is high).
The authors estimate, optimize and experimentally confirm parameters to align with human assessments.
They also report that one fifth of “non-trivial” browser sessions in PubMed invoke PMRA at least once,
providing some “ground truth” for the view that the algorithm captures meaningful intellectual linkages
between documents.

Defining topics. The algorithm relies on three types of text information to derive a list of potential topics:
MeSH terms, abstract words, and title words. MeSH is the National Library of Medicine’s [NLM] controlled
vocabulary thesaurus. It consists of terms arranged in a hierarchical structure that permit searching at
various levels of specificity (there are over 28,000 descriptors in the 2018 edition of MeSH). Almost every
publication in PubMed is tagged with a set of MeSH terms (between 1 and 103 in the current edition of
PubMed, with both the mean and median approximately equal to 11). NLM’s professional indexers are
trained to select indexing terms from MeSH according to a specific protocol, and consider each article in the
context of the entire collection (Bachrach and Charen 1978; Névéol et al. 2010).

The presence of MeSH terms is crucial for the performance of the PMRA algorithm in two separate respects.
Directly, because the MeSH terms are appended to the list of abstract words and title words to form the set
of topics present in a PubMed record. Indirectly, because PMRA uses MeSH terms as informative markers
to separate “elite” from “non-elite” topics in each record, and relies on a mixture of two Poisson distributions
(one for elite terms, one for non-elite terms) to estimate the probability that a document is about a topic,
given that we observe its corresponding term (abstract word, title word, MeSH term) a certain number of
times in the document.

The reliance of PMRA on MeSH terms offers both advantages and disadvantages from the standpoint of our
study. On the positive side of the ledger, professional indexers with domain expertise annotate articles with


                                                          xi
MeSH terms—the authors are not involved. Professional annotators are probably less subject than authors
to demand effects, whereby keywords are chosen endogenously to appeal to an audience of potential readers,
referees, and journal editors. As such, they are relatively more stripped of “social baggage” than author-
chosen keywords would be.vi Research in information science backs up the claim that MeSH terms can be
seen as representing standardized and high-quality summaries of a particular publication (Bhattacharya et
al. 2011).

On the negative side of the ledger, two features of the MeSH annotation process deserve mention. First,
MeSH terms suffer from a keyword vintage problem as well as a left-censoring problem; these two problems
are inextricably linked. Indexers may have available a lexicon of permitted keywords which is itself out
of date. NLM continually revises and updates the MeSH vocabulary in an attempt to neutralize keyword
vintage effects, but articles are not systematically backward-annotated. Take, for example the paper by
Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna which appeared in Science in June 2012 (Jinek et al., “A
programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity”) and established the
viability of the CRISPR-Cas9 system for genome editing. The article is tagged by 11 unique MeSH terms,
but CRISPR is not one them. This is of course because the CRISPR keyword was not part of the controlled
MeSH thesaurus in 2012—it was “born” as a keyword in 2013!

Second, human indexers are not necessarily impervious to scientific fads and fashions. In their efforts to be
helpful to PubMed users, they may use combinations of keywords that reflect the conventional views of the
field. Probabilistic topic models such as PMRA assume that the scientific corpus has been correctly indexed.
But what if the indexers who chose the keywords brought their own “conceptual baggage” to the indexing
task, so that the pictures that emerge from this process are more akin to their conceptualization than to
those of the scientists whose work it was intended to study? In our view, “indexer effects” (in the parlance
of Whittaker 1989) present a more benign challenge. A number of studies have asked authors to validate ex
post the quality of the keywords selected by independent indexers, with generally encouraging results (Law
and Whittaker 1992). Inter-indexer reliability is also very high (Wilbur 1998).

There is an additional reason why these challenges deserve less emphasis than might appear at first blush,
at least from the standpoint of accurately capturing intellectual relatedness. PMRA relies on abstract words
and title words as well as MeSH terms. Going back to the Jinek et al. (2012) article, the word “CRISPR”
appears four separate times in the abstract. PMRA can therefore link this foundational paper to 218
other articles, which will often be annotated with CRISPR-relevant MeSH terms (e.g., “CRISPR-Associated
Proteins” or “CRISPR-Cas Systems.”) In other words, the inclusion of title/abstract words help remedy
unpleasant features of the MeSH annotation process. In so doing, however, they weaken our initial claim
that the linkages revealed by PMRA are purely intellectual, devoid of “social baggage.” For this reason,
below we will explicitly look at the extent to which omitting abstract and title words from the input used by
PMRA to generate the list of intellectual neighbors alters our benchmark set of results. Figure C1 depicts
how the multiplier of the unconditional probability that two articles are related through PMRA is affected
by the number of MeSH terms that overlap between the two records. For example, two articles picked at
random are 255 times more likely to be related if they share 5 MeSH terms instead of only one. Note that
the baseline unconditional probability that two articles are related when they share only one MeSH term is
quite low, on the order of 1 ÷ 1, 000, 000.

Implementation details. Using the MeSH keywords as input, PMRA essentially defines a distance concept
in idea space such that the proximity between a source article and any other PubMed-indexed publication
can be assessed. The following paragraphs were extracted from a brief description of PMRA:

         The neighbors of a document are those documents in the database that are the most similar to it. The simi-
         larity between documents is measured by the words they have in common, with some adjustment for document
         lengths. To carry out such a program, one must first define what a word is. For us, a word is basically an

  vi
       Importantly, the assignment of MeSH keywords does NOT take into account references cited in the publication.




                                                             xii
          unbroken string of letters and numerals with at least one letter of the alphabet in it. Words end at hyphens,
          spaces, new lines, and punctuation. A list of 310 common, but uninformative, words (also known as stopwords)
          are eliminated from processing at this stage. Next, a limited amount of stemming of words is done, but no
          thesaurus is used in processing. Words from the abstract of a document are classified as text words. Words
          from titles are also classified as text words, but words from titles are added in a second time to give them a
          small advantage in the local weighting scheme. MeSH terms are placed in a third category, and a MeSH term
          with a subheading qualifier is entered twice, once without the qualifier and once with it. If a MeSH term is
          starred (indicating a major concept in a document), the star is ignored. These three categories of words (or
          phrases in the case of MeSH) comprise the representation of a document. No other fields, such as Author or
          Journal, enter into the calculations.

          Having obtained the set of terms that represent each document, the next step is to recognize that not all words
          are of equal value. Each time a word is used, it is assigned a numerical weight. This numerical weight is
          based on information that the computer can obtain by automatic processing. Automatic processing is important
          because the number of different terms that have to be assigned weights is close to two million for this system.
          The weight or value of a term is dependent on three types of information: 1) the number of different documents
          in the database that contain the term; 2) the number of times the term occurs in a particular document; and
          3) the number of term occurrences in the document. The first of these pieces of information is used to produce
          a number called the global weight of the term. The global weight is used in weighting the term throughout the
          database. The second and third pieces of information pertain only to a particular document and are used to
          produce a number called the local weight of the term in that specific document. When a word occurs in two
          documents, its weight is computed as the product of the global weight times the two local weights (one pertaining
          to each of the documents).

          The global weight of a term is greater for the less frequent terms. This is reasonable because the presence of a
          term that occurred in most of the documents would really tell one very little about a document. On the other
          hand, a term that occurred in only 100 documents of one million would be very helpful in limiting the set of
          documents of interest. A word that occurred in only 10 documents is likely to be even more informative and
          will receive an even higher weight.

          The local weight of a term is the measure of its importance in a particular document. Generally, the more
          frequent a term is within a document, the more important it is in representing the content of that document.
          However, this relationship is saturating, i.e., as the frequency continues to go up, the importance of the word
          increases less rapidly and finally comes to a finite limit. In addition, we do not want a longer document to be
          considered more important just because it is longer; therefore, a length correction is applied.

          The similarity between two documents is computed by adding up the weights of all of the terms the two docu-
          ments have in common. Once the similarity score of a document in relation to each of the other documents in
          the database has been computed, that document’s neighbors are identified as the most similar (highest scoring)
          documents found. These closely related documents are pre-computed for each document in PubMed so that
          when one selects Related Articles, the system has only to retrieve this list. This enables a fast response time
          for such queries.vii


For a given source article, PMRA yields the following output: (i) an ordered list of intellectually related
articles with a fixed length; (ii) a cardinal measure of distance between the source and each related article,
which we have normalized such that a source is always 100% related to itself, and relatedness decreases as
one goes down the ranking of the ordered list of neighbors.

Cutoff Rules. The algorithm uses a cutoff rule to determine the number of related articles associated with a
given source article. First, the 100 most related records by similarity score are returned. Second, a reciprocity
rule is applied to this list of 100 records: if publication x is related to publication y, publication y must also
be related to publication x. As a result, there is no fixed number of related articles for a source article. On
the contrary, the total number of related articles can be of arbitrary large size, and certainly much higher
than 100. Figure C2, Panel A displays the histogram for the distribution of the number of related articles
for the 35,409 source articles in our main sample. The mean number of articles is 153 and the median 119.
Surprisingly, however, 25% or so of the source articles have less than 100 related articles associated with
them. In part, this is an artefact of some data construction choices, as we eliminate related articles outside
the [1965; 2006] date range, or related articles that are not original articles (reviews, editorials, etc.), or
related articles in journals not indexed by the Web of Science. And yet, even after accounting for these
  vii
        Available at http://ii.nlm.nih.gov/MTI/related.shtml



                                                                xiii
factors, slightly more than 10% of the source articles have less than 100 intellectual neighbors, which is
surprising given the documented cutoff rule whereby PMRA supposedly always starts from a list of 100
neighbors, and then possibly add to this list via symmetry.

We investigated this peculiar feature of the data; PMRA appears to have a second cutoff rule based on the
cardinal relatedness score. For each source article, we computed the minimum relatedness score, and graphed
the resulting distribution (Figure C2, Panel B). One can observe a mass point around 0.10 (corresponding
to 3% of the source articles), meaning that PMRA will fail to expand the set of neighbors all the way up to
100 articles if it finds out that doing so would mean including related articles with relatedness < 0.10.viii

The presence of this second cutoff is in an important respect a welcome (if idiosyncratic and poorly docu-
mented) feature of the algorithm. If the cutoff was downward-rigid at 100, then after a star scientist had
passed away, PMRA would need to reach into a set of articles that are in fact quite intellectually distant
from the source to fill the void mechanically induced by the fact that the deceased star cannot contribute
to his own subfields. Figure C2, Panel C confirms that it is not the case. It depicts, for both treated and
control source articles, the distribution of relatedness score for the least related article associated with each
source article, only taking into account the articles written after the death (or counterfactual death) of the
star. The two distributions are quite close to one another; if anything, there are slightly more control source
articles that lie at the cardinal cutoff value of 0.10, relative to treated source articles. In other words, we find
no evidence of “overexpansion” in less proximate intellectual domains for treated fields, relative to control
fields, in the period that follows the death of an eminent scientist.

One final check is to look for stability over time, both for the ordinal cutoff and the cardinal cutoff. A
maintained assumption for our research design is that these cutoffs do not vary over time differentially for
treated and control fields. We investigate cutoff stability by running a regression of each subfield’s log size
(respectively, each subfield’s log odds of the lowest relatedness score) onto journal effects, number of authors
effects, 36 source publication year effects (from 1967 to 2002, 1966 is the omitted variable), and 36 source
publication year by treatment status interaction terms. We graph the coefficient estimates corresponding to
these interaction effects on Figure C3, which are for the most part imprecisely estimated zeros, and do not
exhibit any specific upward or downward trend. From all these analysis, we conclude that there is no reason
to suspect that PMRA’s cutoff rules impact treated and control source articles in a differential way.

From source article to subfield: An Example. Given our set of source articles, we delineate the
scientific fields to which they belong by focusing on the set of articles returned by PMRA that satisfy three
additional constraints: (i) they are original articles (as opposed to editorials, comments, reviews, etc.); (ii)
they were published in or before 2006 (the end of our observation period); and (iii) they appear in journals
indexed by the Web of Science (so that follow-on citation information can be collected). In Figure C4, we
illustrate the use of PMRA with an example taken from our sample. Consider “The transcriptional program
of sporulation in budding yeast” (PubMed ID #9784122), an article published in the journal Science in
1998 originating from the laboratory of Ira Herskowitz, an eminent UCSF biologist who died in 2003 from
pancreatic cancer. PMRA returns 72 original related journal articles for this source publication.ix Some
of these intellectual neighbors appeared before the source to which they are related, whereas others were
published after the source. Some represent the work of collaborators, past or present, of Herskowitz’s,
whereas others represent the work of scientists in his field he may never have come in contact with during
his life, much less collaborated with. The salient point is that nothing in the process through which these
related articles are identified biases us towards (or away from) articles by collaborators, frequent citers of
 viii
      There is a smattering of source articles for which the minimum relatedness is below 0.10. Upon closer examination, these
source articles have no abstracts in PubMed, or do not have MeSH terms available. We investigated the sensitivity of our main
results to dropping these subfields from the analysis (Appendix E, Table Ex).
   ix
      Why exactly 72? In fact, PMRA lists 152 “intellectual neighbors” for PubMed ID 9784122. But once we exclude articles
published after 2006 (the end of our observation period), purge from the list reviews, editorials and other miscellaneous “non-
original” content, and drop a handful of articles that appeared in minor journals not indexed in Thomson-Reuter’s Web of
Science, the number of publications associated with this source article indeed drops to 72.




                                                             xiv
Herskowitz’s work, or co-located researchers. Rather, the only determinants of relatedness are to be found
in the overlap in MeSH keywords between the source and its potential neighbors.

PubMed ID #9784122 appeared in the October 23rd 1998 issue of the journal Science and lists 15 MeSH terms
and 5 substances. Consider now its second most-related (listed in Figure C1), PubMed ID #12242283 “Phos-
phorylation and maximal activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae meiosis-specific transcription factor Ndt80 is
dependent on Ime2.” It appeared in Molecular and Cell Biology in October of 2002 and has 24 MeSH terms
(resp. 11 substances). Figure C5 displays the MeSH terms that tag this article along with its source PubMed
ID #9784122. The keywords that overlap exactly have been highlighted in dark blue; those whose close an-
cestors in the MeSH keyword hierarchical tree overlap have been highlighted in light blue. These terms
include common terms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Transcription Factors as well as more
specific keywords including NDT80 protein, S cerevisiae and Gene Expression Regulation, Fungal.

PMRA also provides a cardinal dyadic measure of intellectual proximity between each related article and its
associated source article. In this particular instance, the relatedness score of “Phosphorylation...” is 94%,
whereas the relatedness score for the most distant related article in Figure C4, “Catalytic roles of yeast...”
is only 62%.

Delineating subfields. In the five years prior to his death (1998-2002), Herskowitz was the last author on
12 publications, the publications most closely associate with his position as head of a laboratory. For each
of these source publications, we treat the set of publications returned by PMRA as constituting a distinct
subfield, and we create a subfield panel dataset by counting the number of related articles in each of these
subfields in each year between 1975 and 2006.

An important characteristic of the subfields subfields generated by this procedure is that they correspond to
quite compact intellectual neighborhoods. One window into the extent of intellectual breadth for PMRA-
generated subfields is to gauge the overlap between the articles that constitute any pair of subfields associated
with the same star. In the sample, the 452 deceased stars account for 3,076 subfields, and 21,661 pairwise
combination of subfields (we are only considering pairs of subfields associated with the same individual
star). Figure C6 displays the histogram for the distribution of overlap, which is extremely skewed. A full
half of these pairs exhibit exactly zero overlap, whereas the mean of the distribution is 0.06. To find pairs
of subfields that display substantial amounts of overlap (for example, half of the articles in subfield 1 also
belong in subfield 2), one must reach far into the right tail of the distribution, specifically, above the 98th
percentile.

Given a source article published in year t, PMRA will tend to find the largest number of neighbors contem-
poraneously, slightly fewer neighbors–but still a large proportion of them all–during years t − 1 and t + 1, a
slightly lower number still in years t − 2 and t + 2, etc. In other words, PMRA creates lists of intellectual
neighbors such that, when rolled up at the year level, will generate subfields whose life cycle has an inverted
U-shape, with the peak of the U corresponding to the year of publication for the source. This does not strike
us as an implausible feature of the scientific process: papers related to a focal one will be more likely to
appear in close temporal proximity with it. Importantly, this feature of PMRA affects treated and control
subfields in a precisely symmetric fashion.

To illustrate this empirically, we took a random sample of 5,000 articles in PubMed (original articles, in
journals indexed by web of science, that appeared between 1965 and 2003–the same range of years as for
our source articles) and computed the average number of articles entering those subfields in a range of
[−10; +10] years after the publication of the source. This yields a pronounced inverted-U shape, as seen on
Figure C7. Interestingly, the decay in the outer years is not symmetric: PMRA finds more neighbors in the
future than in the past. This may reflect the steadily expanding universe of publications, such that there
will mechanically be more candidates to be included as related neighbors going forward in time, relative to
going backward in time. The same tendency would of course apply equally to control and treated subfields.




                                                       xv
Robustness checks. The production version of PMRA is used by thousands of scientists every day to assist
their search of the biomedical literature. The foregoing discussion has shown that some idiosyncrasies baked
into the algorithm are not necessarily desirable from a research standpoint. How would our benchmark set
of results change, for instance, if the subfields were expanded in size? Or if a cardinal cutoff rule determined
the boundary of a subfield? Or if only MeSH terms, rather than the combination of MeSH terms and
abstract/title words, were used to assess the similarity between the documents in a subfield? Below, we avail
ourselves to an off-line version of PMRA that was explicitly built to allow some limited experimentation with
featured of the PMRA algorithm.x Using this software tool, we can generate the relatedness score between
a source article in PubMed and a string of text. We manipulate that string of text to generate relatedness
scores between our source articles and an expanded set of candidate related articles under different scenarios.

Before doing so, however, we need to create an expanded list of “candidate” related articles, because we lack
the computing power to check each source article against the entire PubMed corpus.xi Our approach is to
combine the related articles (denoted P M RA1 articles below) with the related articles of the related articles
(denoted P M RA2 articles below) as the candidate set. Using the cardinal relatedness score generated by the
off-line, tunable version of the software, we then use a simple cutoff rule to delineate the expanded subfields:
we retain only those articles with cardinal relatedness score greater than 0.20 (the median). In addition,
as is the case for the benchmark set of subfields, we also eliminate non-original articles, articles that fall
outside of our date range, articles not written in English, and articles that appear in journals not indexed
by the Web of Science. We repeat this exercise, except that we set loose the tunable version of PMRA on
candidate related articles that are summarized solely by their MeSH terms (i.e., abstract/title words are not
taken into account).

Figure C8 displays the histogram of the distribution for subfields constructed using this novel set of rules.
The mean stands at 891 articles, the median at 625 articles, with a maximum value of 7,112. These subfields
are therefore much larger than those generated by the production version of PMRA. Table C1 replicates
our benchmark set of specifications (columns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 3) on these new data. The leftmost
three columns correspond to the version where abstract/title words and MeSH terms are used to calculate
relatedness score; the rightmost three columns correspond to the version where the input into the calculation
of relatedness is limited to the MeSH terms. The magnitudes of the effects are a bit larger than those observed
in Table 3; the coefficients are also more precisely estimated. Figure C9 replicates Panel C of Figure 2 on
the new data. Panel A of Figure C9 corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in column (3) of
Table C1, whereas Panel B of Figure C9 corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in column (6) of
Table C1. In both of these pictures, there appear to be a slight pre-trend in that activity in the field picks up
slightly before the death of the star scientist. The magnitudes, however, are very small, marginally significant,
and substantially smaller than those found in the post-death period, providing reassurance regarding the
robustness of our core results.




   x
     We thank Kyle Myers from the NBER for graciously allowing us access to this software, which forms the basis of his
manuscript entitled “The Elasticity of Science” (Myers 2018). Note that it relies on a version of PubMed that is not complete—
about 10% of the online version of the database have no counterparts in the off-line version, but these articles appear to be
missing at random.
  xi
     There would be close to half a trillion article pairs to check, even after eliminating articles outside of our date range,
non-original content, articles in other languages, etc.



                                                             xvi
Table C1: Alternate Subfield Definitions
                                                                                     Expanded Neighborhoods,
                                   Expanded Neighborhoods
                                                                                         MeSH Terms Only
                                                                  Non-                                     Non-
                                  All          Collabs.                              All      Collabs.
                                                                Collabs.                                 Collabs.
                                Authors         Only                              Authors       Only
                                                                  Only                                     Only
                                 0.098**        -0.321**        0.120**            0.071**    -0.327**   0.089**
 After Death
                                 (0.026)        (0.047)         (0.026)            (0.022)    (0.045)    (0.022)
 Nb. of Investigators             6,237          6,194           6,237              6,226      6,189      6,226
 Nb. of Fields                   33,987          33,732          33,981            33,928      33,761     33,928
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.         1,390,415      1,380,078       1,390,169          1,398,549  1,391,664  1,398,549
 Log Likelihood                -5,918,924     -1,508,675      -5,704,068         -8,106,163 -1,818,687 -7,895,247
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total
      number of publications in a subfield in a particular year (similar to Table 3, columns 1 through 3). All models
      incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and
      control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year
      and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the
      deceased star. The first three columns use subfields that comprise both PMRA1 and PMRA2 articles, but where
      the input data includes abstract/title words plus MeSH terms, just as in the production version of the algorithm.
      In contrast, in the second set of three columns, subfields have been constructed while ignoring abstract/title
      words for the candidate related articles. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star
      scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                Figure C1: MeSH Term Overlap & Relatedness




                        Note: This figure depicts the relationship between MESH term overlap
                              and being classified as related by PMRA based on a random
                              sample of approximately 130 million article pairs in PubMed
                              (formed from a random sample of 15,400 individual articles).
                              With exactly one MeSH term in common, the base probability of
                              being related is on the order of 1/1,000,000. That probability
                              increases extremely steeply as the number of MeSH terms shared
                              between any two random articles moves beyond 4 terms in
                              common.


                                                           xvii
                                                                    Figure C2
                                                     Subfield Size and PMRA Cutoff Rules
                                                                                                                                                                           C. Cardinal Cutoff, by Treatment
                  A. Ordinal Cutoff                                           B. Cardinal Cutoff
                                                                                                                                                                              Status, Post-Death Period Only




                                                                                                                           Frequency (Proportion of All Source Articles)
Note: We document the rules that govern the cutoff in the number of related articles associated with each source. Panel A depicts the histogram for the distribution of related
      articles after filtering out “undesirable” publications (such as reviews and other non-original material, non-English publications, etc.). Panel B depicts the distribution of
      the relatedness score for the least related article associated with each source article in our data. There is a mass point at 0.10 that corresponds to an additional cutoff
      rule in PMRA. A smattering of source publications have some related articles with relatedness score below 0.10, but the overwhelming majority of those are incomplete
      records: missing abstract, missing MeSH terms, or both. These account for less than 0.5% of the source articles. Finally, Panel C compares the relatedness of the least
      related article for each source, by treatment status, and solely for the related articles that appeared after the death (respectively counterfactual death) of a star.




                                                                                      xviii
                                                               Figure C3
                                                    Temporal Stability of Cutoff Rules

                              A. Ordinal Cutoff                                                                  B. Cardinal Cutoff
                                 (Subfield Size)                                                              (Lowest Relatedness Score)




                                                                                                  67

                                                                                                  68

                                                                                                  69

                                                                                                  70

                                                                                                  71

                                                                                                  72

                                                                                                  73

                                                                                                  74

                                                                                                  75

                                                                                                  76

                                                                                                  77

                                                                                                  78

                                                                                                  79

                                                                                                  80

                                                                                                  81

                                                                                                  82

                                                                                                  83

                                                                                                  84

                                                                                                  85

                                                                                                  86

                                                                                                  87

                                                                                                  88

                                                                                                  89

                                                                                                  90

                                                                                                  91

                                                                                                  92

                                                                                                  93

                                                                                                  94

                                                                                                  95

                                                                                                  96

                                                                                                  97

                                                                                                  98

                                                                                                  99

                                                                                                  00

                                                                                                  01

                                                                                                  02
           67

           68

           69

           70

           71

           72

           73

           74

           75

           76

           77

           78

           79

           80

           81

           82

           83

           84

           85

           86

           87

           88

           89

           90

           91

           92

           93

           94

           95

           96

           97

           98

           99

           00

           01

           02




                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               19

                                                                                               20

                                                                                               20

                                                                                               20
         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         19

         20

         20

         20




Note: We regress the log of pre-death subfield size (Panel A) and the log odds of the relatedness score for the least related article (Panel B) onto (i) journal fixed
      effects; (ii) a suite of indicator variables for the source article’s number of authors; (iii) source article year of publication effects; and (iv) interaction terms
      between each year of publication and a treatment status indicator. The graphs report the coefficient estimates, along with their associated 95% confidence
      interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered at the level of the star) for these 36 interaction terms.




                                                                                   xix
                                           Figure C4: From Source to Related Articles




Note: We illustrate the process of identifying the related articles through the use of an example. Ira Herskowitz, a superstar scientist in our sample, died in 2003. In
      the five years prior to his death (1998-2002), Herskowitz was the last author on 12 publications. One of these publications is “The transcriptional program of
      sporulation in budding yeast,” an article published in the journal Science in 1998. On the right-hand side panel, one sees that PMRA identifies 72 related
      articles related to this source publication. Each of these related articles can then be parsed in a variety of ways. In particular, their authorship list can be
      matched to the AAMC Faculty Roster, which allows us to distinguish between collaborators of Herskowitz’s and non-collaborators, as well as between the
      subfield’s insiders vs. outsiders. Eight out of the 72 articles have a former or current collaborator on the authorship roster. Twenty two of the 72 articles in
      the subfield cite the source article, while the source articles references eight of the articles in the subfield.

                                                                                  xx
Figure C5: PMRA and MeSH Term Overlap—An Example

            Source Article                                    PMRA-Linked Article

                                                      Sopko et al., “Phosphorylation and maximal
Chu et al., “The transcriptional program of
                                                      activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae meiosis-
 sporulation in budding yeast.” Science,
                                                          specific transcription factor Ndt80 is
                   1998.
                                                            dependent on Ime2.” MCB, 2002.

      PMID #9784122                                          PMID #12242283
MeSH Terms                                            MeSH Terms
Animals                                               Active Transport, Cell Nucleus
Chromosomes, Fungal                                   Binding Sites
DNA-Binding Proteins*                                 Cell Cycle Proteins*
Fungal Proteins                                       Cell Nucleus
Gene Expression Regulation, Fungal*                   DNA-Binding Proteins*
Genes, Fungal                                         Fungal Proteins*
Genome, Fungal                                        Gene Expression Regulation, Fungal*
Humans                                                Genes, Fungal
Meiosis                                               Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
Morphogenesis                                         Meiosis*
Organelles                                            Phosphorylation
Saccharomyces cerevisiae*                             Promoter Regions, Genetic
Spores, Fungal                                        Protein Kinases*
Transcription Factors                                 Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases
Transcription, Genetic*                               Recombinant Fusion Proteins
                                                      Saccharomyces cerevisiae
                                                      Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins*
                                                      Spores, Fungal
                                                      Substrate Specificity
                                                      Transcription Factors*
                                                      Transcriptional Activation

Substances                                            Substances
DNA-Binding Proteins                                   Cell Cycle Proteins
Fungal Proteins                                        DNA-Binding Proteins
NDT80 protein, S cerevisiae                            Fungal Proteins
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins                      Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
Transcription Factors                                  NDT80 protein, S cerevisiae
                                                       Recombinant Fusion Proteins
                                                       Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
                                                       Transcription Factors
                                                       Protein Kinases
                                                       IME2 protein, S cerevisiae
                                                       Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases
Note: We compare the MeSH terms for the number of MeSH terms for the source article in Figure C4,
      along with those of its most proximate intellectual neighbor according to PMRA.




                                                xxi
                                 Figure C6
                   Article Overlap Between Subfield Pairs




Note: We compute the share of related articles that are shared between pairs of PMRA-delineated subfields.
      To be conservative, we focus the analysis on 21,661 subfield pairs where a deceased superstar was the
      last author on both of the associated source articles.




                              Figure C7
           Distribution of Activity in Subfields Over Time




Note: This figure illustrates the timing of articles entering the subfields for a random sample of 5,000 articles
       in PubMed (original articles, in journals indexed by Web of Science, that appeared between 1965 and
       2003—the same range of years as for the source articles in our analytic sample), and we run them
       through PMRA, rolling up the count of articles up to the subfield-year level (as in our regressions).




                                                      xxii
                     Figure C8
Distribution of Expanded Neighborhood Subfield Size




      Note: The articles that are candidate for membership in each subfield
            satisfy the following conditions: PMRA1 or PMRA2. We then
            compute relatedness in this expanded neighborhood using the
            tunable version of PMRA. We discard every article with new
            relatedness score less than 0.20 (the median in the sample). As
            a result, there is a cardinal cutoff, but no ordinal cutoff that
            delineates subfield boundaries. 35 (0.1%) of the fields are outliers
            with more than 5,000 articles. In the histogram above, we make
            use of abstract & title words, in addition to MeSH terms, to
            assess relatedness through PMRA.




                                        xxiii
                                                    Figure C9
                                  Dynamics of Subfield Entry—Non Collaborators
                                         Alternate Subfield Definitions
                       A. Expanded Neighborhoods                                               B. Expanded Neighborhoods, MeSH Terms Only




Note: The dark blue dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which
      publication flows in subfields are regressed onto year effects, subfield age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of
      years before/after the death event (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications also include
      a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time
      of the death. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around star scientist) around these estimates is plotted with
      vertical light blue lines; Panel A corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the third column of Table C1; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic
      version of the specification in the sixth column of Table C1.




                                                                            xxiv
               Appendix D: Construction of the Control Group

We detail the procedure implemented to identify the control subfields that help pin down the life-cycle and
secular time effects in our difference-in-differences (DD) specification. Happenstance might yield a sample of
stars clustered in decaying scientific fields. More plausibly, activity in the typical subfield might be subject
to idiosyncratic life-cycle patterns, with their productive potential first increasing over time, eventually
peaking, and thereafter slowly declining. Relying solely on subfields treated earlier or later as an implicit
control group raises the worry that these time-varying omitted variables will not be fully captured by subfield
age controls, particularly since dating the birth of a subfield is a process fraught with hazards.

To address this concern, we create an additional level of difference by selecting control subfields. Recall that
selecting a subfield in our framework is akin to first selecting a source article and then using PMRA to harvest
all the related articles to this source in intellectual space. Since the second step is fully automated, only
the first step is really of concern. Practically, we will recruit control source articles from the set of articles
authored by star scientists who do not die prematurely. But what makes a satisfactory control group? It is
important to distinguish between ex ante vs. ex post criteria. Ex ante, one would like control source articles
to have the following properties:

   1. to be published contemporaneously with the source article for the treated subfield;
   2. to be unrelated (in both an intellectual and a social sense) to the source article for the treated subfield;
   3. to be of similar expected impact and fruitfulness, relative to the source article for the treated subfield;
   4. to have a similar number of authors as the source article for the treated subfield;
   5. to have a superstar author in the same authorship position and of approximately the same age as
      that occupied by the deceased superstar on the authorship roster of the source article for the treated
      subfield.

Ex post, it will be important for the control subfields to satisfy an additional condition: the treated and
control subfields should exhibit very similar trends in publication activity and funding flows up to the year
of treatment (i.e., the year of death for the treated superstar).

Coarsened Exact Matching. To meet these goals, we implement a “Coarsened Exact Matching” (CEM)
procedure (Blackwell et al. 2009). The first step is to select a relatively small set of covariates on which
we need to guarantee balance ex ante. This choice entails judgement, but is strongly guided by the set of
criteria listed above. The second step is to create a large number of strata to cover the entire support of the
joint distribution of the covariates selected in the previous step. In a third step, each observation is allocated
to a unique strata, and for each observation in the treated group, control observations are selected from the
same strata.

The procedure is coarse because we do not attempt to precisely match on covariate values; rather, we coarsen
the support of the joint distribution of the covariates into a finite number of strata, and we match a treated
observation if and only if a control observation can be recruited from this strata. An important advantage
of CEM is that the analyst can guarantee the degree of covariate balance ex ante, but this comes at a cost:
the more fine-grained the partition of the support for the joint distribution (i.e., the higher the number of
strata), the larger the number of unmatched treated observations.


Implementation. We identify controls based on the following set of covariates (t denotes the year of
death): star scientist career age; citations received by the article up to year t; number of authors; position
of the star author on the authorship roster (only last authorship position is considered); journal; and year


                                                       xxv
of publication. The first three covariates only need to match within relatively coarse bins. For instance, we
create nine career age categories: less than 10 years; between 10 and 20 years; between 20 and 25 years;
between 25 and 30 years; between 30 and 35 years; between 35 and 40 years; between 40 and 45 years;
between 45 and 50 years, over 50 years of career age. Similarly, we coarsen the distribution of citations at
baseline into five mutually exclusive bins: zero citations; between one and 10 citations; between 10 and 50
citations; between 50 and 120 citations; and more than 120 citations. In contrast, we impose an exact match
on journal, publication year, and the star’s authorship position.

We match approximately 75% of the treated source articles in this way. Some further trimming of the control
articles is needed. First, we eliminate any control that shares any author with the treated source. Second,
we eliminate any control article with a dead star scientist on its authorship roster, even if he appears in an
intermediate position in the authorship list. Third, we drop every control that also happens to be related
intellectually to its source as per PMRA. Finally, we drop from the data any source article that finds itself an
orphan (i.e., not paired with any control) at the conclusion of this process. Figure D1 provides an illustrative
example.

The final sample has 3,074 treated source articles and 31,142 control source articles. As can be seen in
Figure D2, the distribution of activity levels, measured by cumulative publications up to the baseline year,
is very similar between treated and control subfields. As well, there is no evidence of preexisting trends
in activity, as demonstrated by the coefficient estimates graphed in Figure 1 and E1. In Table 2, treated
and control subfields are very well-balanced on the covariates that formed the basis of the CEM matching
procedure. This is true almost by construction. What is more surprising (and also welcome) is that the
procedure balances a number of covariates that were not used as inputs for matching, such as various metrics
of star eminence. For other covariates, we can detect statistically significant mean differences, though they
do not appear to be substantively meaningful (e.g., 6.7% of control stars vs. 9.9% of treated stars are female).


Sensitivity Analyses. Human judgement matters for the outcome of the CEM procedure insofar as one
must draw a list of “reasonable” covariates to match on, as well as decide on the degree of coarsening to
impose. We have verified that slight variations in the implementation (e.g., varying slightly the number of
cutoff points for the stock of baseline citations for the source; focusing on birth age as opposed to career age
for the stars) have little impact on the main results.




                                                     xxvi
             Figure D1: Matching Procedure to Identify Controls for the Source Articles




Note: The two articles above illustrate the Coarsened Exact Matching (CEM) procedure. These two articles appeared in the journal Science in 1998. They received a
      similar number of citations up to the end of the baseline year (2002, one year before Herskowitz’s death): 514 citations for Chu et al., 344 citations for Neumann
      et al. Note that Alan Perelson and Ira Herskowitz are both in last authorship position. They also obtained their PhD within a year of each other.




                                                                               xxvii
                                        Appendix E: Extensions

Extended descriptive statistics. For space reasons, Table 2 provided descriptive statistics at baseline
for only a selected set of right-hand side covariates and outcome variables. In Tables E1 and E2, we present
descriptive statistics and correlation matrices for all the covariates and outcome variables that appear either
in the main body of the manuscript, or in Appendixes E and F. Table E1a highlights balance between
control and treated subfields at baseline for a simple transformation of the outcome variables. Recall that
our outcome variables are of the form “number of articles in subfield i and year t that satisfy some condition,”
where examples of such conditions include, inter alia, “by non-collaborators only, where these related authors
had no prior participation in the subfield” or “by non-collaborators only, where the focal star is not cited in
the list of references.” We transform these flow variables into cumulative stock variables, taking into account
the years between the birth of the subfield and the year of death (or counterfactual death). So, for example,
at baseline, the stock or related articles by non-collaborators that list references only outside the subfield
are balanced between control and treated subfields (13.764 vs. 13.789).xii

Table E1b provides descriptive statistics for star-level (e.g., cumulative NIH funding at baseline) and subfield-
level (e.g., commitment of the star to the subfield) covariates. These covariates are used to realize sample
splits around their medians in Tables 6 and 7 of the manuscript, and in Tables E5, E7, and E8 of Appendix E.
In Table E2, we also display correlation matrices for these variables. To make the matrix legible, we
place correlations for subfield-level covariates and star-level covariates in separate tables (E2a and E2b).
The correlations are typically reassuringly high across measures within a construct (e.g., , but low across
constructs.

Event study graphs using the raw data. Figure E1 provides graphical evidence of the effect of star
death on subfield entry using raw data. This involves an important simplification—anchoring the comparison
between control and treated subfields on “experimental time” (the number of years elapsed since treatment),
ignoring the fact that our death events are staggered over a long time period (1975 to 2003). Yet, these
graphs provide visual evidence that the main effects of death on subfield growth or decline we document in
regression specifications saturated with calendar year and age effects (Figure 2) are also apparent in the raw
data. The graphs in Figure E1 also make vivid the life-cycle of subfields. Given a particular source article,
PMRA creates a list of intellectual neighbors that, when added together at the year level, generate subfields
whose evolution over time follows an inverted U-shape, with the peak of the U corresponding to the year of
publication for the source.xiii Of course, these life cycle patterns are a reflection of design choices for PMRA.
That being said, a plausible feature of the scientific process is that papers related to a focal one will be more
likely to appear in close temporal proximity with it.

Sudden vs. Anticipated Death Events. To gain statistical power, our main results pool the subfields
of stars who died suddenly with those of stars whose untimely passing was anticipated. Yet, the case for
the exogeneity of a death event is stronger when it is sudden; when the death can be anticipated, it is
theoretically possible for the star to engage in “intellectual estate planning,” whereby particular scientists
(presumably close collaborators) are anointed as exemplars of the next generation of leaders in the subfield.
Table E3 breaks down our core set of results by cause of death, focusing on entry by non-collaborators only.
Contrasting the coefficient estimates across Panel A and Panel B in the first column of Table E1, relative
subfield growth appears to be driven by stars whose death was anticipated. The effect in the case of sudden
death is small in magnitude and imprecisely estimated.
  xii
       Note that the variables in Table E1a pertain to subfield entry by non-collaborators only, except the first three, which
correspond to the outcome variables in the right-most three columns of Table 3 (number of NIH grants acknowledged by articles
in the subfield, in total, by collaborators only, and by non-collaborators only).
  xiii
       On Figures E1, Panels A, B, and C, the peak appears roughly two to three years before the death, and not in
the year of death. But recall that the source articles that generate the subfields in our data appeared in the window
[tyr death−5 ; tyr death−1 ]. As such, the peak observed in these figures is an average of the peaks for subfields associated
with sources published in the years tyr death−5 , tyr death−4 , . . . , tyr death−1 .



                                                           xxviii
As in Table 4, we parse every related article in the subfield to assign them into one of six mutually exclusive
bins, based on their vintage-specific long-run citation impact: articles that fall in the bottom quartile of the
citation distribution; in the second quartile; in the third quartile; articles that fall above the 75th percentile,
but below the 95th percentile; articles that fall above the 95th percentile, but below the 99th percentile; and
articles that fall above the 99th percentile of the citation distribution. Decomposing this effect across the
quantile bins as above reveals that the differences between the cases of sudden and anticipated death can be
accounted for by shifts in activity for low-impact contributions. In the right tail of the distribution, there is
very little evidence that the manner of superstar death matters at all for the fate of their subfields. In both
cases, non-collaborators increase their relative contribution sharply—on the order of 40%.

Figure E2 and E3 display event study-style graphs in the spirit of Figure 2, Panel C. When using all
publications (regardless of impact) as the metric of activity in a subfield (Figure E2), we can see that
the upward trend is more pronounced (as well as statistically significant) in the case of anticipated events.
When using only “top publications” (specifically, those in the upper 5 percentiles of the citation distribution,
adjusted for each year of publication), the differences are less stark. Consistent with a dearth of statistical
power, our ability to estimate these effects precisely is also limited. This convergence of the effect of death
when focused on the upper tail of the impact distribution legitimates our choice to pool the data for sudden
and anticipated events.

Consolidating vs. disruptive entry. The findings above do not imply that the published results of
entrants necessarily contradict or overturn the prevailing scientific understanding and assumptions within a
subfield. Direct evidence of these contributions’ disruptive impact is elusive. To provide indirect evidence,
we use the “disruptiveness” index (hereafter denoted d) recently proposed by Funk and Owen-Smith (2017),
which seeks to capture whether an idea consolidates or destabilizes the status quo. d measures the extent to
which the future ideas that build on the focal idea also rely on its acknowledged predecessors. In practice,
for article i, it is defined as:
                                               n
                                           1 X
                                      di =        [1(j ∨ Ki ) − 1(j ∧ Ki )]
                                           ni j=1

where j indexes the forward citing articles (j = 1, . . . , n), Ki is the set of articles {k1 , k2 , . . . , kp } that are
(backwards) referenced within i, ni is the number of forward citations to article i, 1(j ∨ Ki ) is equal to
one if forward citing article j does not reference any of the articles in Ki , and 1(j ∧ Ki ) is equal to one
if forward citing article j does reference at least one of the articles in Ki . d = 1 for articles that are
“maximally destabilizing,” in the sense that there is no overlap between the articles referenced by the focal
article and the references listed in the papers that cite it. In contrast, d = −1 for articles that are “maximally
consolidating,” in the sense that every citing article and the source have at least one reference in common.

We compute the d index for all related articles in our data (mean= −.39, median= −.49, s.d.= .47). We count
the number of related articles that belong to a particular quantile bin of d. We create six non-overlapping
bins: below the 10th percentile of d, between the 10th and the 25th percentile, between the 25th and the 50th
percentile, between the 50th and the 75th percentile, between the 75th and the 95th percentile, and above the
95th percentile of d. In a final step, we roll up the outcome at the subfield-year level. We then run a separate
regression with each of these six outcome measures, using the research design outlined in Section 4.1. As
can be observed in Table E4, the relationship between star death and subfield entry by non-collaborators
is non-monotonic in the extent to which it entails disrupting the paradigms of the treated subfields. The
relationship is strongest for related articles that fall in the intermediate range of the “disruptiveness” metric.
In contrast, the effect is zero and noisy when focusing on entry by both the most disruptive and the most
consolidating articles.

Taken together, the results in Tables 5 and E4 paint a nuanced picture of directional change in the wake of
superstar death. The new contributions do not represent a departure from the subfield’s concerns. At the
same time, the citation evidence makes it clear that these additional contributions often draw from more
recent and different sources of knowledge for inspiration. Moreover, rather than to view these contributions


                                                          xxix
as the expression of a Kuhnian paradigm shift within the subfield, it seems more appropriate to interpret
them as reflecting the impact of a myriad “small r,” permanent revolutions whereby new ideas come to the
fore without necessarily eclipsing prior approaches.

Subfield characteristics. Table E5 examines how three different characteristics of subfields influence the
magnitude of the treatment effect. We first inquire whether post-death entry by non-collaborators is more
pronounced is subfields with forward momentum, relative to those where activity is relatively more subdued
in the years leading up to the star’s death. To create a metric of subfield “hotness,” we compute the fraction
of all papers in the subfield that were published in the window of five years before the star’s death (or
counterfactual death for the control subfields).xiv We then contrast the magnitude of the treatment effect
in the subsamples of “hot” and “cold” subfields, respectively, by splitting the data across the median of the
hotness covariate. Interestingly, the subfields with relatively less intense activity are driving the post-death
entry effect. The treatment effect for hot subfields is half as small in magnitude, relative to that for cold
subfields, and not statistically significant.

Next, we focus on the number of scientists trained by the star that had been active in the subfield before his
death. We conjecture that the subfields of stars who produced many intellectual “offsprings” may be less
welcoming to outsiders than those in which the stars did not train many graduate students or postdoctoral
fellows. Of course, we do not have evidence that these individuals, once trained, remained intellectually
beholden to the star. To identify trainees, we focus on the subset of collaborators who occupy the first
author position in articles where the star occupies the last position; with the added stipulation that the
coauthored publication appears in a window of ± three years around the year in which the collaborator’s
highest degree was received. We then count of the number of investigators trained by the star before his
(possibly counterfactual) death. The results in Table E5 indicate that subfields that are relatively more
endogamous (more than two trainees, the median of this covariate) experience elevated rates of entry after
the star’s death, relative to before. However, the difference between the coefficients corresponding to subfield
with an above median of number of trainees versus below median number of trainees is not itself statistically
significant.

Finally, we examine whether a star’s level of commitment to a subfield moderates the extent of the post-death
entry boost. Recall from Table 6 that the subfields where stars are relatively more important experience more
entry following the star’s death. A star could be important to a subfield, while not being fully committed to
it, in the sense that his presence in the subfield represents only a small part of his overall published output.
Empirically, we compute commitment as the fraction of a star’s publications that fall into the focal subfield,
and we split the data according to the median of this measure (which is equal to 0.14 in the data). The
magnitudes of the treatment effects are very similar. What appears to be associated with the post-death
entry boost is the star’s importance to the subfield while alive, and not the extent of his commitment to it.

Impact of research infrastructure needs. Our analysis is limited to the life sciences and biomedical
research. Though this area accounts for a large fraction of publicly funded, civilian research funding in
the United States, it is not necessarily representative of all fields of science. In particular, some domains
of research, like high-energy particle physics for example, require access to expensive and lumpy capital
equipment, such as the Large Hadron Collider that came on line in 2009 at the cost $8 billion dollars
(Stephan 2012). In contrast to the “big science,” hypercollaborative projects that are emerging as the norm
in these fields (e.g., Aad et al. 2015), academic life scientists require funding in sizable, but more modest
amounts to do frontier research. In scientific domains where capital needs are lumpy, the phenomenon of
entry in the wake of the passing of an eminent scientists may play out very differently, depending on the
institutions that govern access to the scarce capital equipment.
 xiv
     Only the articles in the subfield that were published before the death are taking into account when computing this ratio.
The mean hotness across subfields is 0.61 (very similar to the median), with a standard deviation equal to 0.21.




                                                            xxx
Within biomedical research, large-scale clinical trials most closely resemble the characteristics of those other
capital-intensive science fields. These necessitate a large infrastructure of data collection, monitoring, and
management, which is why these activities are often consolidated in large cooperative groups such as the
AIDS Clinical Trials Group, the Children’s Oncology Group, or the Framingham Heart Study. PubMed has
a “publication type” field which allows us to identify the subfields that are clinical-trial intensive (10% of
the subfields) versus those that are not (the remaining 90%).

Table E6 replicates the results of Table 3 separately for these two subsamples. Unsurprisingly, our ability
to estimate statistically significant effects is limited to the much larger set of non clinical trial-intensive
subfields. That said, the magnitudes for the clinical trial-intensive subfields are very similar.

Star characteristics. We saw in Table 6 that the passing of stars that shone brighter while they were
alive (measured by citations, publications or funding at death) appear to be driving much of the effect on
non-collaborator entry. Tables E7 and E8 focus on other star characteristics that might moderate the core
finding. The first two columns of Table E7 show that the subfields of relatively younger stars (those aged 60
and below at the time of their deaths, the median in our sample) account for much of the overall impact of
death—the magnitude of the effect for older stars is very small and imprecisely estimated. However, there is
potentially a distinction between being “young in the field” and simply being young. We measure experience
in a subfield by capturing the year in which the star first published within it. Subfield experience varies
from 1 to 38 years, with a median of seven and a mean of 8.36. The last two columns of Table E7 imply that
the stars who are above median in subfield experience are associated with slightly more post-death entry,
but the difference is very slight.

Table E8 brings more nuance to the analysis by focusing on the extent to which the star was leading vs.
lagging the frontier of his subfields at the time of death. We develop two alternative measures of “distance
to the frontier.” We assume that frontier work will be more likely to reference more recent science, and
alternatively will tend to be tagged by MeSH keyword combinations that are of more recent vintage. In
a window of five years before the death, we then contrast the difference in reference vintage (respectively
MeSH term combination vintage) for articles written by the star vs. articles written by all other authors. We
then split subfields according to the median of this difference. Across all measures, the results in Table E8
tend to show that the effect of post-death entry are larger for those subfields where the star was leading
when he passed, relative to those where his lead may have been slight or his research even staler than that
of other researchers in the subfield.

Outsiders vs. competitors: A reprise. Recall that Figure 3 focused on the extent to which related
authors were outsiders vs. previous incumbents in the subfields that expand in the wake of a star’s death.
For every related article, we matched their authorship roster to the Faculty Roster of the AAMC. Using the
matched authors’ past publication record, we can then ascertain the fraction of each related author’s output
that fall in the focal subfield. We then sorted each related article into 11 mutually exclusive bins: zero overlap
(which corresponds to the bottom two quartiles of the overlap distribution), and a separate bin for every five
percentiles above the median (50th to 55th percentile, 55th to 60th percentile,. . . , 95th to 99th percentile), as
well as a top percentile bin. We then computed the corresponding measures of subfield activity by aggregating
the data up to the subfield/year level. We presented the results graphically in Figure 3, Panel B, where each
dot corresponds to the magnitude of the treatment effect in a separate regression with the outcome variable
being the number of articles in each subfield that belong to the corresponding bins.

In Table E9, we provide, in regression table form this time, a variant of Table 3 where overlap is measured
not just with respect to the focal subfield, but rather with respect to the combined subfields of a given star.
We also simplify the number of bins, with only five: related articles by new scientists, related articles by
scientists with zero overlap who have published in the past in other subfields, related articles by scientists in
the third quartile of overlap, related articles by scientists whose past publication record puts them between
the 75th and 95th percentile of the overlap distribution, and finally related articles by scientists whose past
publication record puts them above the 95th percentile of the overlap distribution. With this “global”


                                                       xxxi
measure of overlap, one can observe that the post-death entry boost is driven by scientists with no, or only
limited past participation in the subfields where the star was active.

The lifecycle of stardom. The results in our manuscript naturally raise implications for welfare. We
expound the view that once securely ensconced at the helm of their field, stars leverage their power for
longer than a benevolent social planner might prefer. This argument would be less tenable if stars were
able to remain at the peak of their intellectual abilities until the very twilight of their careers. To shed
light on the career life cycle for superstars, we focus on the 5,878 control stars in our analytic sample, and
construct a panel dataset of publications at the star scientist-year level.xv Using Poisson specifications, we
then regress publication output onto year effects, indicator variables for degree (MD, PhD, MD/PhD), an
indicator variable for female scientists, indicator variable for departmental affiliation (medicine vs. surgery
vs. cell biology, etc.), indicator variables for the year in which the highest degree was received as well as
52 indicator variables for age effects (from age 29 to age 80, with ages below 29 absorbed in the omitted
category).

Panel A of Figure E4 displays the estimates corresponding to the age effects when then outcome in the
specification is the overall number of publications in a given year. Panel B restricts the outcome measure to
publications whose number of long-run citations lies above the 95th percentile of the vintage-specific citation
distribution at the article level. Panel C proceeds in the same spirit, but focuses on even more impactful
publications, those whose number of long-run citations lie above the 99th percentile of the vintage-specific
citation distribution at the article level. As can be observed in all three panels, the productive life cycle
of stars follows an inverted U-shaped pattern, with a peak occurring earlier for highly cited publications,
followed by a steeper drop off.




  xv
       We eliminate the 452 extinct stars from the sample since their life cycle was interrupted prematurely.



                                                              xxxii
Table E1a: Extended Descriptive Statistics, Subfield-level outcome variables
                                                                                   Control Subfields                Treated Subfields
                                                                                 Mean     Median Std. Dev.      Mean     Median   Std. Dev.
Baseline stock of related NIH grants, total                                     23.824       17        25.570   22.449    17       23.566
Baseline stock of related NIH grants, collaborators                              4.876        2        6.952    4.446      2        6.011
Baseline stock of related NIH grants, non-collaborators                         19.301       13        22.170   18.306    13       20.659
Baseline stock of related articles, bottom quartile of citation impact           6.614        4        8.322    6.741      4        8.611
Baseline stock of related articles, 2nd quartile of citation impact             13.423        9        13.983   13.356     9       14.057
Baseline stock of related articles, 3rd quartile of citation impact             20.100       14        19.051   19.996    14       18.937
Baseline stock of related articles, 75th < citation impact< 95th pctl.          21.762       16        19.810   21.271    16       19.289
Baseline stock of related articles, 95th < citation impact< 99th pctl.           5.233        3        5.933    5.108      3        5.844
Baseline stock of related articles, citation impact > 99th pctl.                 1.257        1        2.129    1.280      0        2.360
Baseline stock of related articles, outsiders                                   25.167       19        21.966   23.046    17       21.194
Baseline stock of related articles, incumbents                                  16.000        9        19.960   17.056    11       19.908
Baseline stock of related articles, proximate to source (cardinal measure)      31.353       24        31.179   32.022    25       31.854
Baseline stock of related articles, distant from source (cardinal measure)      37.037       19        49.598   35.730    18       48.119
Baseline stock of related articles, proximate to source (ordinal measure)       32.730       31        17.223   32.786    31       17.000
Baseline stock of related articles, distant from source (ordinal measure)       35.661       15        51.796   34.966    14       51.735
Baseline stock of related articles, references within subfield                  54.627       42        48.492   53.963    41       47.581
Baseline stock of related articles, references outside subfield                 13.764        7        19.080   13.789     7       19.159
Baseline stock of related articles, cites the star                              32.332       22        34.199   31.076    22       32.141
Baseline stock of related articles, does not cite the star                      36.058       24        37.875   36.677    24       39.633
Baseline stock of related articles, recent references                           25.390       16        29.948   25.300    16       29.643
Baseline stock of related articles, old references                              43.000       32        39.830   42.453    32       39.545
Baseline stock of related articles, recent MeSH terms (individual)              47.225       34        44.565   46.781    34       43.835
Baseline stock of related articles, old MeSH terms (individual)                 20.465        7        32.090   20.318     7       30.955
Baseline stock of related articles, recent MeSH terms (combinations)            34.242       23        36.401   33.941    23       35.964
Baseline stock of related articles, old MeSH terms (combinations)               30.569       20        34.234   30.179    20       33.176
Baseline stock of related articles, with no star author                         50.222       36        45.708   50.241    36       46.113
Baseline stock of related articles, with at least one star author               18.168       12        19.281   17.512    12       18.411
Baseline stock of related articles, with current elite author                   62.275       46        55.514   61.728    45       55.169
Baseline stock of related articles, with no current or future elite author       2.699        1        4.855    2.657      1        4.715
Baseline stock of related articles, with future elite author                     3.416        2        5.079    3.367      2        4.916
Note: All variables are limited to subfield activity by non-collaborators, unless otherwise specified.




                                                                       xxxiii
Table E1b: Extended descriptive statistics, key covariates
                                                                               Control Subfields                         Treated Subfields
                                                                                                    Std.                                        Std.
                                                                        Mean        Median                          Mean         Median
                                                                                                    Dev.                                        Dev.
Star-level
Age at Death                                                            58.100          58          8.795           58.100           58         8.796
Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Publications                              164           131           123             170            143          118
Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Citations                                12,141        8,010         12,938          11,580         8,726        10,212
Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline                       $18,784,517   $11,904,846   $25,160,518     $17,637,726   $12,049,690   $24,873,018
Star’s number of past trainees (overall)                                8.665           6           8.991            8.379           7          7.661
Subfield-level
Importance of the star to the subfield                                    0.152          0          0.134              0.151          0          0.132
Commitment of the star to the subfield                                   0.160           0          0.149             0.157           0          0.149
Subfield coherence [PMRA-based measure]                                   0.602          1          0.131             0.603           1          0.128
Subfield coherence [citation-based measure]                              -0.003          0          0.019             -0.003          0          0.023
Subfield cliquishness [Clustering Coefficient]                           0.774           1          0.140             0.774           1          0.137
Cumulative Nb. of editorials by coauthors                               122.453         35         217.358           118.844         39         201.803
Nb. of coauthors in study sections                                       0.324           0          0.846             0.369           0          0.971
% of subfield NIH funding controlled by the star’s collaborators          0.285          0          0.315              0.269          0          0.307
Subfield “hotness”                                                       0.597           1          0.212             0.596           1          0.217
Star’s number of past trainees in the subfield                            1.917          1          2.450              1.803          1          2.171
Years of experience in the subfield                                       8.277          7          5.750              8.493          7          6.078
Relative lead of the star in subfield [Individual MeSH measure]           0.045         -0          1.879              0.036         -0          1.741
Relative lead of the star in subfield [2-way combo MeSH measure]         -0.028          0          4.447             -0.089          0          4.334
Relative lead of the star in subfield [backward reference measure]        0.053         -0          6.902             0.227          -0          6.833
Note: This table reports summary statistics for all of the key covariates that we interact with the treatment effect in order to explore the underlying
mechanisms of star death.




                                                                       xxxiv
Table E2a: Correlation matrix, Subfield-level covariates
                                                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)            (5)      (6)       (7)
     (1)    Importance of the star to the subfield                                 1.00
     (2)    Commitment of the star to the subfield                               0.34**      1.00
     (3)    Star’s number of past trainees in the subfield                       0.23**     0.24**      1.00
     (4)    Subfield coherence [PMRA-based measure]                              -0.34**    -0.07**   0.04**        1.00
     (5)    Subfield coherence [citation-based measure]                          -0.05**    -0.03**    -0.01        0.00        1.00
     (6)    Subfield cliquishness [clustering coefficient]                       -0.25**    -0.37**   -0.40**      -0.10**     0.12**         1.00
     (7)    Cumulative nb. of editorials by coauthors                            -0.06**    -0.20**    0.01*       0.07**      -0.03**       -0.00     1.00
     (8)    Nb. of coauthors in study sections                                   -0.02**    -0.11**   0.13**       0.05**      -0.02**      -0.04**   0.48**
     (9)    % of subfield NIH funding controlled by the star’s collaborators     0.36**     0.15**    0.24**       -0.12**     -0.09**      -0.25**   0.10**
    (10)    Subfield “hotness”                                                   -0.03**    -0.07**   -0.10**      -0.05**     -0.09**      0.24**    -0.04**
    (11)    Years of experience in the subfield                                  0.12**     0.30**    0.38**       0.07**      0.02**       -0.44**   0.09**
    (12)    Relative lead of the star in subfield [individual MeSH measure]       0.01*      0.01      -0.00       -0.04**      0.01        0.02**    -0.01**
    (13)    Relative lead of the star in subfield [2-way combo MeSH measure]      -0.00      0.01      -0.00       0.01**       0.01         -0.00    -0.01*
    (14)    Relative lead of the star in subfield [backward reference measure]   -0.08**     -0.00    -0.04**      0.02**      0.02**       0.04**    -0.04**
                                                                                   (8)        (9)       (10)         (11)           (12)     (13)      (14)
     (8)   Nb. of coauthors in study sections                                       1.00
     (9)   % of subfield NIH funding controlled by the star’s collaborators        0.12**    1.00
    (10)   Subfield “hotness”                                                     -0.02**   -0.05**      1.00
    (11)   Years of experience in the subfield                                     0.09**   0.22**     -0.49**       1.00
    (12)   Relative lead of the star in subfield [individual MeSH measure]          0.00     0.00       -0.01†      -0.01†          1.00
    (13)   Relative lead of the star in subfield [2-way combo MeSH measure]       -0.01**    0.00      -0.05**      0.03**         0.29**    1.00
    (14)   Relative lead of the star in subfield [backward reference measure]     -0.03**   -0.06**    -0.10**      0.02**         0.05**   0.09**     1.00

Table E2b: Correlation matrix, Star-level covariates
                                                                                     (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)
     (1) Age at Death                                                               1.00
     (2) Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Publications                               0.40**    1.00
     (3) Investigator Cumulative Nb. of Citations                                  0.21**   0.74**     1.00
     (4) Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline                           0.38**   0.45**    0.34**      1.00
     (5) Star’s number of past trainees (overall)                                  0.33**   0.54**    0.56**     0.36**      1.00
†
    p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01




                                                                          xxxv
Table E3: Scientific Impact of Entry by Non-Collaborators
                                                                                      Btw.75th     Btw. 95th      Above
                                                Bttm.         2nd          3rd
                                 All Pubs                                              & 95th       & 99th         99th
                                               Quartile     Quartile     Quartile
                                                                                        pctl.        pctl.         pctl.

Panel A: Anticipated Death Events
                                  0.128**        0.043        0.082*       0.093*      0.151**       0.214**     0.333**
After Death
                                  (0.038)       (0.045)      (0.041)      (0.041)      (0.048)       (0.069)     (0.115)
Nb. of Investigators               4,018         3,982        4,018        4,016        4,013         3,946       3,214
Nb. of Fields                     15,084        14,885       15,082       15,082       15,076        14,623       9,586
Nb. of Field-Year Obs.           554,869       547,637      554,795      554,795      554,573       537,883      352,571
Log Likelihood                  -1,234,030     -315,200     -504,577     -633,777     -643,787      -234,637     -67,585
Panel B: Sudden Death Events
                                   0.026        -0.102†       -0.069       -0.040       0.090        0.243**     0.310**
After Death
                                  (0.048)       (0.057)      (0.055)      (0.054)      (0.057)       (0.075)     (0.116)
Nb. of Investigators               4,656         4,615        4,656        4,655        4,656         4,592       3,777
Nb. of Fields                     17,549        17,253       17,539       17,545       17,549        17,063       11,331
Nb. of Field-Year Obs.           645,771       634,958      645,407      645,623      645,771       627,898      417,017
Log Likelihood                  -1,396,961     -338,628     -563,370     -726,799     -756,820      -285,678     -83,118
Note:   Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. Like in Table 4 in the manuscript,
        the dependent variable is the total number of publications by non-collaborators in a subfield in a particular
        year, where these publications fall in a particular quantile bin of the long-run, vintage-adjusted citation
        distribution for the universe of journal articles in PubMed. In Panel A, the sample is limited to 1,576 subfields
        associated with 229 stars whose death is anticipated (along with the corresponding control subfields); and in
        Panel B, the sample is limited to 1,342 subfields associated with 185 stars whose death is sudden and unexpected
        (along with the corresponding control subfields). All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield
        age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after
        the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as
        elasticities. For example, the estimates in the first column of Panel A, imply that treated subfields see an
        increase in the number of contributions by non-collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically
        significant 100×(exp[0.128]-1)=13.66%.

        Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist.
        †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                         xxxvi
Table E4: Disruptive vs. Consolidating Entry
                                             Btw. 10th       Btw. 25th       Btw. 50th        Btw. 75th
                                Below                                                                         Above 95th
                                              & 25th         and 50th        and 75th         and 95th
                               10th pctl.                                                                       pctl.
                                               pctl.           pctl.           pctl.            pctl.
 Disruption Index d               d=-1       -1< d <-.74    -.74< d <-.50   -.50< d <-.14    -.14< d <0.53       d >0.53

                                 0.005         0.071           0.139***        0.154***         0.121***         0.002
 After Death
                                (0.041)       (0.041)          (0.034)         (0.031)          (0.034)         (0.041)
 Nb. of Investigators            6,189         6,184            6,247           6,254            6,253           6,077
 Nb. of Fields                  33,610        33,868           34,183          34,205           34,147          30,889
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.        1,237,024     1,246,410        1,257,883       1,258,695        1,256,557       1,136,914
 Log Likelihood                -670,691      -837,488        -1,218,093      -1,268,501       -1,134,304       -448,029
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total
     number of publications by non-collaborators in a subfield in a particular year, where these publications fall within
     a particular quantile bin of the Funk & Owen-Smith (2017) disruptiveness index, denoted by d. All models
     incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control
     subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing
     from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level
     of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




Table E5: Post-death entry and subfield characteristics
 Metric of field                                                    Number of                Commitment to
 Momentum
                                   “Hotness”
                                                                     Trainees                  the Field
                                 Below         Above             Below        Above            Below          Above
                                Median        Median            Median       Median           Median         Median
                                0.130**        0.066             0.100*       0.059†           0.059†         0.069
 After Death
                                (0.028)       (0.044)           (0.041)      (0.035)          (0.032)        (0.046)
 Nb. of Investigators            4,870         4,694             3,566        4,881            4,477          4,520
 Nb. of Fields                   17,427        16,791            8,652        25,566           17,072         17,146
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.         642,219       616,957           317,813      941,363          627,355        631,821
 Log Likelihood                -1,453,789    -1,137,226         -677,372     -2,085,856      -1,345,958   -1,413,964
 Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is
        the total number of publications by non-collaborators within a subfield in a particular year. Each pair of
        columns splits the sample across the median of a particular covariate for the sample of subfields (treated
        and control) in the baseline year. The first set of two columns examines differences in the extent to which
        the “hotness” of the subfield—defined as the fraction of the subfield’s activity that falls within the time
        window of five years before the star’s death—influences the rate at which non-collaborators enter the field
        after the star passes away. The second set of columns examines the impact of having former trainees of the
        star in the subfield. The final set of columns splits the sample according to the degree of commitment of
        the star to the subfield (i.e., the fraction of his/her output that falls within the subfield. All models
        incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated
        and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the
        coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. Robust standard errors in
        parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                           xxxvii
Table E6: Impact of Research Infrastructure Needs
                                     Clinical Trial-intensive                                    Other
                                                                 Non-                                           Non-
                                  All           Collabs.                           All          Collabs.
                                                               Collabs.                                       Collabs.
                                Authors          Only                            Authors         Only
                                                                 Only                                           Only
                                  0.061          -0.147          0.086†            0.060†       -0.262**       0.095**
 After Death
                                 (0.051)        (0.102)         (0.052)           (0.031)       (0.065)        (0.032)
 Nb. of Investigators             1,739          1,666           1,739             5,753          5,630         5,753
 Nb. of Fields                    3,437          3,309           3,437            30,781         29,787        30,781
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.         125,919         121,230        125,919          1,133,257      1,096,675     1,133,257
 Log Likelihood                 -315,048        -77,390        -302,267         -2,628,821     -660,968      -2,510,273
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the
      total number of publications in a subfield in a particular year. The first set of three columns replicate our
      benchmark specifications (Table 3, columns 1, 2, and 3) on the sample of subfields where research often entails
      performing large scale clinical trials. The second set of three columns replicate the benchmark specifications on
      the sample of subfields where research seldom entails performing large-scale clinical trials. Clinical trial
      publications were identified using the publication type field in PubMed. All models incorporate a full suite of
      year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches
      from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year and individual fixed effects
      may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star. Robust
      standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




Table E7: Influence of star age and in-field experience
                                          Star Birth Age                        Star Experience in the Field
                                        at Time of Death                               at Time of Death
                                                                                  Recent           Established
                               Younger than 61            61 or Older
                                                                           (less than 7 years) (more than 7 years)
                                           **
                                     0.108                   0.009                 0.061†             0.092*
 After Death
                                     (0.041)                (0.041)               (0.037)            (0.036)
 Nb. of Investigators                 5,542                  1,936                 5,166              4,257
 Nb. of Fields                       27,022                  7,196                17,933             16,285
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.             995,153                264,023               659,252            599,924
 Log Likelihood                    -2,178,601              -581,832             -1,376,994         -1,348,968
Note:   Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the
        total number of publications by non-collaborators within a subfield in a particular year. All models incorporate
        a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control
        subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year and
        individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the
        deceased star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as
        elasticities. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p <
        0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                           xxxviii
Table E8: Star’s leadership relative to the frontier in his/her
          subfield
                                      Vintage of
 Metric of distance to                                                         Vintage of MeSH terms
                                   cited references
 the subfield frontier
                                                                         Individual             2-way combinations
                                  Lagging       Leading             Lagging       Leading       Lagging       Leading
                                         **            *                                 **            †
 After Death                       0.117          0.154               0.063        0.192          0.094        0.167**
                                   (0.037)       (0.072)             (0.047)       (0.049)       (0.057)       (0.041)
 Nb. of Investigators               3,373         3,075               3,328         3,210         3,333         3,216
 Nb. of Fields                      9,226         7,664               8,647         8,243         8,762         8,128
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.           339,900       282,526             318,626       303,800       322,838       299,588
 Log Likelihood                   -775,180      -618,943            -713,539      -682,532      -729,341      -666,577
Note:   Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the
        total number of publications by non-collaborators within a subfield in a particular year. We develop two
        alternative measures of “distance to the frontier.” We assume that frontier work will be more likely to
        reference more recent science, and alternatively will tend to be tagged by MeSH keyword combinations that
        are of more recent vintage. In a window of five years before the death, we then contrast the difference in
        reference vintage (respectively MeSH term combination vintage) for articles written by the star vs. articles
        written by all other authors. We then split subfields according to the median of this difference. All models
        incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated
        and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that
        age, year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of
        death for the deceased star. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist.
        †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




Table E9: Influence of field overlap between related authors and
          the stars on the rate of entry into subfields
                                 New              Below            Btw. 50th and         Btw. 75th and           Above
                               Scientists         Median             75th pctl.            95th pctl.           95th pctl.

 Intellectual Overlap x        Not Defined           x=0             0<x<6.35%           6.35%<x<36.70%         x>36.70%
                                  0.081            0.113**              0.096*                  -0.000             -0.075
 After Death
                                 (0.082)           (0.028)             (0.038)                 (0.061)            (0.128)
 Nb. of Investigators             4,724             6,260               6,167                   5,638              3,622
 Nb. of Fields                    16,961           34,216               33,688                  29,845            15,241
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.          625,066         1,259,102            1,239,873               1,098,754          561,888
 Log Likelihood                  -88,890         -1,508,995           -970,344                -633,095           -149,524
Note:   This table displays a variation of the results depicted in Figure 3, Panel B in regression form. Estimates stem
        from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total number of
        publications by non-collaborators within a subfield in a particular year, broken into five bins: publications by
        new scientists; publications that fall below the median of our measure of field overlap between the star and the
        related investigators identified on these articles’ authorship roster; publications that fall in the third quartile of
        the field overlap measure; publications that fall in the fourth quartile but below the top ventile of the field
        overlap measure; and finally publications that fall in the top ventile of the measure. In contrast to Figure 3, in
        this case overlap has been defined with respect to the “global” subfield that encompasses all the subfields of a
        given star in the data, as opposed to the “local” measure where overlap with the focal subfield determines the
        extent of overlap. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term
        common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to
        address the concern that age, year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry
        around the time of death for the deceased star. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of
        the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.



                                                           xxxix
                                                                           Figure E1
                                                             Subfield Growth and Decline—Raw Data

                                            A. All Authors                                                   B. Collaborators                                             C. Non-Collaborators
  Average Flow of Articles into Subfields




                                                                                                                                Average Flow of Articles into Subfields
                                                                   Average Flow of Articles into Subfields




Note: Panels A, B, and C show the path of mean publication activity for treated and control subfields around the year of star death, broken down by total number of
      publications in the subfield (Panel A), number of publications in the subfield with a coauthor of the star (Panel B), and number of publications in the subfield
      without any coauthor of the star (Panel C).




                                                                                                                  xl
                  Figure E2: Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline
                              Non-collaborator Activity Only—All Publications


                           A. Anticipated Death                                                                    B. Sudden Death




Note: The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript. The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates
      stemming from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows by non-collaborators within a subfield are regressed onto
      year effects, subfield age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator
      variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the
      treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death. These regressions are run separately on
      the subsample of subfields associated with stars whose death was anticipated (and their controls—Panel A), and on the subsample of subfields associated with
      stars whose death was sudden (and their controls—Panel B). The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around star
      scientist) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines.




                                                                                   xli
                  Figure E3: Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline
                      Non-collaborator Activity Only—Top 5% publications by citation


                            A. Anticipated Death                                                                     B. Sudden Death




Note: The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript. The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates
      stemming from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which the flows of highly-cited publications (top 5% of the vintage-specific citation
      distribution) by non-collaborators within a subfield are regressed onto year effects, subfield age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status
      and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications
      also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around
      the time of the death. These regressions are run separately on the subsample of subfields associated with stars whose death was anticipated (and their controls—
      Panel A), and on the subsample of subfields associated with stars whose death was sudden (and their controls—Panel B). The 95% confidence interval
      (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around star scientist) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines.




                                                                                     xlii
                                                                       Figure E4
                                                               The Life Cycle of Stardom


                                                                       B. Highly-cited Publications                                C. Highly-cited Publications
                 A. All Publications
                                                                                 (Top 5%)                                                  (Top 1%)




Note: For the sample of 5,878 control superstars, we create a panel dataset at the scientist-year level. We regress (i) publication output in a given year (Panel A) and (ii)
highly-cited publications in a given year (Panels B and C) onto year effects, indicator variables for degree (MD, PhD, MD/PhD), an indicator variable for female scientists,
indicator variable for departmental affiliation (medicine vs. surgery vs. cell biology, etc.), indicator variables for the year in which the highest degree was received as well
as 52 indicator variables for age effects (from age 29 to age 80, with ages below 29 absorbed in the omitted category). In Panel B, a publication is deemed to be highly
cited if it falls above the 95th percentile of the vintage-specific citation distribution at the article level. In Panel C, a publication is deemed to be highly cited if it falls
above the 99th percentile of the vintage-specific citation distribution at the article level. The above plots display the estimates for the age indicator variables up to the
age of 70 (to preserve the same scale across the three figures), together with their associated 95% confidence interval. The list of covariates is strictly identical across the
three panels.




                                                                                      xliii
                                 Appendix F: Robustness Checks

Balanced panel. With treatment events staggered over time, a concern with the dynamic specifications
summarized in Figure 2 is that the magnitude of the treatment effect might not be stable over time. Because
our observation period stops in 2006, the lead terms far away from death are identified by only a subsample
of the data (see Figure F1). Could such heterogeneity confound the true dynamics, for example if deaths
that occurred earlier in the sample have a bigger effect? To address this concern, we extend the observation
period used to generate the event study graphs in Figure 2 from 2006 to 2012, resulting in a sample that is
almost perfectly balanced in a window of ten years before to ten years after the death of a superstar. As
can be seen in Figure F2, which replicates Figure 2 in all respects except the length of the analytic sample,
the results change very little.

This figure begs another question: why not simply use this longer observation period as the default through-
out the paper? There are two reasons. First, we cannot identify collaborator status reliably after 2006
because this is the last year of the data in our version of the AAMC Faculty Roster. Second, whereas we
can account precisely for the employment status of the control superstars up to 2006 (the year during which
we coded their CVs), some may retire, or even die in the years that follow, raising the specter that their
subfields are not adequate controls during the 2007-2012 time period. As a result, we quickly revert back to
the observation window 1965-2006 in all that follows.

Main results, rolled up to the scientist-level of analysis. The treatment variable exhibits variation
at the level of the star scientist, and not at the level of the subfield-star pair. Of course, we cluster the
standard errors at the star level, and we exploit the differential position of a star across his subfields to shed
light on mechanisms. But do our main results survive when the data is “rolled up” to the star-year level of
the analysis? To probe the robustness of our benchmark set of results, we lump all related articles for each
star together as if they belonged to a single subfield. Nevertheless, the results in Table F1 and Figure F3 are
very similar to those in Table 3 and Figure 2, both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance. One
exception is the coefficient on the effect of entry by collaborators in Table F1, which is negative as expected,
but smaller in magnitude, relative to the corresponding coefficient in Table 3.

Alternate functional forms. Despite its robustness and appropriateness for the analysis of skewed positive
outcomes, the conditional fixed effects Poisson model of Hausman et al. (1984) has an important shortcoming:
subfields for which there is no variation in the outcome during the observation period (for example, because
the outcome is uniformly zero) drop out of the sample. This is why the number of observations in many
tables varies slightly from column to column. Fixed-effects OLS models do not suffer from this limitation.
In Table F2 and Figure F4, we examine the sensitivity of our benchmark set of results to the choice of
alternative functional forms. In the three columns to the left, we simply use the “raw” number of articles
in the subfield as the outcome, and perform estimation by OLS. Of course, the estimates are not directly
interpretable in terms of elasticities. At the mean of the data, however, the treatment effect in the third
column implies that subfield entry by non-collaborating authors expands by 0.409/3.335 = 12.26%, which is
not all that different from the 8.2% reported in Table 3.

In the three columns to the right, Table F2 reports results corresponding to OLS estimation, but this time
with the outcome variables transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function (Burbidge et al. 1988).xvi
In this case, coefficient estimates can be interpreted as elasticities, as an approximation. They are quite
similar once again to those reported in Table 3, except for the effect on entry by collaborators, which is
smaller in magnitude.
 xvi                      √
     sinh−1 (x) = ln(x + x2 + 1). Unlike the log of x, the inverse hyperbolic sine is defined at zero, which is attractive here
because a substantial proportion of the subfields in the data display no activity in a particular year. For example, all subfields
obviously see entry over the entire observation period, and yet in 31.33% of the subfield-year observations, the number of articles
entering is zero.




                                                               xliv
Figure F4 presents dynamic analogs of the results in the the third column (Panel A) and sixth column
(Panel B) of Table F2. In the case of the raw outcomes (Panel A), one can detect a trend in outcome before
the event, though it is not estimated precisely. The results using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
(Panel B) exhibit no evidence of a pre-trend.

Size of the control group. The first three columns in Table F3 drop from the sample all the control
subfields, but are otherwise analogous to the core results presented in Table 3, Panel A. In these specifications,
subfields who were treated in the past or will be treated in the future serve as implicit controls for the
subfields currently experiencing the death of their associated star. The results are qualitatively similar to
those displayed in Table 3. However, the corresponding event study graphs (Figure F5) clearly show that
dropping the control group from the estimation sample produces pre-event trends that cast doubt on a
research design based on a single level of difference. This provides a clear rationale for our preferred research
design, which adds an additional level of difference to the data—that provided by control subfields.

The second set of three columns in Table F3 attempt to replicate the results of Table 3 in a sample such that
for each treated subfield, there is exactly one control subfield (selected at random from the set of control
subfields for each treated source). The magnitudes are qualitatively similar to those observed in Table 3, but
the standard errors are larger. We conclude that the approximate 1 : 10 ratio of treated to control subfields
is important insofar as it provides the statistical power to estimate the post-death term that is common
between treated and control subfields, and to do so net of the subfield age and calendar year dynamics.

Are death events exogenous? Could some of the deaths in our sample be caused by stress as others are
seeking to break a stars’ hold on a field? Chronic stress can lead to a wide range of adverse health conditions.
Most of these conditions diminish quality of life but not mortality per se. The most notable link between
stress and death is through heart disease. Thus one possibility is that stress increases the risk of a heart
attack. 14% of the extinct superstars (who account for 16.75% of the treated subfields) die of a heart attack.

In Table F4 (three leftmost columns), we replicate the results of Table 3 while excluding these subfields. The
point estimates are slightly larger in magnitude, and also slightly more precisely estimated when excluding
the subfields associated with heart attack events. Of course, there may be other more indirect channels
through which stress can precipitate death. From a study design perspective, we would be more concerned
with this threat to identification if subfield growth was trending upward before the death. But from the
event study-type figures we present (Figure 2, as well as numerous variations in Appendices E and F), this
does not appear to be the case.

Multi-disciplinary source articles and the validity of the control group. Multi-disciplinary journals
such as PNAS, Science, or Nature account for 10% of the subfields in our data.xvii This could be problematic
insofar as these prestigious outlets publish articles in all scientific fields, and we recruit control source articles
from the same journal and year as that of the treated source article. Take the source paper by Chu et al.
(1998)—already used as an example in Appendix D—which appeared in the issue of Science dated October
23rd of that year. The same issue includes a paper with the title “Climate and groundwater recharge during
the last glaciation in an ice-covered region” and another called “Self-organized growth of three- dimensional
quantum-Dot crystals with fcc-like stacking and a tunable lattice constant.” It would not seem advisable to
use one of these as the source for a control subfield, since they do not pertain to the life sciences, even under
the most expansive definition of this term.

This is not an issue in practice, since to qualify as a control, it is not sufficient for a candidate source article
to appear in the same journal and year as its treated counterpart. In addition, we impose the requirement
that one of our 12,000+ still alive superstars is in last authorship position. This will filter out of the set
of potential controls any non-biomedical articles that appear in these outlets since all the stars in our data
 xvii
     Note that PLoS One, a very large multidisciplinary journal, does not contribute any source article in our sample. This is
because it was founded in 2006, and the latest year of publication for one of the source articles (treated or control) is 2002 (one
year before the latest year of death, which is 2003).



                                                               xlv
(deceased or not) are life scientists. We have also replicated the benchmark results excluding the subfields
that are associated with a source article published in either Science, Nature, or PNAS. The results are
displayed in the three rightmost columns in Table F4. The point estimates are very similar to those we
obtain in our benchmark set of analyses (columns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 3).

Source articles, with and without abstracts. In Table F5, we perform one analysis that (imperfectly)
tries to assess the sensitivity of our results to the use of author-chosen information to delineate the set of
intellectual neighbors in a subfield. Ten percent of the subfields in the data radiate from source articles
for which PubMed does not have an abstract. For these subfields, PMRA must therefore make do without
abstract words (i.e., relying solely on title words and MeSH terms) to return a set of neighbors. We reproduce
our benchmark set of specifications (the first panel of Table 3) on the set of subfields radiating from source
articles with and without abstract information. As can be seen above, the estimates for the sample restricted
to abstractless source articles are less precisely estimated than for the sample restricted to the much larger
number of subfields associated with source articles that have an abstract. The magnitudes in both cases,
however, are quite similar, which we find reassuring.

Table 7 estimated on the subsample of less-well cited stars. Table 7 provides evidence that subfield
entry is more pronounced after the death of an eminent scientist when the subfield can be perceived as less
coherent, or when the colleagues of the star are less able to exert control over critical resources after he has
passed away. However, the sample for these results was limited to the subfields of well-cited stars (those
above the median by cumulative citations in the sample, in the year of death). For completeness, Table F6
provides an exact analog to Table 7, except that in this case the sample is limited to the subfields of less
well-cited stars (those below the median by cumulative citations in the sample, in the year of death).

The results in this subsample are less consistent across measures than was the case for the more eminent
stars. Many pairs of columns do not show notable differences between more coherent and less coherent
subfields, or between more indirectly controlled vs. less indirectly controlled subfields. In two instances,
however, the direction of the results is opposite to that observed in Table 7. First, subfields that were
relatively less consolidated according to the metric of Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) see increased entry after
the passing of a less eminent star (second and third columns of Panel A). Second, subfields in which the
less eminent star had important coauthors sitting on NIH study sections in the last five years of his life also
experience elevated rated of entry post-death (second and third columns of Panel B).




                                                      xlvi
Table F1: Impacts at the level of the star scientist
                                                                                              NIH Funding Flows
                                              Publication Flows
                                                                                               (Nb. of Awards)
                                  All             Collabs.      Non-Collabs.           All         Collabs.     Non-Collabs
                                Authors            Only            Only              Authors        Only           Only

                                   (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)           (5)            (6)
                                         **                                **                 **
                                 0.227              -0.121         0.249             0.248          -0.092        0.272**
 After Death
                                 (0.056)           (0.088)         (0.055)           (0.059)       (0.098)        (0.058)
 Nb. of Stars                     6,369             6,369           6,369             5,440         5,172          5,427
 Nb. of Star-Year Obs.          801,654           801,654         801,654            15,469        14,589         15,436
 Log Likelihood                -2,444,982         -663,888       -2,262,127          479,539       452,259        478,516
Note:   Estimates stem from conditional (star) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total
        number of publications in the collection of subfields in which the star (deceased or not) was active in a particular
        year. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and star career age effects, as well as term common to
        both treated and control stars that switches from zero to one after the (possibly counterfactual) death of the
        star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. For
        example, the estimates in column (3) imply that treated stars see an increase in the number of contributions by
        non-collaborators in their fields—a statistically significant 100×(exp[0.249]-1)=28.27%. Robust standard errors
        in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




Table F2: Alternate Functional Forms
                                                       OLS                                        OLS
                                                    (in levels)                        (inverse hyperbolic sine)
                                                                        Non-                                 Non-
                                      All            Collabs.                          All      Collabs.
                                                                      Collabs.                             Collabs.
                                    Authors           Only                          Authors       Only
                                                                        Only                                 Only
                                    0.334**          -0.145**         0.409**         0.032     -0.054**   0.065**
 After Death
                                    (0.108)          (0.032)          (0.100)        (0.025)    (0.014)    (0.024)
 Nb. of Investigators                6,260            6,260            6,260          6,260      6,260      6,260
 Nb. of Fields                      34,218            34,218           34,218        34,218      34,218     34,218
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.            1,259,176        1,259,176        1,259,176      1,259,176 1,259,176 1,259,176
 Mean of the Depndt. Var.            3.757            0.606            3.335          1.407      0.289      1.315
 Adjusted R2                         0.428            0.380            0.400          0.555      0.329      0.523
Note:   Estimates stem from (subfield) fixed effects OLS specifications. In columns 1, 2, and 3, the dependent variable
        is the number of publications in a subfield in a particular year. In columns 4, 5, and 6, the dependent variable
        is the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of publications in a subfield in a particular year. All models
        incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and
        control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year
        and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the
        deceased star. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p <
        0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                             xlvii
Table F3: Alternate Control Groups
                                                                                         1:1 Ratio
                                            No Controls
                                                                                Treated to Control Subfields
                                                                Non-                                   Non-
                                  All         Collabs.                             All    Collabs.
                                                              Collabs.                               Collabs.
                                Authors        Only                             Authors     Only
                                                                Only                                   Only
                                  0.052        -0.312**         0.058†            0.023    -0.205**    0.049
 After Death
                                 (0.033)       (0.045)         (0.034)           (0.033)   (0.061)    (0.034)
 Nb. of Investigators              452           430             452              2,557     2,439      2,557
 Nb. of Fields                    3,076         2,885           3,076             6,152     5,800      6,152
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.         111,708        104,705        111,708           223,416    210,502   223,416
 Log Likelihood                 -255,523       -57,768        -245,596          -520,195  -118,841   -498,256
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the
      total number of publications in a subfield in a particular year. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects
      and subfield age effects. Columns 4, 5, and 6 also include a term common to both treated and control subfields
      that switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year and individual
      fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star.
      Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p <
      0.01.




Table F4: Additional Robustness Checks
                                                                                          Excluding
                                   Excluding Heart Attacks
                                                                                  Multi-disciplinary Journals
                                                                Non-                                            Non-
                                  All         Collabs.                             All         Collabs.
                                                              Collabs.                                        Collabs.
                                Authors        Only                              Authors        Only
                                                                Only                                            Only
                                  0.060*       -0.235**        0.093**            0.074*       -0.212**        0.105**
 After Death
                                 (0.030)       (0.063)         (0.030)           (0.029)       (0.058)         (0.030)
 Nb. of Investigators             5,817         5,685           5,817             5,811         5,670           5,811
 Nb. of Fields                   26,728         25,793         26,728            28,707         27,741         28,707
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.         983,372       948,973         983,372          1,056,127      1,020,609      1,056,127
 Log Likelihood                -2,243,461     -562,978       -2,147,307        -2,455,832     -616,652       -2,355,142
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the
      total number of publications by non-collaborators in a subfield in a particular year. All models incorporate a full
      suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that
      switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year and individual fixed
      effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star. Robust
      standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                          xlviii
Table F5: Additional Robustness Checks (cont’d)
                                 Only source with abstracts                    Only source without abstracts
                                                               Non-                                            Non-
                                 All          Collabs.                            All         Collabs.
                                                             Collabs.                                        Collabs.
                               Authors         Only                             Authors        Only
                                                               Only                                            Only
                                 0.055*       -0.234**        0.089**             0.129        -0.224†         0.148†
 After Death
                                (0.028)       (0.061)         (0.028)            (0.081)       (0.118)        (0.083)
 Nb. of Investigators            6,009          5,905          6,009              1,549         1,399          1,549
 Nb. of Fields                  30,787         30,052         30,787              3,431         3,044          3,431
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.       1,132,555      1,105,538      1,132,555           126,621        112,367       126,621
 Log Likelihood               -2,621,169     -689,447       -2,502,613          -276,654       -46,146       -266,293
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the
      total number of publications by non-collaborators in a subfield in a particular year. All models incorporate a full
      suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that
      switches from zero to one after the death of the star, to address the concern that age, year and individual fixed
      effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star. Robust
      standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                          xlix
Table F6: The Nature of Entry Barriers for Less Cited Stars
                                                                                  Subfield Coherence
 Panel A
                                       PMRA-based definition                            Citation-based definition                       Cliquishness
                                                              Above                                                                Below            Above
                                   Below Median                                  Below Median        Above Median
                                                              Median                                                              Median            Median
                                        0.044                  0.024                  -0.021              0.128**                  -0.018            0.052
 After Death
                                       (0.052)                (0.047)                (0.047)              (0.045)                 (0.053)           (0.040)
 Nb. of Investigators                   2,131                  2,257                  2,118                2,232                   2,087             2,263
 Nb. of Fields                          8,068                  9,260                  8,191                9,137                   9,181             8,147
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.               296,675                340,075                301,130              335,620                 337,770           298,980
 Log Likelihood                       -604,994               -746,571               -690,078             -673,587                -749,640          -595,838
                                                                   Indirect Control through Collaborators
 Panel B
                                                                                                                                    Fraction of Subfield
                                          Editorial Channel                         NIH Study Section Channel
                                                                                                                                       NIH Funding
                                                              Above                                                                Below           Above
                                   Below Median                                  Below Median        Above Median
                                                              Median                                                              Median           Median
                                        -0.041                 0.072                  -0.003               0.149†                  0.029            0.055
 After Death
                                       (0.063)                (0.052)                (0.050)              (0.083)                 (0.049)          (0.059)
 Nb. of Investigators                   1,024                  2,455                  2,279                1,367                   1,997            2,135
 Nb. of Fields                          5,719                 11,609                 12,153                5,175                   7,806            9,522
 Nb. of Field-Year Obs.               210,920                425,830                446,939              189,811                 287,089          349,661
 Log Likelihood                       -495,980               -892,355              -1,000,972            -393,326                -646,673         -713,420
Note: Estimates stem from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non-
      collaborators in a subfield in a particular year. The sample is limited to the subfields in which the least eminent among the stars were active
      (specifically, below the median of the “cumulative citations up to the year of death” metric). Each pair of columns splits the sample across the median
      of a particular covariate for the sample of fields (treated and control) in the baseline year. For example, the first two columns of Panel B compare the
      magnitude of the treatment effect for stars whose collaborators have written an above-median number of editorials in the five years preceding the
      superstar’s death, vs. a below-median number of editorials. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects, as well as a term
      common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing
      from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the star scientist. †p < 0.10, *p <
      0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                                                    l
                                                         Figure F1
                                                   Timing of Death Events




     75        76        77      7   8        79        80     81      8   2        83        84        85      8   6        87        88        89     90        91        92        93     94      9   5        96        97     98      9   9        00        01     02      0   3
19        19        19        19         19        19        19     19         19        19        19        19         19        19        19        19     19        19        19        19     19         19        19        19     19         20        20        20     20




                                                                                                                                  li
                                                         Figure F2
                              Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline
                                                       Balanced Panel
                   A. All Authors                                            B. Collaborators                                       C. Non-Collaborators




Note: The graphs in this figure are patterned after Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript. The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from
      conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows in subfields are regressed onto year effects, subfield age effects, as well as 20
      interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year
      of death is omitted). The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory
      trends in subfield activity around the time of the death. The sample used to estimate these specifications differs in one respect from our main sample: it has been
      extended from 2006 to 2012, which entails that at least nine years of data are available to identify the treatment effects far away from death (the latest date of death
      in our sample is 2003). The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around star scientist) around these estimates is plotted with
      the vertical light blue lines.




                                                                                      lii
              Figure F3: Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline
                           Aggregated up to the level of the star scientist

                           A. Non-collaborators                                                                   B. Collaborators




Note: The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel B and C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript. The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient
      estimates stemming conditional (star scientist) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows within the composite-subfield (comprising all
      the distinct related articles associated with a star’s source articles) are regressed onto year effects, subfield age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms
      between treatment status and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of
      death is omitted). The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for
      transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death. The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around
      star scientist) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines.




                                                                                liii
               Figure F4: Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline
                           Non-Collaborators—Alternate Functional Forms
                              A. OLS (in levels)                                                       B. OLS (inverse hyperbolic sine)




Note: The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript. The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates
      stemming from subfield fixed effects OLS specifications in which publication flows by non-collaborators within a subfield are regressed onto year effects,
      subfield age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator variable
      for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated
      and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the “raw”
      count of articles in a subfield-year; In Panel B, these counts have been transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine. The 95% confidence interval
      (corresponding to robust standard errors, clustered around star scientist) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines.




                                                                                 liv
               Figure F5: Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline
                                          No Control Subfields

                            A. Non-collaborators                                                                    B. Collaborators




Note: The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel B and C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript. The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient
      estimates stemming from conditional (subfield) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows within a subfield are regressed onto year effects,
      subfield age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator variable
      for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). These regressions are run with subfield activity limited to non-collaborators of the star
      (Panel A), and with subfield activity limited to collaborators of the star (Panel B). The 95% confidence interval (corresponding to robust standard errors,
      clustered around star scientist) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines




                                                                                  lv
                             Appendix G: Displacement Effects

Conceptual challenges. We find that activity by non-collaborators of the star increases in the fields in
which the superstar was active prior to his death. In principle, it is possible that commensurate declines
can be observed in the fields where these related authors were active but the star was not. However, these
displacement effects might be very diffuse—spread out over many subfields, and thus difficult to detect in
our subfield-level of analysis. To examine this possibility more directly, we shift the level of analysis away
from the subfield to that of the related author.

It is important to note however, that the panel dataset at the related author level is not simply the mirror
image of the subfield panel dataset using an alternative way to aggregate the data. In particular, an author
can only be represented in the sample if he was active in one of the star’s subfields prior to his untimely
death. But we have seen in Figure 3 and Table E10 that the bulk of the effect of death can be traced to
new entrants in the subfield. We do not include these authors in the author-level analysis, because doing
so would imply that the individuals are part of the sample because of an event that is itself a result of the
treatment.

As a consequence, there should be no presumption that the magnitudes of the effect of star death at the
author level and at the subfield level match. Since the author-level analysis necessarily excludes entrants, a
reasonable conjecture is that the author-level effects will be smaller.

Author-level sample. In building up a sample of related authors, we face an important practical hurdle.
A related author is frequently related to more than a single eminent scientist. Around which star should we
anchor the analysis? In order to pin down a single year of treatment for each related author, we use two
different metrics. The first is simply the number of related articles before the star’s death—we associate to
a related author the star with the highest count. The second metric is based on the cardinal relatedness
score—we select the star that has the most highly related article among all the stars to whom the author is
intellectually related. We proceed in a rigorously symmetric fashion for the related authors of control stars.

Since we are now choosing a focal star on which to anchor our analysis, but we know that authors are
related to several distinct stars, we no longer maintain the distinction between those publications that are
related and unrelated to a particular star. Rather, we turn our attention to the effect of superstar death
on the total output of related authors (in terms of publications and NIH grants awarded). Recall that
non-collaborators are contributing more within the subfields of the dead superstars with whom they are
intellectually related (Table 3). Therefore, the absence of changes in total output would imply that this
additional work is displacing work they were doing in other subfields, at least in part.

Results. We are now ready to proceed with a related author-level analysis whose structure parallels that
of our main specifications at the subfield level. We investigate the effect of star death on related authors’
(i) NIH grants awarded; (ii) publication output; and (iii) publication output split between “PI articles” and
“non-PI articles.”xviii

The results are displayed in Table G1. When looking at either publication or grant output, we do not find
evidence of sustained increases after the death of a superstar. When focusing on authors associated with
stars because of the number of related articles between the two, the effect of death tends to be small in
magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from zero (the four leftmost columns of Table G1). These
results change slightly when we focus on authors whose research was, at least in part, very closely related to
xviii
     PI articles—those where the focal author appears in first or last position on the authorship roster—are most intimately
identified with his laboratory (Zuckerman 1968; Nagaoka and Owan 2014). In contrast, the articles where the related author
appears in the middle of the authorship list correspond to research projects for which the author’s substantive contribution
might have been marginal.




                                                            lvi
that of the star. Here the magnitude of the effects are positive and relatively large in magnitude, but also
imprecisely estimated.

We estimate a dynamic version of these specifications and display the corresponding event study-style graphs
in Figure G1 (publication output) and Figure G2 (grant output). In general, it appears from these figures
that the total output of related authors neither expands nor contracts in the wake of a star’s passing.
Therefore, the related articles contributed to the star’s subfields after they pass away most likely replace,
at least in part, articles that these authors would have written in other intellectual domains had the star
remained alive. Our results are therefore consistent with star extinction driving changes in the direction of
scientific research, rather than shifting the overall level of scientific activity.




                                                    lvii
Table G1: Related Authors’ Publication and Grant Output
                                                           Nb. of Related Articles                                           Highest Relatedness Score
                                               Nb. of            All           PI           Middle-                   Nb. of           All          PI         Middle-
                                             NIH Grants         Pubs.         Pubs.       Author Pubs.              NIH Grants        Pubs.        Pubs.     Author Pubs.
                                                 -0.020         0.003         0.014            -0.019                   -0.019        0.092        0.087          0.072
 After Death
                                                (0.022)        (0.060)       (0.083)          (0.055)                  (0.053)       (0.228)      (0.319)        (0.172)
 Nb. of Star Investigators                       5,459          5,802         5,766            5,784                    1,784         2,017        2,008          2,015
 Nb. of Related Authors                         26,728         44,649        42,654           43,483                    2,944         3,850        3,811          3,840
 Nb. of Star/Related Author Pairs               39,770          67,740        64,823           66,036                    3,542        4,642        4,599          4,632
 Nb. of Author-Year Obs.                       888,746        1,402,293     1,357,179        1,382,976                 94,132        120,918      120,249        120,822
 Log Likelihood                                -362,087       -772,285      -468,162         -595,167                  -54,512       -86,098      -53,633        -71,209
Note:   Estimates stem from conditional (related author) fixed effects Poisson specifications. The dependent variable is either the publication output for a related, non-
        collaborating author in a particular year, or the number of distinct NIH grants awarded to that author awarded in a particular year. In the four leftmost columns,
        each author is paired with the star with whom s/he had the highest number of related articles. In the four rightmost columns, each author is paired with the
        star with whom s/he had the related article with the highest relatedness score. All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and investigator age effects, as
        well as a term common to both treated and control authors that switches from zero to one after the death of the star. Exponentiating the coefficients and
        differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities. Robust standard errors in parentheses double-clustered at the level of the star & related authors.
        †p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.




                                                                                  lviii
         Figure G1: Effect of Star Scientist Death on Related Authors’ Publication Output


                         A. Nb. of Related Articles                                                          B. Highest Relatedness Score




Note: The dark blue dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional fixed effects specifications in which publication output for
      a related, non-collaborating author in a given year is regressed onto year effects, author age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status
      and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted). The specifications
      also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both treated and control authors. The 95% confidence intervals (corresponding to robust standard
      errors, clustered at the level of the associated star) around these estimates is plotted with the light-blue vertical lines; Panel A corresponds to a dynamic version
      of the specification in the second column of Table G1; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the sixth column of Table G1.




                                                                                  lix
               Figure G2: Effect of Star Scientist Death on Related Authors’ NIH Grants


                        A. Nb. of Related Articles                                                          B. Highest Relatedness Score




Note: The dark blue dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional fixed effects specifications in which the number of NIH
      grants awarded to a related, non-collaborating author in a given year is regressed onto year effects, author age effects, as well as 20 interaction terms between
      treatment status and the number of years before/after the death event (the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted).
      The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both treated and control authors. The 95% confidence intervals (corresponding to
      robust standard errors, clustered at the level of the associated star) around these estimates is plotted with the light-blue vertical lines; Panel A corresponds to
      a dynamic version of the specification in the first column of Table G1; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the fifth column of
      Table G1.




                                                                                 lx
                                                References

Aad, Georges et al. 2015. “Combined Measurement of the Higgs Boson Mass in pp Collisions at √s=7 and 8 TeV with
        the ATLAS and CMS Experiments.” Physical Review Letters 114(191803): 1-33.
Azoulay, Pierre, Andrew Stellman, and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2006. “PublicationHarvester: An Open-source Software Tool
         for Science Policy Research.” Research Policy 35(7): 970-974.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso. 2011. “Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from the Academic
         Life Sciences.” RAND Journal of Economics 42(3): 527-554.
Bachrach, C. A., and Thelma Charen. 1978. “Selection of MEDLINE Contents, the Development of its Thesaurus, and
        the Indexing Process.” Medical Informatics (London) 3(3): 237-254.
Bhattacharya, Sanmitra, Viet Ha-Thuc, and Padmini Srinivasan. 2011. “MeSH: A Window Into Full Text for Document
        Summarization.” Bioinformatics 27(13): i120-i128.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee and A. Leslie Robb, 1988. “Alternative Transformations to Handle Extreme Values
        of the Dependent Variable.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 83(401): 123-127.
Blackwell, Matthew, Stefano Iacus, Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2009. “cem: Coarsened Exact Matching in Stata.”
        The Stata Journal 9(4): 524-546.
Chu, S., J. DeRisi, M. Eisen, J. Mulholland, D. Botstein, P.O. Brown, and I. Herskowitz. 1998. “The Transcriptional
         Program of Sporulation in Budding Yeast.” Science 282(5389): 699-705.
Funk, Russell J., and Jason Owen-Smith. 2017. “A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological Change.” Management
        Science 63(3): 791-817.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. “Econometric Models for Count Data with an Application
       to the Patents-R&D Relationship.” Econometrica 52(4): 909-938.
Jinek, Martin, Krzysztof Chylinski, Ines Fonfara, Michael Hauer, Jennifer A. Doudna, and Emmanuelle Charpentier.
        2012. “A Programmable Dual-RNA-guided DNA Endonuclease in Adaptive Bacterial Immunity.” Science
        337(6096): 816-821.
Law, John, and John Whittaker. 1992. “Mapping Acidification Research: A Test of the Co-word Method.”
       Scientometrics 23(3): 417-461.
Lin, Jimmy, and W. John Wilbur. 2007. “PubMed Related Articles: A Probabilistic Topic-based Model for Content
        Similarity.” BMC Bioinformatics 8(423): 1-14.
Myers, Kyle. 2018. “The Elasticity of Science.” Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Névéol, Aurélie, Rezarta Islamaj Dogan, and Zhiyong Lu. 2010. “Author Keywords in Biomedical Journal Articles.”
        AMIA Symposium Proceedings 537-541.
Nagaoka, Sadao, and Hideo Owan. 2014. “Author Ordering in Scientifice Research: Evidence from Scientists Survey in
        the US and Japan.” IIR Working Paper #13-23, Hitotsubashi University, Institute of Innovation Research.
Sopko, Richelle, Sheetal Raithatha, and David Stuart. 2002. “Phosphorylation and Maximal Activity of Saccharomyces
        cerevisiae Meiosis-Specific Transcription Factor Ndt80 Is Dependent on Ime2.” Molecular and Cellular Biology
        22(20): 7024-7040.
Stephan, Paula E. 2012. How Economics Shapes Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Whittaker, John. 1989. “Creativity and Conformity in Science: Titles, Keywords and Co-Word Analysis.” Social Studies
        of Science 19(3): 473-496.
Wilbur, W. John. 1998. “The Knowledge in Multiple Human Relevance Judgments.” ACM Transactions on Information
        Systems 16(2): 101-126.
Zuckerman, Harriet A. 1968. “Patterns of Name Ordering Among Authors of Scientific Papers: A Study of Social
       Symbolism and Its Ambiguity.” American Journal of Sociology 74(3): 276-291.




                                                        lxi
