NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPROVING COLLEGE ACCESS IN THE UNITED STATES:
BARRIERS AND POLICY RESPONSES
Lindsay C. Page
Judith Scott-Clayton
Working Paper 21781
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21781

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015

We thank Sue Dynarski, Bruce Sacerdote, Brent Evans, Michael Hurwitz, Joshua Goodman, and Peter
Hinrichs for useful feedback and Aaron Anthony for exceptional research assistance. All errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Lindsay C. Page and Judith Scott-Clayton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Improving College Access in the United States: Barriers and Policy Responses
Lindsay C. Page and Judith Scott-Clayton
NBER Working Paper No. 21781
December 2015
JEL No. I22,I23,I24
ABSTRACT
Socioeconomic gaps in college enrollment and attainment have widened over time, despite increasing
returns to postsecondary education and significant policy efforts to improve access. We describe the
barriers that students face during the transition to college and review the evidence on potential policy
solutions. We focus primarily on research that examines causal relationships using experimental or
quasi-experimental methods, though we draw upon descriptive evidence to provide context. Our review
is distinctive in three respects. First, in addition to the literature on financial aid, we examine the evidence
on informational and behavioral interventions, academic programs, and affirmative action policies
intended to improve college access. Second, we incorporate a wealth of recent research not included
in prior reviews. Finally, we conceptualize college access broadly, as including not just whether but
also where students attend and whether they have access to college-level courses. We conclude with
a discussion of implications for policy and research.

Lindsay C. Page
School of Education
University of Pittsburgh
4318 Wesley W. Posvar Hall
230 South Bouquet Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
lpage@pitt.edu
Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 W.120th Street, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu

1. Introduction
The United States has long ranked as the world’s most educated nation, leading the
charge for mass elementary education in the nineteenth century and mass secondary education in
the early twentieth century (Goldin & Katz, 2008). But the transition to mass postsecondary
education that began after World War II has stagnated in the twenty-first century. Between 1950
and 2000, the proportion of 25-34 year olds who had at least some college nearly quadrupled,
from 16 to 57 percent, but improvements have slowed and this figure has grown more modestly
since then to 63 percent in 2012 (Baum, Ma, & Payea, 2013). 2 This slowdown is particularly
puzzling given that the wage premium for a bachelor’s degree is near a historically high level
(Goldin & Katz, 2008). Currently, those with a bachelor’s degree earn over $800,000 more in
lifetime income, on average, than their counterparts with only high school diplomas, even after
subtracting out loans taken on to finance higher education (Daly & Bengali, 2014).
Perhaps even more troubling than the overall slowdown in attainment growth, gaps in
college attainment by family income have actually increased over time (Bailey & Dynarski,
2011; Belley & Lochner, 2007). These gaps do not go away after controlling for other
explanatory factors such as academic background: among high school students scoring in the top
quartile on a standardized test, only 41 percent of those from the poorest families earn a
bachelor’s degree, compared to 74 percent of students from high-income families (Kena et al,
2015).
Standard theories of human capital acquisition (e.g., Becker, 1964) suggest that the
equilibrium level of college enrollment reflects individuals’ rational assessments that weigh the

2

Similar patterns can be seen by looking at immediate college enrollment rates of recent high school graduates,
which rose from about 50 percent in the late 1970s to 67 percent in 1997, but has remained stagnant since then
(NCES Digest of Education Statistics 2014, Table 302.30. Retrieved from
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d14/tables/dt14_302.20.asp).

1

expected costs of undertaking higher education against the expected benefits. Expected costs
include tuition, fees, and other direct costs, the opportunity cost of foregone employment while
enrolled, and the psychological cost of effort; expected benefits include both monetary and nonmonetary returns to education. In a perfect market, variation in enrollment rates across
geographies, socioeconomic groups, or over time simply reflect the different costs and benefits
these groups face, and do not – on their own – provide justification for government intervention.
In a perfect market, whether the cost of college is “high” or “low” is of little concern; subsidizing
tuition would only inefficiently induce enrollments among individuals whose expected benefits
would not justify the costs.
Legitimate concerns about imperfections in the market for college, however, arise from
the two stylized facts with which we open this review: increases in college enrollments have not
kept pace with increases in the returns to college, and, socioeconomic gaps are widening, even
after accounting for academic preparation.
What types of market imperfections might be present to justify a policy response? One
justification is the presence of social externalities: college enrollment may generate social
benefits that exceed the private returns. For example, postsecondary education has been linked to
higher levels of volunteering and voting (Dee, 2004), better birth outcomes and higher levels of
school readiness in the next generation (Currie & Moretti, 2003), lower levels of criminal
behavior (Lochner & Moretti, 2004), and higher levels of economic growth (Aghion, Boustan,
Hoxby, & Vandenbussche, 2009). Thus, even if the market were otherwise well-functioning,
policymakers may seek to encourage a higher level of academic achievement and attainment
than individuals would choose on their own.

2

A second justification for policy intervention is the presence of credit constraints. While
the benefits of college occur in the future, the costs occur in the present (and may extend decades
into the future). If individuals cannot safely and sufficiently borrow against their future earnings
to finance present costs, some individuals who should go to college (in the sense that their
lifetime benefits exceed lifetime costs) will not do so. While upper-income students may be able
to rely upon parental savings, lower-income students may face significant financial barriers to
attendance.
Third, young people—particularly those from lower-income, immigrant, and/or noncollege educated families—may lack good information about the costs and benefits of
enrollment, as well as about the process of preparing for, applying to, and selecting a college.
Informational failures are arguably increasingly important as program and financing options
have multiplied over time.
Finally, recent work in psychology and behavioral economics demonstrates how human
decision-making often departs from standard models of economic behavior, particularly when
faced with complex options, and particularly when the decision-makers are young and
inexperienced (Thaler & Mullainathan, 2008; Casey, Jones, & Somerville, 2011). Yet all along
the pathway from college consideration to matriculation, students face complicated choices and
may lack sufficient support and structure to navigate burdensome processes and institutional
bureaucracy.
These market imperfections and behavioral realities motivate policy efforts to improve
college access. Following Long and Riley (2007), barriers to access can be grouped into three
broad categories: financial constraints, informational/behavioral constraints, and academic
constraints. Of course, these constraints are not mutually exclusive, and for students residing in

3

areas of concentrated disadvantage, these challenges may be particularly acute. Students of color
may face additional, distinct barriers, including both implicit and explicit discrimination
(Bertrand, Chugh, & Mullainathan, 2005).
In this paper, we review the economic literature on policies to improve college access.
We emphasize research that identifies and characterizes causal relationships using experimental
or quasi-experimental methods, though we also draw on descriptive evidence to provide context.
Our review differs from prior reviews on college access in three respects. First, while prior
reviews have focused extensively on the impact of financial aid (see, e.g., Deming & Dynarski,
2009; Dynarski & Scott-Clayton, 2013), we go beyond this body of research to incorporate
evidence on informational and behavioral interventions, academic programs, and affirmative
action policies. Since these interventions overlap and interact, there is particular value in
providing a comprehensive review. Second, we incorporate a wealth of recent research not
included in prior reviews. The past few years have been particularly active in the economics of
higher education, given the new accessibility of administrative datasets and a trend towards
increasing experimentation both by policymakers and researchers. Finally, we conceptualize
college access broadly, examining constraints on students’ decisions not just of whether but also
where to attend, as well as constraints on students’ access to college-credit-bearing courses. This
broad conceptualization reflects the growing body of evidence demonstrating the influence of
institutional factors on both completion rates and later outcomes (Bowen, Chingos &
McPherson, 2009; Bound, Lovenheim & Turner, 2010; Goodman, Hurwitz & Smith, 2015;
Hoekstra, 2009; Howell & Pender, 2015 [this issue]).

4

College access and college completion, of course, are not the same thing. Only about half
of all degree-seeking, first-time college entrants complete any degree within six years. 3 And
among recent cohorts, those who do complete are taking longer to do so (Bound, Lovenheim &
Turner, 2010). Thus, attention increasingly is turning to college completion rather than college
access alone. Still, improving college access remains among the most promising strategies for
raising college degree attainment overall, particularly if we conceptualize access not as getting
students in the door of any college, but instead as getting them off to a good start at an institution
that is well aligned with their interests and capabilities. The challenges that students face during
the transition to college may influence not only whether they attend at all, but also the timing of
enrollment, choice of institution, method of finance, and the pace of progress towards a degree.
These many factors ultimately can influence students’ likelihood of graduation.
We structure our review around four types of barriers that students face in the transition
to college and evidence on efforts to combat those barriers. Section 2 examines financial aid
policy. In Section 3, we discuss the complexity of the college-going process itself and efforts to
improve students’ navigation of information and behavioral impediments. In Section 4, we
consider policies responses to the academic barriers that students face in the transition to
postsecondary education, and in Section 5, we highlight research on affirmative action bans and
the “top X percent” admissions plans developed in response. Finally, Section 6 concludes by
discussing implications for future policy and research.

2. College costs and financial aid
In the U.S., state and local appropriations have traditionally helped to keep tuition prices
well below the full cost of providing higher education. But states are devoting a smaller
3

Authors’ computations using NCES Quick Stats, BPS:2009 Survey data restricted by degree goals in first year.

5

proportion of their budgets to higher education in recent years, even as enrollments have
increased (Mettler, 2014). As a result, public institutions that produce the majority of bachelor’s
degree recipients are increasingly reliant on tuition as a revenue source: at public master’s and
bachelor’s degree granting institutions, the proportion of revenue coming from net tuition and
fees increased from about 30 percent in 2000 to nearly half in 2012 (Baum, Elliott & Ma, 2014).
The result is that families increasingly face financial barriers to college access. The
average net cost of attendance (including not just tuition and fees, but also costs of books,
transportation, food and housing, and subtracting out grant aid) for a full-time student in 2014-15
was $5,960 at a community college, $12,830 at a public four-year college, and $23,550 at a
private four year institution. As family incomes have remained stagnant over the past decade and
have declined in real terms at the bottom of the income distribution, these costs represent an
increasing fraction of family resources (Baum & Ma, 2014). For a student at the 20th percentile
of family income, attending even a community college would consume more than 20 percent of
the family’s income, even after accounting for financial aid. Attending a public four-year
institution would consume 45 percent of the family budget on average. 4 Moreover, even where
affordable options exist for families, they are not necessarily “just as good” as institutions that
are less affordable. Per-student resources have become increasingly stratified across institution
type, with declines in the two-year and non-top-50 public sector. Declining resources in these
sectors is associated with declining rates of degree completion (Bound, Lovenheim, & Turner,
2010). Indeed, Howell and Pender (2015 [this issue]) highlight the tradeoff between cost and
institutional quality faced by most students.

4

We calculate these percentages using the net tuition, fees, room and board estimates provided by the College Board
(2014a), on pp. 22-24, as well as family income statistics from the same report on page 33.

6

This is not to say that students and families are on their own when it comes to paying for
college. In response to concerns about rising costs, states and institutions increasingly follow a
high-tuition, high-aid pricing strategy in which rapidly rising sticker prices are ameliorated, for
some students, by increases in the availability of financial aid. Seven out of 10 undergraduates
now receive some form of financial aid; in 2014-15, full-time undergraduates received an
average of $8,080 each in grants, $1,260 in tax credits and work-study assistance, and $4,840 in
federal loans (Baum, Elliott & Ma, 2014). 5
While substantial amounts of financial aid are available, determining the net price a
student is going to face requires a more individualized answer than ever before. Within a given
institution, net tuition and fees can vary widely across students, even among those with similar
socioeconomic profiles (Anthony, Page & Seldin, 2015). Moreover, accessing available financial
aid is typically not automatic: students (and often their parents) need to be aware of what
programs exist and must submit a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), the
complexity of which is well documented (Dynarski & Scott-Clayton 2006; Dynarski, ScottClayton & Wiederspan, 2013; Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 2015). Misperceptions about
college costs are widespread and are most prevalent among students from the lowest-income
backgrounds, likely contributing to persistent gaps in postsecondary attainment as well as
undermatch by socioeconomic status (ACSFA, 2005; Grodsky & Jones, 2007; Horn, Chen, &
Chapman 2003; Hoxby & Avery, 2013; Hoxby & Turner, 2013; Radford, 2013).
As a result of the challenges present in the financial aid process, many students fail to
access aid for which they would qualify. While FAFSA application rates have risen over time—
from 50 percent of undergraduates in 1999-2000 to 70 percent in 2011-12—substantial numbers
of eligible students still fail to apply. Estimates based on data from the 2011-12 National
5

Averages are calculated over all students, not just those receiving aid.

7

Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) indicates that of the 30 percent of students who
failed to file a FAFSA, one third would have qualified for a Pell Grant. 6 In addition, many
FAFSA filers apply after important deadlines (King, 2004), in turn decreasing the likelihood of
receiving state and institutional aid for which they would otherwise be eligible.
The efficiency and equity of the American high-tuition, high-aid model of college
financing rests heavily on the effectiveness of financial aid programs. Are these programs
successful at reaching their intended targets—students on the margin of college access—and
influencing their behavior? Or are they windfalls to individuals who would have enrolled
regardless? In the remainder of this section, we review the evidence on the causal impacts of
grants, loans, and other types of aid on college enrollment and attainment. We discuss
interventions related to reducing the complexity of the aid application and other steps in the
college transition separately in Section 3.
2.1. Traditional aid (need-based grants and subsidized tuition)
Standard models of human capital investment indicate that students will continue on to
higher education if the benefits of doing so outweigh the costs (e.g., Becker, 1964). Efforts that
increase grant-based financial aid directly to students may act through decreasing the cost of
attendance such that students on the margin are compelled to matriculate. As predicted by
economic theory, more than thirty years of empirical research has established that lowering the
cost of college can increase college enrollments. In 1988, Leslie and Brinkman reviewed several
dozen non-experimental studies and concluded that a $1,000 decrease in net price was associated
with a 3- to 5-percentage-point increase in college attendance. However, it is difficult to infer
causal effects based on non-experimental analyses of financial aid policy, because aid recipients

6

Authors’ calculations using computations from NCES Quick Stats online tool, NPSAS:2012 undergraduate
sample.

8

are often systematically selected and/or self-selected based on characteristics (e.g., need, merit,
motivation to enroll) that may have independent effects on outcomes of interest.
While these early studies may have suffered from selection bias, subsequent research
using more rigorous empirical methods applied to data from several different time points and
several different contexts has found positive effects of a similar magnitude, increasing
confidence that these effects are truly causal and not just reflecting correlations. Several studies
have taken advantage of discrete policy changes to compare similar students who receive
dramatically different amounts of aid, including Dynarski’s (2003) analysis of the Social
Security Survivors Benefit, Abraham and Clark’s (2006) and Kane’s (2007) study of
Washington, D.C.’s Tuition Assistance Grant, and two separate studies of the mid-century G.I.
Bills (Bound & Turner, 2002; Stanley, 2003). All of these studies find that enrollment increases
when the net price faced by students is exogenously lowered. For more detailed reviews of these
studies, see Long (2008), Deming & Dynarski (2009), and Dynarski & Scott-Clayton (2013).
More recent work on traditional financial aid (need-based grants and tuition subsidies)
has increasingly focused on college choice, persistence, and eventual degree completion.
Castleman and Long (2013) use a regression-discontinuity (RD) design to examine the effects of
a need-based program in Florida that has a strict eligibility cutoff, and find significant increases
in four-year college enrollment and subsequent bachelor’s degree completion. Goldrick-Rab,
Harris, Kelchen, and Benson (2012) provide rigorous evidence on the effects of need-based aid
on persistence conditional on initial enrollment, through their randomized evaluation of the
Wisconsin Scholars Grant (WSG). WSG provided large grants to Pell-eligible first-year students
already enrolled at Wisconsin four-year institutions. Perhaps surprisingly, they find only modest
effects on credit accumulation and persistence that fade out over time. These results may be due

9

in part to the fact that students who received the WSG saw other aid reduced; however,
providing the scholarship only after students initially enrolled may also have limited the impact
of the program.
A set of studies exploits natural geographic variation in community college prices
resulting from community college taxing districts in Texas: students who live within a given
district face lower prices than similar students living just outside district boundaries (Denning,
2014; Martorell, McCall & McFarlin, 2014; McFarlin, 2007). All three studies confirm that
students facing lower community college prices are more likely to enroll in college. Less
evidence is available regarding effects on eventual degree receipt: McFarlin (2007) finds a
worrisome pattern of students switching from four-year to two-year institutions, but Denning
(2014) finds no evidence of such switching, and an overall positive impact on bachelor’s degree
completion.
The research evidence regarding the impact of the nation’s single largest grant program,
the federal Pell Grant, has been somewhat more mixed. Hansen (1983) and Kane (1996) find
little effect of the introduction of the program overall. But Seftor and Turner (2002) find positive
impacts of expansions in eligibility for adult students, and Bettinger (2004) finds some evidence
of positive effects of larger Pell grants on persistence for students who are already enrolled. The
lack of consistent positive findings for Pell Grants may be due in part to complexity and
confusion surrounding the Pell eligibility and application process, which obscure its benefits and
dampen its impact among the individuals who need it most (Dynarski & Scott-Clayton, 2006;
Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos & Sanbonmatsu, 2012).
Recent work has also identified some new potential explanations for the mixed evidence
on Pell Grants and the WSG. Specifically, the increasingly complex interactions between aid

10

programs may make it difficult to isolate the effects of any one program. For example, Turner
(2014) finds that private institutions reduce institutional aid for students who receive Pell, and
Goldrick-Rab and colleagues (2012) find that a $3,500 WSG award translated into just $1,500 in
total financial aid (including loans). Marx and Turner (2015) find that students who just miss
eligibility for Pell actually receive more in total aid from all sources on average, because students
just ineligible for Pell are much more likely to receive student loans. Scott-Clayton and Park
(2015) replicate these findings related to Pell eligibility and also find evidence that some
community colleges use state aid to disproportionately assist students who do not qualify for
Pell.
2.2. Broad-based merit aid programs
Since 1991, several states have instituted large-scale, merit-based grant programs to
defray the costs of higher education among their residents who meet certain merit-defined, but
not particularly elite eligibility criteria. 7 These state merit-based programs represent the most
sizeable increase in financial aid spending in the past two decades (College Board, 2012), and
they are also amenable to causal analysis—typically relying on difference-in-difference or RD
designs—that exploit variation in eligibility across states, cohorts, and test score eligibility
thresholds. The related research base indicates that such programs have led to improvements in
college readiness metrics; increases in college enrollment and performance; improved rates of
degree attainment; and decreases in the loss of talented students to other states by affecting
college choice (Bruce & Carruthers, 2014; Carruthers & Ozek, 2013; Cornwall, Mustard, &
Sridhar, 2006; Dynarski, 2004, 2008; Pallais, 2009; Scott-Clayton, 2011; Zhang & Ness, 2010).
7

These states include Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Nevada, New
Mexico, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, and West Virginia, although Arkansas and Maryland have since
phased out their programs. Dynarski (2004) defined “broad-based” to mean that at least 30 percent of high school
seniors would quality.

11

One aspect of these programs that has proved both politically appealing and potentially
important for influencing behavior has been their simplicity (Dynarski & Scott-Clayton, 2006).
Many of these programs fully cover tuition and fees (at least initially) at in-state, public
institutions for students meeting a minimum GPA and sometimes ACT/SAT requirement, and
require minimal paperwork to claim.
Nevertheless, attention has also been paid to unintended consequences associated with
these efforts. For example, while Georgia HOPE improved overall rates of college enrollment in
the state, it also led to a widening of college attendance gaps by race and socioeconomic status,
given the strength of response among middle-income students (Dynarski, 2000). 8 In addition, the
merit-based Adams Scholarship in Massachusetts resulted in students switching to in-state public
institutions away from higher quality alternatives, ultimately reducing students’ likelihood of
timely degree attainment (Cohodes & Goodman, 2014). Finally, a pair of recent studies using
Census data to examine a broader set of merit-aid programs has called into question whether
single-state, early estimates of the impact of merit aid may overstate the impacts experienced
more generally (Fitzpatrick & Jones, 2012; Sjoquist & Winters, 2012).
A recent experimental evaluation of the Buffet Scholarship in Nebraska provides perhaps
the most rigorous evidence on the potential impact of programs providing free in-state college to
students on the basis of modest academic achievement (Angrist, Hudson & Pallais, 2014;
Angrist, Autor, Hudson, & Pallais, 2015). Buffet Scholars receive up to five years of free tuition
and fees, plus a $500 book credit, if they attend a public in-state institution. The eligibility
criteria include a minimum 2.5 high school GPA and maximum expected family contribution

8

Other states’ programs, however, appear to narrow gaps in enrollment (Dynarski, 2004), perhaps because unlike
Georgia HOPE, other states allowed Pell recipients to combine awards, rather than reducing merit aid dollar-fordollar for students receiving larger Pell awards.

12

(EFC) to the cost of college corresponding to family incomes between $80,000-$100,000. 9
Applicants are also ranked (against students listing the same target institution) on the basis of
high school transcripts, essays, and letters of recommendation. For the study, a group of students
who fell in the middle of the rankings were randomly assigned to receive the award or not. The
authors find only a small, insignificant effect on initial enrollment (unsurprising given a 97
percent baseline enrollment rate even among the control group) but find substantial shifts from
two-year to four-year institutions, and substantial impacts on enrollments in the second year (a 7
percentage point increase overall and 14 percentage point increase in four-year enrollment), with
effects largest among lower achieving subgroups.
2.3. Place-based college “promise” programs
In addition to state-based merit programs, several urban settings have followed suit to
implement locally-based “promise” programs of their own. In some cases, the only “merit”
requirement for eligibility is to graduate from a public high school within a certain area. This
place-based approach began in 2005 with the announcement of the Kalamazoo Promise, which
offers full in-state college tuition to graduates of the Kalamazoo Public Schools in Michigan who
had been enrolled in the district for at least four years. A difference-in-difference analysis
comparing ACT score-sending behavior of students at Promise and non-Promise high schools
just before and after implementation found that eligible students were more likely to send their
scores to more selective in-state institutions (Andrews, DesJardins & Ranchhod, 2010). Results
from a separate difference-in-difference analysis (comparing students before and after the
program’s announcement, by length of enrollment in the district) suggest the program improved

9

The EFC maximum for the program ranged from 10,000 to 15,000. Corresponding family income range was
calculated by the authors’ using NCES Quick Stats, NPSAS:2012 data on dependent undergraduates.

13

high school credit completion, reduced suspensions, and had substantial effects on college
enrollment and graduation (Bartik & Lachowska, 2013; Bartik, Hershbein & Lachowska, 2015).
Similarly, in 2008, local business and civic leaders provided funding to establish a free
community college program called “Knox Achieves” in Knox County, Tennessee. The program,
which was expanded to 22 counties in 2011 and became the model for a statewide “Tennessee
Promise” program expected to roll out in 2015, guarantees free community college tuition and
fees to high school seniors who sign up, apply for financial aid, and meet with a mentor.
Carruthers and Fox (2015) examine the impact of Knox Achieves using both difference-indifference and propensity score matching and find large impacts on high school graduation and
college enrollment, with some shift from the four-year to two-year sector. Interestingly, the
program achieves these large effects with relatively little additional financial aid ($971, on
average), since most students already receive significant tuition reductions via existing federal
and state programs. This points to the fact that the design and messaging of grant programs, not
just the dollar value of aid provided, can be a significant factor in influencing student outcomes.
Since the launch of the Kalamazoo Promise, 31 communities (including locations such as
El Dorado, AR and Pittsburgh, PA) have implemented promise programs, although with
significant variation in details such as scholarship generosity and eligibility criteria. One recent
notable entrant is Chicago’s Star Scholarship, created in 2014, which provides free community
college to students with at least a 3.0 high school GPA who test out of remediation. While
marketed as a “free college” program, critics have noted that its eligibility requirements make it
more akin to merit-based aid given that only about 15 percent of the city’s high school graduates
would qualify (Fain, 2014). In early 2015, President Obama also announced his own free
community college plan, proposing to use federal funds to cover 75 percent of tuition and fees

14

for community college students in states that commit to cover the remainder. 10 Many details of
the proposal remain to be seen, however, making it difficult to extrapolate potential impacts
based on the existing body of research evidence.
2.4. Tax credits and deductions
The federal government’s tax expenditures on higher-education-related tax credits and
deductions were valued at nearly $19 billion dollars in 2014-15, making it as big a source of aid
for college as the Pell Grant program was just a few years ago (e.g., in 2008-09, just prior to a
dramatic Pell expansion during the Great Recession). The Hope Tax Credit (HTC) and Lifetime
Learning Tax Credit (LLTC) were enacted in 1997, while the more generous American
Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC) has been available since 2009. For families who do not qualify
for a tax credit, tuition and fees may be deducted from income. Early work examining the
introduction of the credits using survey data and difference-in-difference analysis generated
conflicting findings regarding the HTC and LLTC, with Long (2004) finding no effects on
college enrollment and Turner (2011) finding positive effects (using the October Current
Population Survey and Survey of Income and Program Participation, respectively). Recent work
by Bulman and Hoxby (2015) and Hoxby and Bulman (2015 [this issue]) utilizing de-identified
data from the full population of tax returns provides the cleanest quasi-experimental
identification of the impact of these tax benefits, including the more generous AOTC. They make
use of non-linearities in the relationship between income and eligibility to identify effects (using
regression discontinuity, regression kink, and simulated instruments approaches) that are difficult
to pin down without administrative data. They provide compelling and precise evidence that

10

For more information, see https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/09/fact-sheet-white-houseunveils-america-s-college-promise-proposal-tuitio

15

neither tax credits nor deductions influence college enrollment, perhaps because the tax benefits
are not realized until months after the enrollment decision has been made.
2.5 Student loans
Compared to the volume of research on grant aid and tuition discounts, relatively few
studies have examined how student loans affect college enrollment, performance, or completion.
There is strong evidence of the value of student loan access outside the U.S., in countries where
student loans have been the most prominent form of government aid for college. In Chile, access
to student loans is determined by both income quintile and test score. Using an RD design, Solis
(2014) finds that college enrollment is 16 percentage points higher for those who barely qualify
for loans compared to those who barely miss the test score cutoff (from a baseline college
enrollment rate around 30 percent); he also finds that the program virtually eliminates the income
gradient in college enrollment for students above the cutoff. Examining college applicants just
above and below a credit score cutoff for loan access in South Africa, Gurgand, Lorenceau, and
Mélonio (2011) find a similarly large, 20 percentage point increase in college enrollment for
students with access to loans (from a baseline enrollment rate of about 50 percent).
It is difficult to extrapolate from these studies to the U.S., in which loans are growing, but
still only one component of a broader aid system. Heller (2008) reviews the non-experimental
literature on whether loans increase college access and concludes that college enrollments are not
as sensitive to loans as to grants, but cannot conclude whether or not they may still be costeffective (given they cost the government only a few cents on the dollar to provide). Dynarski
(2005) finds suggestive, but ultimately inconclusive evidence that student loan expansions in the
United States in the early 1990s led to increased college attendance. Two recent studies utilize
institution-year level variation in whether or not community colleges offer access to federal loans

16

and find higher levels of enrollment intensity and persistence for students who have access to
loans (Dunlop, 2013; Wiederspan, 2015 [this issue]).

3. Navigating complexity: Informational and behavioral interventions
Given the growing complexity of college pricing and financial aid, information and
procedural barriers present an increasingly important challenge to the effectiveness of the U.S.
system of college finance. Importantly, financial aid is not the only aspect of the college-going
process in which such barriers arise. There are many other decisions and steps that “add up” to
postsecondary access, and throughout the process from college consideration to enrollment, lowincome students fall behind their better-off peers in completing these steps (Avery & Kane,
2004). For example, although SAT / ACT taking is a key step in the college-going process,
dramatic socioeconomic differences exist in students meeting this milestone. An estimated 30
percent of students in the bottom income quartile take the SAT, while 70 percent of students in
the top income quartile do so (Goodman, 2013). Keeping students on track from early in the
process is critical, however, given the momentum that students build as they proceed (Klasik,
2012). At first blush, high rates of failure to navigate college-going processes effectively may
seem surprising, given the substantial returns to a college degree. Yet, a closer look reveals many
factors that can hinder students from realizing their college aspirations.
While informational and procedural barriers are increasingly included in discussions of
college access (particularly as they relate to financial aid applications), recognition of their
intersection with broader behavioral barriers has begun to emerge over the past several years.
Behavioral economics provides a framework for understanding departures from standard models
of economic behavior, which do not account for facets of human behavior including limits to

17

rationality and willpower (Thaler & Mullainathan, 2008). The field is especially relevant for
studying students’ college decisions, given the need to weigh costs in the present against benefits
in the future (Lavecchia, Liu & Oreopoulos, 2014), and given that young adults are particularly
present-focused, impulsive and inexperienced in handling complex tasks (Casey, Jones, &
Somerville, 2011; Castleman, 2015; Steinberg, 2008; Steinberg, Cauffman, Woolard, Graham, &
Banich, 2009).
To begin, students may fail to engage optimally in the process of identifying and
applying to postsecondary institutions (Avery, Howell & Page, 2014). Even among collegeaspiring students, a surprising share fails to complete an application to any college (Roderick,
Nagaoka, Coca, & Moeller, 2009), and among those who do apply to four-year institutions,
many students fail to apply to an appropriate number and range of institutions, even though it
would benefit them to do so (Smith, 2013).
What barriers keep students from engaging optimally in the college selection and
application process? Some students may lack access to information; others may be overwhelmed
by the process of parsing information on the volume of potential postsecondary options. Either
circumstance may drive students to make important choices that are haphazard (Radford, 2013);
based on simple rules of thumb (Pallais, 2015); or based on other factors that are not a good basis
for decision making, such as the desire to avoid onerous applications or attend an institution with
certain residential amenities (Smith, Hurwitz & Howell, 2015; Thaler & Sunstein, 2008; Ross,
White, Wright & Knapp, 2013). For high-achieving, low-income students who are
geographically isolated from other high-achieving peers, college application choice sets mirror
those of peers who are socioeconomically rather than academically similar (Hoxby & Avery,
2013). Students cuing their college application choices off of the decisions of preceding cohorts

18

of students from their own high school also may relate to issues of social belonging and students’
overemphasis on aspects of their own identity other than academic success (Walton & Cohen,
2007). Taken together, students can struggle with the sheer volume of options that they have, and
are more likely to make mistakes when their decision making is poorly informed (Milkman,
Beshears, Choi, Laibson, & Madrian, 2012; Ross et al, 2013).
Decision making at the stages of college application and college selection have
contributed to postsecondary “undermatch” where students matriculate to institutions that are not
well-aligned to their academic and other credentials (Bowen, Chingos & McPherson, 2011;
Dillon & Smith, 2013; Smith, Pender & Howell, 2013). Descriptive evidence indicates college
match as important to ultimate college success, given that students are more likely to persist to
degree attainment if they attend a well-matched institution (Light & Strayer, 2000). More
generally, both descriptive (Howell & Pender, 2015 [this issue]) and quasi-experimental
evidence (Goodman, Hurwitz and Smith, 2015) suggests that attending a higher quality
institution has substantial impacts on college completion. 11
Even among recent high school graduates who have been admitted to college and
successfully navigated the financial aid application process, the summer transition to college also
involves a number of hurdles to timely matriculation including: voluminous institutional
paperwork, sometimes exacerbated by a lack of regular internet access; delays in financial aid
packaging due to income verification requirements; challenges in financing the cost of actually
traveling to campus; and unanticipated charges and fees present on a student’s tuition bill
(Castleman & Page, 2014a,b). While navigating such tasks without institutional support poses
challenges, this summer is unique in that students are no longer members of their high school but

11

In this study, in particular, the relevant comparison is primarily between state four-year institutions and two-year
community colleges.

19

have yet to join their college. As a result, a surprisingly large share fail to transition successfully
to college in the fall after high school graduation (Arnold, Fleming, De Anda, Castleman &
Wartman, 2009; Castleman & Page, 2014a,b; Daugherty, 2012; Matthews, Schooley & Vosler,
2011; Roderick et al, 2008; Stephan & Rosenbaum, 2013).
In sum, the complexity of the college-going process itself may hinder students from
achieving greater rates of college access and success. Given the challenges that this context
presents, there is an opportunity to improve student postsecondary access and success by adding
structure to students’ college exploration and application processes, providing additional
guidance and support, and facilitating decision making (Ross et al., 2013). In recognition,
education practitioners and researchers have implemented and evaluated a number of potential
solutions. These efforts range in intensity from high- to low-touch initiatives and include
solutions that are comprehensive (e.g., working with students through all steps in the collegegoing process) to those that are focused on providing information and/or support to address
single barriers, such as applying for financial aid or taking the SAT. We organize our summary
of related evidence along these dimensions.
3.1 Comprehensive college-going support
When considering who can (or should) shepherd students through the college process,
one obvious possibility is high school counselors. Indeed, Hurwitz and Howell (2014) provide
evidence on the positive impact of counselors on college-going outcomes. In reality, however,
current student-to-counselor ratios together with counselors’ many other responsibilities translate
to counselors having little time to provide high quality and personalized college-going support.
The average U.S. public school counselor today manages a caseload that is almost double the
American School Counseling Association recommended 250:1 (ASCA, 2012; Planty et al.,

20

2009), and many counselors lack training and expertise in key college-going processes, such as
applying for financial aid (Civic Enterprises, 2011). When compared to their higher-income
peers, lower income students have less access to school-based college counseling (Clinedinst &
Hawkins, 2009).
A set of efforts have focused on reaching first-generation and low-income students with
the types of high-touch personalized supports more often enjoyed by students from higherincome backgrounds (Avery, Howell & Page, 2014b). Programs such as College Possible and
Bottom Line deliver comprehensive advising services to students through the processes of
college search and completing college and financial aid applications. Bottom Line is unique in
that it purposefully directs students to selected institutions that have both higher graduation rates
and low levels of student debt. Experimental evidence on College Possible and quasiexperimental evidence on Bottom Line based on an RD design reveal that support from these
organizations has led to increased enrollment in four-year institutions (Avery, 2013; Castleman
& Goodman, 2014). In the case of Bottom Line, supported students were more likely to enroll in
those institutions specifically endorsed by the program (Castleman & Goodman, 2014). Bos,
Berman, Kane, and Tseng (2012) provide experimental evidence that similar advising provided
by near-aged peers led to significant improvements in enrollment in four-year public institutions
in California, and Carrell and Sacerdote (2013) found through a randomized controlled trial that
late-stage college advising offered to students who were college-ready but behind in the
application process significantly improved college enrollment for female high school graduates
in New Hampshire. An MDRC led experimental study finds that the College MATCH program
in Chicago, which provides college-going support to students through a combination of
classroom activities and support from a young adult or near-peer advisor, is successful in

21

meeting its programmatic goal of improving the selectivity of the institutions to which collegeintending students apply (Sherwin, 2012).
While these efforts are all geographically limited, other federally-funded programs with
broader reach have also sought to improve college counseling both in and out of school. For
example, a quasi-experimental study of Talent Search revealed positive impacts of the in-school
counseling it provided on completion of college-going tasks, such as applying for financial aid,
and direct-to-college enrollment (Constantine, Seftor, Martin, Silva & Myers, 2006). Finally, a
large-scale randomized trial of the College Advising Corps (CAC), reveals that the placement of
CAC counselors in high schools led to modest but significant improvements in SAT and AP
course taking and FAFSA filing (Bettinger, Antonio, Evans, Foster, Holzman, Santikian &
Horng, 2012; Horng et al., 2013), and led to positive effects on first-year college enrollment,
particularly for Hispanic students and student from low-income backgrounds (Bettinger &
Evans, 2015).
3.2

Targeted support

Other efforts have focused more narrowly on specific tasks, such as FAFSA filing.
Through a collaborative, experimental effort with H&R Block, Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, and
Sanbonmatsu (2012) find that coupling tax preparation with FAFSA completion together with
providing families with estimates of likely levels of financial aid and tuition costs at nearby
colleges led to substantial increases in rates of FAFSA submission as well as financial aid
receipt, college attendance, and persistence. For example, students whose parents received
FAFSA assistance were 8 percentage points more likely to have completed at least two years of
college. Notably, they did not detect any improvements among families who received aid
information but not direct FAFSA assistance. This finding highlights the potential limits of

22

information-only interventions, particularly in helping students and families with complex
processes. In another intervention also focused on financial aid applications, Owen (2012)
evaluated the impact of increased school counselor outreach on FAFSA completion and college
enrollment in the Albuquerque Public Schools (Albuquerque, NM). Covariate controlled year-toyear differences revealed a 10 percentage point increase in FAFSA completion and an associated
12 percentage point increase in on-time college enrollment.
Another step in the college-going process that has received attention is the taking of
college entrance exams. Several states, districts and schools have implemented universal, schoolday testing policies that work to substantially mitigate many of the barriers to timely SAT or
ACT taking. 12 Such strategies help to alleviate the burdens of test taking and also help to
overcome students’ perceptions that taking these assessments is incongruent with their own
identity. Studies that capitalize on the exogenous shock of these policies being introduced in
certain geographies and at certain points in time show that, as would be expected, these policies
have a sizeable impact on rates of test taking (Goodman, 2013; Hurwitz, Smith, Howell & Niu,
2014; Hyman, 2014; Klasik, 2013).
Further, these testing policies can have important impacts on both whether and where
students enroll in college. Analyzing data from multiple states, Klasik (2013) reports significant
impacts of universal testing on overall college enrollment in Illinois and positive although
insignificant effects in Colorado and Maine. Capitalizing on student-level data held by the
College Board, Hurwitz and colleagues (2014) find that the universal policy in Maine did
increase four-year college enrollment rates by 2 – 3 percentage points (4 – 6 percent) overall, and
12

States implementing school-day ACT policies include: Arkansas, Colorado, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Michigan, Montana, North Carolina, Tennessee, Utah and Wyoming (http://www.act.org/stateservices/) and states
implementing school-day ACT policies are States implementing school-day SAT policies are Delaware, Idaho and
Maine, as well as certain districts and schools in Florida, Indiana, Maryland, New Jersey and Texas
(http://professionals.collegeboard.com/higher-ed/recruitment/sat-test/school-day)

23

that this impact was driven particularly by changes for students from high schools in small towns
and rural areas in Maine. Further, the Maine policy increased by 10 percentage points college
enrollment among those students who would not sit for the SAT absent the policy. Of those
students induced into testing by virtue of these universal policies, large shares (many of whom
were from disadvantaged backgrounds), perform well enough on the exam to qualify for
competitive admissions schools (Goodman, 2013). While data limitations prohibit Goodman
from disaggregating impacts by salient student characteristics, she nevertheless finds that as a
result of these policies, selective college enrollment rose by approximately 20 percent, with no
effect on overall college enrollment.
A second strategy for improving rates of SAT / ACT taking is the establishment of a
testing center on a high school campus. This allows students to take the relevant exam in their
own high schools on a given test administration day rather than having to travel to an alternate
location. Capitalizing again on geographic and time variation, Bulman (forthcoming) estimates
that in schools that establish new centers, students are 8 percent more likely to take a college
entrance exam, with particularly strong impacts at low-income schools (where the impact was
approximately a 15 percent increase in test taking). 13 Further analyses indicate that alleviating
barriers to SAT taking may be particularly beneficial for low-income, high-achieving students.
Taken together, several mechanisms may be at play in the impacts discussed here.
SAT/ACT test taking itself is an important milestone in the college-going process (Klasik, 2012).
The school day policies and the introduction of local test centers both increase awareness of and
reduce travel and other hassle costs associated with test taking itself. Further, these policies
underscore an implicit recommendation that students should be taking college entrance exams. In

13

Bulman defines a low-income school one where at least 30 percent of students qualify for free or reduced price
lunch.

24

addition, after taking the test and learning their own score, students may receive important
feedback regarding their own competitiveness as candidates for selective colleges and
universities and may, in turn, revise their perceptions regarding the benefits of college as well as
their own college potential. In sum, for a surprising number of students, the decision to take a
college entrance exam is sensitive to small barriers. Overcoming these barriers leads to changes
in enrollment decisions.
3.3 Low-touch information and nudges
Much of the evidence on SAT/ACT test taking policies find particularly strong impacts
among high-achieving, low-income students. Hoxby and Turner (2013) provide experimental
evidence on a student-outreach effort to provide this subgroup of students with semi-customized
packets of information about college net costs and application processes as well as no-paperwork
application fee waivers. The intervention – Expanding College Opportunity – was inexpensive
(approximately $6 / student) and led to increases in the rates with which the focal students
applied, were accepted to, and attended high quality colleges and universities. It did not,
however, lead to increases in college enrollment overall. The intervention did not impact
freshman year grades, implying that focal students were able to be equally competitive
academically, even at higher-quality postsecondary institutions.
In a much less comprehensive information-based intervention, the College Board recently
collaborated in the development of a “College Is Affordable” brochure that was then distributed
to lower-income families with middle school students in North Carolina. In particular, the goal of
the brochure was to educate families about college net price. Treatment and comparison families
were then surveyed regarding their knowledge of postsecondary financing. Families receiving
the brochure were more likely to report knowing the cost of attending college in North Carolina;

25

agreeing that most students pay less than colleges’ list prices; and agreeing that students from
low-income families could attend college at low to no cost (College Board, 2012). Similarly,
Oreopoulos and Dunn (2013) report that high school students are much more likely to aspire to
postsecondary education after receiving information about the costs and benefits of college.
These efforts, taken together, indicate that students and their families likely stand to benefit from
improved access to college-related information focused on college financing as well as other
aspects of the college-going process.
Indeed, the past few years have also seen a proliferation of tools intended to provide
students and families with better information about important metrics related to college cost and
quality. These include tools such as the White House College Scorecard, the FAFSA4Caster, net
price calculators (NPCs), and the financial aid package shopping sheet. Given their recent
development, we have limited evidence on these tools’ potential for impact on college-related
decisions and outcomes. Rosinger (2014) finds through a randomized controlled trial that use of
the shopping sheet has little impact on students’ enrollment and borrowing decisions. Anthony,
Page and Seldin (2015) provide descriptive evidence that estimates provided by the federal
template NPC can vary substantially from actual financial aid awards, potentially limiting its
promise for putting meaningful information in the hands of students as they making decisions
about the postsecondary institutions to which to apply. As noted above, in their H&R Block
FAFSA experiment, Bettinger and colleagues (2012) found no impact on FAFSA or college
enrollment outcomes of simply providing information about FAFSA and financial aid at the time
of tax filing. This limited set of evidence suggests that it may be too optimistic to expect that
these tools, in isolation, will have a meaningful impact of students’ college-going outcomes. In
fact, it may be reasonable to expect that such tools aiming to making information about college

26

cost and quality more transparent will have more impact on the behavior of postsecondary
institutions compared to the behavior of individual students and families (Loewenstein, Sunstein
& Golman, 2014). This is an area of future research.
Finally, simple reminders and well-framed encouragements or “nudges” also have been
shown to be effective in a variety of settings for improving follow-through with desirable actions
(Armstrong et al, 2009; Dale & Strauss, 2009; Karlan et al, 2010; Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). In
educational contexts, providing students with nudges can help reduce inertia and students’
tendency to procrastinate and can help students to make positive changes to their daily activities
to contribute to more success as a student (Lavecchia et al., 2014). Nudging initiatives have
shown several early successes in the educational context (Bergman, 2013; Kraft & Rogers, 2014;
York & Loeb, 2015). For example, a number of experimental interventions show that summer
outreach and the offer of support delivered by counselors, near-aged peers, or by automated text
messaging serve to significantly summer mitigate attrition from the college-going pipeline and
improve college success (Castleman, Arnold & Wartman, 2012; Arnold, Castleman, Chewning
& Page, 2015; Castleman, Owen & Page, 2015 [this issue]; Castleman, Page & Schooley, 2014;
Castleman & Page, 2014a, 2015, forthcoming).
Nudges can help students overcome their attentional failure by providing reminders that
are well-timed to correspond to the windows of opportunity during which students would
optimally focus on particular tasks. Well-timed nudges may actually serve to capitalize on
students’ relative impulsivity, encouraging them to make progress with a particular task in the
moment rather than putting it off to an unspecified future time (Castleman & Page, 2014b). Thus,
there may be promise in low-touch nudges and reminders to support students throughout the
college-going process.

27

4. Interventions aimed at easing the academic transition to college
Not all students who successfully enroll in college enter academically ready. With
increased rates of college enrollment have come increased rates of students unprepared for
college-level coursework. Estimates suggest that among recent cohorts of high school students,
only one of every three to four students is academically prepared as defined by successfully
graduating from high schools, engaging in a college-preparatory high school curriculum and
meeting a minimum threshold of skill in basic literacy (Chen, Wu, & Tasoff, 2010; Greene &
Forster, 2003).
Of course, academic preparation for college is a long process that starts well before the
end of high school, and a comprehensive examination of human capital production from infancy
onward is beyond the scope of this review. Nevertheless, there are academic challenges specific
to the transition to college that are distinct from concerns about student achievement more
broadly. In particular, high school graduation requirements are generally poorly aligned with
requirements for college-level coursework although students are not aware of this (Kirst &
Venezia, 2004; Rosenbaum, Deil-Amen, & Person, 2006). Moreover, access to collegepreparatory coursework and college counseling are not equally available at all high schools: lowincome and minority students have both fewer opportunities to obtain the academic preparation
required for college and less “college knowledge” regarding what is expected in the first place
(see review by Goldrick-Rab, 2010). In this section we review the evidence on interventions to
address the disconnect between high school and college academics, grouping them by whether
the intervention is primarily based at the postsecondary institution, or at the high school, though
in some interventions this distinction is intentionally blurred.
4.1 Remedial coursework

28

Remedial coursework is perhaps the most widespread and costly intervention aimed at
addressing perceived skill deficiencies among incoming college students. Remedial or
“developmental” courses provide basic instruction in reading, writing, and mathematics, but do
not bear college credit. Most two-year colleges and many non-selective four-year colleges
require incoming students to be screened for possible remedial placement prior to their initial
course registration. Typically, placement is based upon whether students exceed a cutoff on a
placement exam; those scoring below the college-level cutoff may be required to take and pass
one or more remedial courses before enrolling in college-level courses in the given subject. Half
of all undergraduates will take at least one remedial course; among those who take any, the
average is 2.6 remedial courses (Scott-Clayton, Crosta, & Belfield, 2014). Scott-Clayton et al.
(2014) estimate that with over three million new students entering college each year, this implies
a national cost of nearly $7 billion dollars annually. Relatively few students who enter
remediation ever even attempt college-level coursework (Bailey, Jeong, & Cho, 2010). But
because students entering remediation are disadvantaged to begin with, this fact alone is not
informative about the causal effect of remediation.
Several studies using RD analysis to compare students just above and below remedial test
score cutoffs have generally found null to negative impacts of remediation. For example,
Martorell and McFarlin (2011) examine administrative records for over 250,000 students in
Texas public two- and four-year colleges: those just below the test score threshold had
significantly lower rates of persistence and college credit accumulation, with no impact on
degree attainment and future labor market earnings. Studies in Florida and in a large urban
community college system using analogous data and methods found similarly null to negative
effects on academic outcomes (Calcagno & Long, 2008; Scott-Clayton & Rodriguez, 2015).

29

A typical caveat in RD studies is that they identify average treatment effects local to
students scoring near the cutoff—that is, the highest scoring remediated students and the lowest
scoring non-remediated student—and thus one interpretation of the RD evidence may be that the
existing remedial cutoffs are set too high. Evidence regarding impact heterogeneity by ability
does in fact suggest that the negative effects of remediation may be largest for higher-ability or
lower-academic-risk students (Martorell & McFarlin, 2011; Scott-Clayton & Rodriguez, 2015).
Conversely, several RD studies examining very low-scoring students—who are at the margin
between higher and lower levels of remediation—have found some positive effects of being
assigned to the more intensive remedial treatment (Boatman & Long, 2010; Dadgar, 2012;
Hodara, 2012).
Two studies take advantage of seemingly arbitrary variation in placement test cutoff
policies across public institutions within a given state, using distance to college as an instrument
for students’ probability of remediation. The first of these, by Bettinger and Long (2009), also is
one of the only studies to find positive effects of remedial (versus college-level) assignment.
Their analysis strategy requires limiting the sample to students who took the ACT, making this
one of the few studies to examine predominantly four-year enrollees. They find some important
positive impacts, including an increase in bachelor’s degree completion within four years. On the
other hand, even this study finds some negative impacts. For example, in both English and math,
remediated students completed significantly fewer total credits, while those remediated in math
were more likely to drop out in their first year. A more recent study, by Clotfelter, Ladd,
Muschkin, and Vigdor (2015) uses a similar distance-based instrument to examine community
college enrollees in North Carolina. They find strong negative effects on the likelihood of ever
passing a college-level course in the relevant subject, as well as on “college success,” broadly

30

defined to include degree or diploma completion, or completion of at least 10 transferable
courses within four years of entry.
Across studies, this overall negative (or at best mixed) set of findings is consistent with possible
heterogeneity of effects across students with different characteristics and/or preparation. A
related explanation is that the tests used to determine who should be remediated appear to be
poor predictors of who would do well in college-level courses. Scott-Clayton, Crosta, and
Belfield (2014) predict, based on both test scores and detailed measures of high school course
taking and grades, that approximately one-quarter of students remediated in math and one-third
of students remediated in English could have earned a B or better in the relevant college-level
course, had they been placed there directly.
In light of this body of evidence, policy efforts have shifted recently in two directions:
first, towards reducing remedial placement rates through the use of early awareness and
alternative placement measures; and second, towards delivering remedial course content more
efficiently to limit the diversion of students from college-level coursework. An example of the
first strategy is the Early Assessment Program (EAP) in California, in which high school juniors
took the college placement exams. This gave students time to address academic gaps during the
senior year of high school. Evidence capitalizing on changes over time in students’ exposure to
EAP indicates that this testing and feedback strategy reduced remediation rates in college
without discouraging those who were underprepared from continuing on (Howell, Kurlaender, &
Grodsky, 2010). Another example comes from Long Beach City College (LBCC), which
switched from a test-based placement tool to a high-school transcript based process in 2012.
While the policy change was not formally evaluated, LBCC reports that the percentage of
students taking and successfully completing college-level math and English courses tripled and

31

quadrupled, respectively, the year the new policy was introduced (Oakley, 2014). Emerging
experimental evidence from Evans and Henry (2015) finds that use of computer-adaptive
placement testing, together with targeted feedback and the opportunity to retest resulted in a 7 –
9 percentage point increase in college-level math placement, without leading to a reduction in
college course success.
Rigorous causal evidence on the impact of alternative remedial instruction is more
limited. Descriptive evidence suggests the potential promise of technology-based strategies,
including online and other self-directed learning tools (Edgecombe, 2011; Epper & Baker, 2009;
Jenkins, Speroni, Belfield, Jaggars, & Edgecombe, 2010; Zachry & Schneider, 2008). Boatman
(2012) utilizes an RD design to evaluate such strategies and finds positive impacts of revised
remedial programs, at least on short-run outcomes such as early college persistence and credits
attempted.
4.2 Dual enrollment and other high-school based interventions
While remediation may be conceptualized as bringing high school work into college,
another approach to smoothing the academic transition from high school to college is to expose
students to college-level work while they are still in high school. Importantly, some of the
interventions in this domain are crafted not only to address academic barriers, but also to
mitigate informational and financial barriers as well. The oldest initiatives in this vein are the
Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate (IB) programs. Both programs offer
rigorous courses in various subjects, are taught by high school teachers, and culminate in
external exams through which (depending upon the score received) students may earn college
credit at some institutions. Non-experimental evaluations of these programs have consistently
found that participation is positively correlated with academic outcomes including high school

32

graduation, college enrollment, and college performance (e.g., Chajewski, Mattern & Shaw,
2011; Saavedra, 2011).
Of course, even careful non-experimental analyses with rich observable control variables
may overstate effects if the students who participate in these programs are unobservably more
motivated or more interested in college. The most rigorous available evidence also finds positive
effects, albeit of a somewhat more modest magnitude. Jackson (2010) uses administrative data
from Texas to examine the expansion of the AP Incentive Program (APIP), which provided
monetary incentives to students (and their teachers) for passing scores on AP exams. Using a
difference-in-difference design that exploited variation in the timing of schools’ entry into the
program, Jackson finds that school-level participation in the program led to more AP test taking,
higher scores on college entrance exams (SAT and ACT), and a five percent increase in the share
of students enrolling in college. Capitalizing on millions of student records and a continuous raw
score that underlies reported integer AP scores, Smith, Hurwitz and Avery (2015) utilize an RD
design to examine the impact of just passing Advanced Placement exams. Local to the passing
threshold, students who earn a college-credit bearing score are one to two percentage points (per
exam) more likely to earn a bachelor’s degree within four years, with more modest impacts on
six-year degree attainment rates. Together, these results suggest that at the margin of passing,
earning AP credit primarily influences time to degree but not ultimate degree attainment.
Dual enrollment programs are similar to AP or IB in that they enable students to earn
both college and high school credit simultaneously, but unlike AP or IB the credit comes from
the course itself rather than from an external exam. A further important distinction, highlighted
by Karp (2015) is that beyond simply offering more rigorous courses, dual enrollment creates a
mechanism for better collaboration and coordination between the secondary and postsecondary
33

sectors. As with AP and IB, rigorous research on dual enrollment is limited. Non-experimental
analyses have found some positive effects on postsecondary enrollment, persistence, and
completion (CCRC, 2012). While the validity of results from non-experimental comparisons
may be threatened by unobserved confounding variables, a careful propensity score analysis by
An (2013) finds that the strong positive relationship between dual enrollment and BA completion
is robust to the omission of even large potential confounders. The most rigorous quasiexperimental study compares high school students in Florida just above and below a test score
cutoff for program eligibility (Speroni, 2011). Using a regression-discontinuity design, the author
finds no effect of dual enrollment on high school or college outcomes in general. However,
students just barely eligible for college algebra were substantially more likely to enroll and
graduate from college than those just below the cutoff.
Perhaps the most intensive strategy to “bring the college experience into high schools” is
to restructure the high school as an “early college.” Indeed, about 280 early and middle college
high schools (E-MCHSs) exist across the country, often located on college campuses, enabling
students to take college courses and, in some cases, to earn an associate’s degree during high
school. These high schools offer college exposure to a wider range of students than either
traditional dual enrollment or AP/IB programs, which are more academically selective (Barnett,
Maclutsky, & Wagonlander, 2015).
Berger, Turk-Bicakci, Garet, Knudson, & Hoshen (2014) use a randomized-lottery design
to evaluate student outcomes at 10 early colleges across the country that had more applicants
than they had seats. Students randomly offered ECHS admission were significantly more likely
to earn college credits and complete a two-year college degree than those who lost the lottery.
While these differences emerged before the end of high school, they persisted to the end of the

34

follow-up period (with a 17 percentage point difference in associate’s degree completion seven
years after students entered 9th grade). A second study in progress uses a similar research design
with oversubscribed schools in North Carolina (Edmunds, 2010). Results to date indicate that
enrollment in an ECHS had significant, positive effects on several student outcomes, including
student attendance and suspension rates, remaining academically on-track for college,
accumulation of college credit while in high school, and academic performance and persistence
in college (Edmunds et al, 2012; Unlu, Yamaguchi, Bernstein & Edmunds, 2010). While highly
compelling, the effects for oversubscribed schools may not generalize to early colleges more
broadly.

5. Affirmative action and “Top X%” plans
The barriers to college access that we discuss above—financial, informational and
behavioral, and academic—are obviously not mutually exclusive. For low-income, minority, and
first-generation college students—often concentrated in under-resourced high schools—these
barriers may compound. It is also important to acknowledge that underrepresented minorities
face additional, distinct barriers—including highly segregated schools and neighborhoods
(Rothstein, 2015) as well as both implicit and explicit discrimination (Bertrand, Chugh, &
Mullainathan, 2005). 14 While we do not survey the full depth of research on affirmative action in
college admissions, we highlight key findings from this literature below. For more detailed
reviews, see Arcidiacono and Lovenheim (2015), Hinrichs (2012, 2014), or Holzer and Neumark
(2006).

14

See Arcidiacano & Lovenheim (2015) for a recent review of the justifications for and empirical evidence on
affirmative action policies and “percent plans.”

35

Early studies document sharp declines in minority enrollment at selective public
institutions after affirmative action bans are enacted (Tienda, Leicht, Sullivan, Maltese, & Lloyd,
2003; Kain, O’Brien, & Jargowsky, 2005). But one key finding from the subsequent literature is
that such bans primarily affect where students enroll and complete degrees, rather than whether
they do so at all (an important caveat however, is that there are many more studies of the
application/enrollment margins than the completion margin). Several recent studies have
identified the effects of affirmative action by comparing changes in minority student enrollment
(or other outcomes) within states that implemented affirmative action bans (California, Texas,
Washington, and Florida) to changes in states that did not implement such bans. For example,
Hinrichs (2012, 2014) utilizes a difference-in-difference approach with data from a national,
institution-level database (IPEDS) as well as data from the Current Population Survey and
American Community Survey. His results suggest that such bans have little effect on minority
enrollments or bachelor’s degree completions overall, but substantially reduce the likelihood that
minorities enroll in or complete a bachelor’s degree at a selective four-year institution. Other
studies with similar findings include Backes (2012), who examines enrollment and completion
using IPEDS with a difference-in-difference approach; Long (2004), who uses a triple-difference
to examine SAT score-sending behavior in California and Texas among those who took the test
(over time, across states, and across minority status); and Dickson (2006), who examines SAT
test-taking in Texas within the same high schools, before and after the ban.
A complication faced by many of these studies is that states and institutions in many
cases actively developed new policies and programs intended to counter the effects of the
affirmative action bans, so difference-in-difference estimates will capture the combined effect of
eliminating affirmative action and implementing new programs in response, rather than the

36

isolated effect of instituting a ban. Texas’s “Top 10%” plan, which guarantees admission to any
in-state public institution to students who rank in the top 10% of their high school class, is the
most notable example of an alternative policy. 15 If high schools were fully segregated by race,
such a policy would ensure admission for 10% of students within each racial group. But as
Hinrichs (2012) notes, the reality is that high schools are not completely segregated, and “fewer
than x% of minorities are in the top x% of their high school class” (p. 715). This may explain
why such alternatives do not appear to completely undo the effects of affirmative action bans for
minorities. Cortes (2010) examines how the switch from affirmative action to the top 10% policy
in Texas affected the post-enrollment outcomes of minority students differentially by high school
class ranking. 16 She finds that persistence and graduation were flat or declining for minority
students below the top decile, while the same outcomes were increasing for minority students in
the top 10% (as well as for non-minority students throughout the distribution). Daugherty,
Martorell, & McFarlin (2014) use a regression discontinuity strategy around school-level
eligibility cutoffs and find that students who just barely qualified were much more likely to
attend a state flagship institution. But this came at the expense of private college enrollments,
such that there were no effects on enrollment in general or on quality of college attended.
One critique of both affirmative action and top X% plans—and possible explanation of
limited effects on enrollment—is that they may be of limited use to students facing additional
barriers like the ones described elsewhere in this review. To counter these multiple barriers, the
University of Texas at Austin implemented the Longhorn Opportunity Scholarship program. The
15

In 2009, UT-Austin was allowed to limit the proportion of students admitted under the Top 10% plan to 75
percent of the incoming class, meaning that students who just barely make the top 10% still may not meet the
effective cutoff for UT-Austin. Florida and California also have so called “percent plans” but they only guarantee
admission to some public four year institution, not to the institution of the student’s choice as in Texas (Cortes,
2010).
16
Her analysis uses administrative data from the Texas Higher Education Opportunity Project (THEOP) and as such
is conditional on enrolling in some public institution in the state; however, given other evidence that the enrollment
margin is unaffected, this is a reasonable limitation.

37

program targeted low-income, underrepresented high schools (which serve disproportionately
minority student populations) for additional outreach, and provided generous financial assistance
and enhanced academic supports to graduates of these high schools if admitted to UT-Austin
(Andrews, Ranchhod, & Sathy, 2010). The first cohort eligible for the program completed high
school in in 1999, one year after the Top 10% plan went into effect and two years after Texas’s
affirmative action ban. Dickson (2006), using a high school fixed-effects approach, finds
evidence that the program significantly increased SAT-taking at targeted high schools. Andrews
et al. (2010) use a difference-in-difference approach with matched comparison schools and find
that the program substantially increased applications to UT-Austin. They additionally find the
largest effects for students in the top decile of class rank, who were guaranteed admission,
consistent with the notion that for low-income or underrepresented populations, college
application decisions “are subject to multiple constraints” (p. 113). 17

6. Discussion
In this review we have isolated and discussed various barriers to college access. Yet these
barriers can interact, and successful transition to college requires navigating all or at least some
combination of them. Indeed, from this rich and growing literature on barriers to college access
and prospective solutions, a dominant theme that emerges is the overall complexity of the
college transition. Given this complexity, policy solutions that focus on just one type of barrier—
such as college affordability—may lead to improved access, but may not be the most effective
use of resources if other challenges still stand in students’ way. For example, additional grants
funds that allow students to enroll in college may not be well invested if students use these funds
17

Andrews et al. (2010) perform the same analysis for the Century Scholars program, a similar program operated by
Texas A&M, and also find positive results, although the magnitudes are smaller and not statistically significant for
as many deciles.

38

to attend institutions that do not maximize their chances of persistence and success. Similarly,
the potential benefits to helping students select and apply to a set of well-matched colleges may
not be fully realized if students and families have actual or perceived financial barriers that keep
them from investing in higher education. Thus, the most effective solutions may be ones that
seek to address multiple barriers to college access together, rather than in isolation.
Finally, we have set aside, with limited exceptions, the question of what happens with
students once they get through the door of college. While many of the policy interventions that
we examined may support both access and completion, it is also possible for these two goals to
come into conflict, particularly in the context of limited resources. When institutional resources
are constrained, higher education systems may face a tradeoff: serve more students with lower
quality, or fewer students with higher quality academic opportunities and other services (Barr,
2010). At the extreme, if resources are spread too thin, it is conceivable that an institution could
increase its number of graduates by decreasing the number of students admitted.
Consider the implications, for example, of a comprehensive community college
intervention established by the City University of New York, called ASAP (Accelerated Study in
Associate Programs). The program not only waives tuition and fees, but also requires full-time
enrollment, provides free transportation, intensive advising, career services, special seminars and
other supports. After three years, students randomly assigned to the program were nearly twice
as likely to have earned an associate’s degree compared to the control group (40 percent versus
22 percent (Scrivener et al., 2015). But the program is not cheap: at least in its initial
implementation, ASAP represented a 60 percent increase in per-student expenditure.
Importantly, however, it cost less per graduate than business-as-usual (Levin & Garcia, 2013). A
social cost-benefit analysis easily justifies spending the resources needed to expand the number

39

of students served, if those resources exist. On the other hand, if resources are held fixed, the
results suggest the system would produce more graduates by serving fewer students with ASAPlike intensity. 18
Unfortunately, in the U.S., resources for higher education have not expanded as fast as
enrollments. In fact, at the state level, expenditures are falling in real terms. In the face of
competing priorities, the share of state budgets devoted to higher education fell from 8 percent in
1980 to 4 percent in 2010 (Mettler, 2014). On a per-student basis, state funding has fallen 30
percent since its peak in 1987-88, from $10,176 to $7,161 per student (Baum & Ma, 2014). Thus,
the tension between quantity served and quality of service is not a hypothetical one. A key
implication is that improving college access is not, on its own, likely to be sufficient to eliminate
socioeconomic gaps in educational attainment: the “marginal” students induced into college by
virtue of the programs and policies discussed above disproportionately enter the public
institutions at which resource constraints are most acute. Given current trends in per-student
funding, the tension between promoting access and maintaining quality is likely only to increase
in the coming years.
Works Cited
Abraham, K. and Clark, M. (2006). Financial aid and students’ college decisions: Evidence
from the District of Columbia Tuition Assistance Grant Program. Journal of Human
Resources 41 (3): 578-610.
Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance. (2005). The student aid gauntlet: Making
access to college simple and certain. Final Report of the Special Study of Simplification
of Need Analysis and Application for Title IV Aid. Washington, DC: Department of
Education.

18

To see this, assume a fixed budget $10,000, a cost of $100 per student for the baseline service and $160 for the
intervention, and a graduation rate of 22 percent for the control group and 40 percent for the treated group. Serving
100 students with the cheaper baseline intensity produces 22 graduates, while serving 63 students with the more
expensive program produces 25 graduates.

40

Advisory Committee on Student Financial Assistance. (2012). “Pathways to Success:
Integrating Learning with Life and Work to Increase National College Completion." A
report to the U.S. Congress and Secretary of Education. Washington, DC: Department of
Education.
Aghion, P., Boustan, L., Hoxby, C., & Vandenbussche, J. (2009). The causal impact of
education on economic growth: Evidence from U.S. Unpublished paper. Retrieved from:
http://www.weareeducation.org/Harvard_Causal_Impact_Of_Education.pdf.
American School Counselor Association. (2012). ASCA national model: A framework for
school counseling programs. American School Counselor Association.
An, B. P. (2012). The impact of dual enrollment on college degree attainment do low-SES
students benefit? Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 35, 57-75.
Andrews, R. J., DesJardins, S., & Ranchhod, V. (2010). The effects of the Kalamazoo Promise
on college choice. Economics of Education Review, 29(5), 722-737.
Andrews, R. J., Ranchhod, V., & Sathy, V. (2010). Estimating the responsiveness of college
applications to the likelihood of acceptance and financial assistance: Evidence from
Texas. Economics of Education Review, 29(1), 104-115.
Angrist, J., Autor, D., Hudson, S., & Pallais, A. (2015). Evaluating econometric evaluations of
post-secondary aid. American Economic Review, 105(5), 502-07.
Angrist, J., Hudson, S., & Pallais, A. (2014). Leveling Up: Early Results from a Randomized
Evaluation of Post-Secondary Aid (No. w20800). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Anthony, A. M., Page, L. C., & Seldin, A. (2015). In the right ballpark? Assessing the accuracy
of net price calculators. Working paper. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2555051.
Arcidiacono, P., & Lovenheim, M. (2015). Affirmative action and the quality-fit tradeoff (No.
w20962). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Armstrong, A. W., Watson, A. J., Makredes, M., Frangos, J. E., Kimball, A. B., & Kvedar, J. C.
(2009). Text-message reminders to improve sunscreen use. Arch Dermatology, 145(11),
1230-1236.
Arnold, K. C., Castleman, B. L., Chewning, A. & Page, L. C. (2015) Advisor and student
experiences of summer support for college-intending, low-income high school
graduates. Journal of College Access, 1(1), 6 - 28.
Arnold, K.D., Fleming, S., De Anda, M., Castleman, B., & Wartman, K.L. (2009). The summer
flood: The invisible gap among low-income students. Thought & Action, 25, 23-34.

41

Avery, C. (2013). Evaluation of the College Possible program: Results from a randomized
controlled trial (No. w19562). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Avery, C. N., Howell, J. S. & Page, L. C. (2014a). A review of the role of college applications
in students’ postsecondary outcomes. College Board Research Brief.
Avery, C. N., Howell, J. S. & Page, L. C. (2014b). A review of the role of counseling, coaching,
and mentoring on students’ postsecondary outcomes. College Board Research Brief.
Avery, C., & Kane, T. J. (2004). Student perceptions of college opportunities: The Boston
COACH Program. In C. M. Hoxby (Ed.), College choices: The economics of where to
go, when to go, and how to pay for it (pp. 355–394). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Bailey, M., & Dynarski, S. (2011). “Inequality in postsecondary education.” In G.J. Duncan and
R.J. Murnane (eds.), Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s
Life Chances (pp 117-132). New York: Russell Sage.
Bailey, T., Jeong, D.W., & Cho, S.W. (2010). Referral, enrollment, and completion in
developmental education sequences in community colleges. Economics of Education
Review, 29, 255–270.
Barnett, E., Maclutsky, E. and Wagonlander, C. (2015), Emerging early college models for
traditionally underserved students. New Directions for Community Colleges, 2015: 39–
49. doi: 10.1002/cc.20131
Barr, N. (2010). Paying for higher education: What policies, in what order? London, England:
London School of Economics.
Bartik, T. J., & Lachowska, M. (2013). The short-term effects of the Kalamazoo Promise
Scholarship on student outcomes. Research in Labor Economics, 38: 37-76.
Bartik, T. J., Hershbein, B., & Lachowska, M. (2015, February). Longer-term effects of the
Kalamazoo Promise Scholarship on college enrollment, persistence, and completion.
Paper presented at American Education Finance and Policy Annual Conference,
Washington, DC.
Baum, S. R., & Ma, J. (2014). Trends in College Pricing, 2014. New York: NY: The College
Board.
Baum, S. R., Elliott, D. C. & Ma, J. (2014). Trends in student aid, 2014. New York: NY: The
College Board.
Baum, S., Ma, J., & Payea, K. (2013). Education pays 2013: The benefits of higher education
for individuals and society. New York: The College Board.
Becker, G.S. (1964). Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special

42

reference to education. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Belley, P., & Lochner, L. (2007). The changing role of family income and ability in determining
educational achievement (No. w13527). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Berger, A., Turk-Bicakci, L., Garet, M., Knudson, J., & Hoshen, G. (2014). Early college,
continued success: Early college high school initiative impact study. Washington, DC:
American Institutes for Research.
Bergman, P. (2015). Parent-child information frictions and human capital investment: Evidence
from a field experiment. CESifo Working Paper No. 5391. Retrieved from:
http://www.cesifo-group.de/ifoHome/publications/workingpapers/CESifoWP/CESifoWPdetails?wp_id=19163719.
Bertrand, M., Chugh, D., & Mullainathan, S. (2005). Implicit discrimination. American
Economic Review, 94-98.
Bettinger, E. (2004). How financial aid affects persistence. In College choices: The economics
of where to go, when to go, and how to pay for it (pp. 207-238). University of Chicago
Press.
Bettinger, E. P. & Evans, B. J. (2015, February). Information and assistant in the college
enrollment process: Evidence from a randomized field experiment in near-peer college
advising. Presentation at American Education Finance Policy annual meeting,
Washington DC.
Bettinger, E. P., & Long, B. T. (2009). Addressing the Needs of Underprepared Students in
Higher Education Does College Remediation Work?. Journal of Human Resources,
44(3), 736-771.
Bettinger, E., Long, B.T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The role of application
assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1205-1242.
Bettinger, E.P., Antonio, A. L. Evans, B., Foster, J., Holzman, B., Santikian, H., & Horng, E.
(2012). National College Advising Corps, 2010-2011 Evaluation Report. Evaluation and
Assessment Solutions for Education. URL:
http://www.socialimpactexchange.org/sites/www.socialimpactexchange.org/files/Evalua
tion%20Report%2010-11%20%2804%2025%2012%29%20FINAL.pdf.
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (2015). Better for students: Simplifying the federal financial
aid process. URL: http://postsecondary.gatesfoundation.org/wpcontent/uploads/2015/07/FAFSA-Approach_FINAL_7_7_15.pdf.
Boatman, A. (2012). Evaluating institutional efforts to streamline postsecondary remediation:
The causal effects of the Tennessee Developmental Course Redesign Initiative. Also
available as a National Center for Postsecondary Research (NCPR) Working Paper, June
43

2012.

Boatman, A., & Long, B. T. (2010). Does remediation work for all students? How the effects of
postsecondary remedial and developmental courses vary by level of academic
preparation. An NCPR Working Paper. National Center for Postsecondary Research.
Bos, J., Berman, J, Kane T, and F. Tseng (2012). The impacts of SOURCE: A program to
support college enrollment through near-peer low-cost student advising. working paper.
Bound, J. & Turner, S. (2002). Going to war and going to college: Did World War II and the
G.I. Bill increase educational attainment for returning veterans? Journal of Labor
Economics 20 (4): 784–815.
Bound, J., Lovenheim, M. F., & Turner, S. (2010). Why have college completion rates
declined? An analysis of changing student preparation and collegiate
resources. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3), 129-57.
Bowen, W. G., Chingos, M. M., & McPherson, M. S. (2009). Crossing the finish line:
Completing college at America's public universities. Princeton University Press.
Bruce, D. J. & Carruthers, C. K., (2014). Jackpot? The impact of lottery scholarships on
enrollment in Tennessee. Journal of Urban Economics 81, 30-44.
Bulman, G. (forthcoming). The effect of access to college assessments on enrollment and
attainment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Bulman, G. B., & Hoxby, C. M. (2015). The returns to the federal tax credits for higher
education. In Brown, J. R. (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 29. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Calcagno, J. C., & Long, B. T. (2008). The impact of postsecondary remediation using a
regression discontinuity approach: Addressing endogenous sorting and noncompliance
(NBER Working Paper No. 14194). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Carrell, S. E., & Sacerdote, B. (2013). Late interventions matter too: The case of college
coaching New Hampshire (No. w19031). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carruthers, C. K., & Fox, W. F. (2015). Aid for all: College coaching, financial aid, and postsecondary persistence in Tennessee. Forthcoming in Economics of Education Review.
Carruthers, C. K., & Ozek, U. (2013, March). Losing HOPE: Financial aid and the line
between college and work. Annual Conference of the Association for Education Finance
and Policy, New Orleans, LA.

44

Casey, B. J., Jones, R. M., & Somerville, L. H. (2011). Braking and accelerating of the
adolescent brain. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21(1), 21-33.
Castleman, B. L. & Goodman, J. (2014). Intensive college counseling and the college
enrollment choices of low income students. HKS working paper.
Castleman, B. L. & Page, L. C. (2014a). Summer melt: Supporting low-income students through
the transition to college. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Castleman, B. L. & Page, L. C. (2014b). A trickle or a torrent? Understanding the extent of
summer “melt” among college-intending high school graduates. Social Science
Quarterly, 95(1), 202 – 220.
Castleman, B. L. & Page, L. C. (2015). Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and
peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates?
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 115, 144 – 160.
Castleman, B. L. & Page, L. C. (forthcoming, 2016). Freshman year financial aid nudges: An
experiment to increase financial aid renewal and sophomore year persistence. Journal of
Human Resources, 51(2).
Castleman, B. L., & Long, B. T. (2013). Looking beyond enrollment: The causal effect of needbased grants on college access, persistence, and graduation. NBER Working Paper No.
19306. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Castleman, B. L., Arnold, K.D., & Wartman, K.L. (2012). Stemming the tide of summer melt:
An experimental study of the effects of post-high school summer intervention on lowincome students’ college enrollment. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness,
5(1), 1-17.
Castleman, B. L., Owen, L. & Page, L. C. (2015) Stay late or start early? Experimental evidence
on the benefits of college matriculation support from high schools versus colleges.
Economics of Education Review, 47, 168-179.
Castleman, B. L., Page, L. C. & Schooley, K. (2014). The forgotten summer: Mitigating
summer attrition among college-intending, low-income high school graduates. Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(2), 320 – 344.
Castleman, B.L. (2015). Prompts, personalization, and pay-offs: Strategies to improve the
design and delivery of college and financial aid information. In Castleman, B.L.,
Schwartz, S., & Baum, S. (eds.). Decision making for student success. New York, NY:
Routledge Press.
Chajewski, M., Mattern, K. D. and Shaw, E. J. (2011). Examining the role of Advanced
Placement® exam participation in 4-year college enrollment. Educational Measurement:
Issues and Practice, 30: 16–27. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-3992.2011.00219.x

45

Chen, X., Wu, J., & Tasoff, S. (2010). Postsecondary expectations and plans for the high school
senior class of 2003-04. Issue Tables. NCES 2010-170rev. National Center for
Education Statistics.
Civic Enterprises. (2011). School counselors literature and landscape review. The College
Board.
Clinedinst, M. E. & Hawkins, D.A. (2009). 2009 State of College Admission. National
Association for College Admission Counseling.
Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., Muschkin, C., & Vigdor, J. L. (2015). Developmental Education
in North Carolina Community Colleges. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 37
(3), 354–375.
Cohodes, S. R., & Goodman, J. S. (2014). Merit aid, college quality, and college completion:
Massachusetts' Adams scholarship as an in-kind subsidy. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 6(4), 251-285.
College Board (2012) College is Affordable: A pilot study. The College Board. Washington,
DC Available online at
http://www.advocacy.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/college-is-affordablesummary-9-6-12-final.pdf.
Community College Research Center [CCRC] (2012). What we know about dual enrollment.
New York, NY: Community College Research Center.
Constantine, J. M., N.S. Seftor, E. Martin, T. Silva, & D. Myers (2006). Study of the effect of
the Talent Search Program on secondary and postsecondary outcomes in Florida,
Indiana and Texas. Final report from Phase II of the National Evaluation. U.S.
Department of Education.
Cornwell, C., Mustard, D., & Sridhar, D. (2006). The enrollment effects of merit-based
financial aid: Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE Scholarship. Journal of Labor Economics
24: 761–86
Cortes, K. E. (2010). Do bans on affirmative action hurt minority students? Evidence from the
Texas Top 10% Plan. Economics of Education Review, 29(6), 1110-1124.
Currie, J., & Moretti, E. (2003). Mother's education and the intergenerational transmission of
human capital: Evidence from college openings. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1495-1532.
Dadgar, M. (2012). Essays on the economics of community college students’ academic and
labor market success. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations
and Theses. (Accession Order No. [3506175]).
Dale, A., & Strauss, A. (2009). Don’t forget to vote: Text message reminders as mobilization
46

tools. American Journal of Political Science, 53(4), 787-804.
Daly, M. C., & Bengali, L. (2014). Is it still worth going to college?. FRBSF Economic Letter,
13.
Daugherty, L. (2012). Summer Link: A program to facilitate the transition from high school to
college. Strategic Data Project Fellowship Captstone Report.
http://sdp.cepr.harvard.edu/files/cepr-sdp/files/sdp-fellowship-capstone-reportdaugherty.pdf
Daugherty, L., Martorell, P. & McFarlin, I. (2014). The Texas Ten Percent Plan’s Impact on
College Enrollment. Education Next vol. 14 no. 3 (Summer 2014), pp. 63-69.
Dee, T. S. (2004). Are there civic returns to education?. Journal of Public Economics, 88(9),
1697-1720.
Deming, D., & Dynarski, S. (2009). Into college, out of poverty? Policies to increase the
postsecondary attainment of the poor. NBER Working Paper 15387, Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Denning, J. T. (2014). College on the Cheap: Costs and Benefits of Community College.
Mimeo, University of Texas at Austin.
Dickson, L. M. (2006). Does ending affirmative action in college admissions lower the percent
of minority students applying to college?. Economics of Education Review, 25(1), 109119.
Dillon, E. W., & Smith, J. A. (2013). The determinants of mismatch between students and
colleges (No. w19286). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dunlop, E. (2013). What do Stafford loans actually buy you? The effect of Stafford loan access
on community college students (CALDER Working Paper No. 94). Washington, DC:
National Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research.
Dynarski, S. M. (2000). Hope for whom? Financial aid for the middle class and its impact on
college attendance. National Tax Journal 53 (3): 629–61.
Dynarski, S. M. (2003). Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on college
attendance and completion. American Economic Review, 93(1), 279–288.
Dynarski, S. M. (2004). The new merit aid. In Hoxby, C. M. (ed.) College Choices: The
Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay for It. University of Chicago
Press and the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 63–100.
Dynarski, S. M. (2005). Loans, liquidity and schooling decisions. Mimeo, Harvard University.
Dynarski, S. M. (2008). Building the stock of college-educated labor. Journal of Human
47

Resources 43(3): 576–610.
Dynarski, S. M., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2006). The cost of complexity in federal student aid:
Lessons from optimal tax theory and behavioral economics. National Tax Journal 59
(2): 319–56.
Dynarski, S. M., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2013). Financial aid policy: Lessons from research. In
Future of Children vol. 23, no. 1, edited by Cecilia Rouse, Lisa Barrow, and Thomas
Brock, Princeton, NJ: The Trustees of Princeton University.
Dynarski, S. M., Scott-Clayton, J., & Wiederspan, M. (2013). Simplifying tax incentives and aid
for college: Progress and prospects (No. w18707). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Edgecombe, N. (2011). Accelerating the academic achievement of students referred to
developmental education (CCRC Working Paper No. 30, Assessment of Evidence
Series). New York, NY: Columbia University, Teachers College, Community College
Research Center.
Edmunds J.A., Bernstein, L., Unlu, F., Glennie, E., Willse, J., Smith, A., & Arshavsky, N.
(2012). Expanding the start of the college pipeline: Ninth-grade findings from an
experimental study of the impacts of early college high schools. Journal of Research on
Educational Effectiveness, 5(2), 136-159.
Edmunds, J. A. (2010). A better 9th grade: Early results from an experimental study of the Early
College High School Model. A Policy Brief. Greensboro, NC: SERVE Center.
Epper, R. M., & Baker, E. (2009). Technology solutions for developmental math: An overview
of current and emerging practices. Report prepared with funding from the William and
Flora Hewlett Foundation and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
Evans, B. J. & Henry, G. (2015, March). Self-paced remediation and math placement: A
randomized field experiment in a community college. Paper presented at the Society for
Research on Educational Effectiveness Spring Conference, Washington, DC.
Fain, P. (2014). Benefits of free. Inside Higher Ed, October 16, 2014.
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/10/16/chicago-joins-tennessee-tuition-freecommunity-college-plan
Fitzpatrick, M. D., & Jones, D. (2012). Higher education, merit-based scholarships and postbaccalaureate migration. Working Paper No. 18530. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Goldin, C., & Katz, L. F. (2008). The race between education and technology. Cambridge, MA:
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Goldrick-Rab, S. (2010). Challenges and opportunities for improving community college
48

student success. Review of Educational Research, 80(3), 437-469.
Goldrick-Rab, S., Harris, D., Kelchen, R., & Benson, J. (2012). Need-based financial aid and
college persistence experimental evidence from Wisconsin. Available at SSRN 1887826.
Goodman, J., Hurwitz, M., & Smith, J. (2015). College access, initial college choice and degree
completion (No. w20996). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goodman, S. (2013). Learning from the test: raising selective college enrollment by providing
information. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-69. Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Greene, J. P., & Forster, G. (2003). Public high school graduation and college readiness rates
in the United States. Education Working Paper No. 3. Center for Civic Innovation.
Grodsky, E. & Jones, M. T. (2007). Real and imagined barriers to college entry: Perceptions of
cost. Social Science Research 36(2): 745–766.
Gurgand, M., Lorenceau, A. J., & Mélonio, T. (2011). Student loans: Liquidity constraint and
higher education in South Africa. Agence Française de Développement Working Paper
No. 117.
Hansen, L. W. (1983). The impact of student financial aid on access. In J Froomkin (Ed.). The
crisis in higher education (84–96). New York: Academy of Political Science.
Heller, D. E. (2008). The impact of loans on student access. In Baum, S., McPherson, M., &
Steele, P. (eds.), The effectiveness of student aid policies: What the research tells us (pp.
39-68), New York: The College Board.
Hodara, M. (2012). Language Minority Students at Community College: How Do
Developmental Education and English as a Second Language Affect Their Educational
Outcomes? (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses.
(Accession Order No. [3505981]).
Hoekstra, M. (2009). The effect of attending the flagship state university on earnings: A
discontinuity-based approach. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4), 717-724.
Holzer, H. J., & Neumark, D. (2006). Affirmative action: What do we know?. Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 25(2), 463-490.
Horn, L. J., Chen, X., & Chapman, C. (2003). Getting ready to pay for college: What students
and their parents know about the cost of college tuition and what they are doing to find
out. National Center for Education Statistics Report No. 2003030. Washington, DC:
National Center for Education Statistics.

49

Horng, E. L., Evans, B. J., Foster, J. D., Kalamkarian, H. S., Hurd, N. F., & Bettinger, E. P.
(2013). Lessons learned from a data‐driven college access program: The National
College Advising Corps. New directions for youth development, 2013(140), 55-75.
Howell, J. S., Kurlaender, M., & Grodsky, E. (2010). Postsecondary preparation and
remediation: Examining the effect of the Early Assessment Program at California State
University. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 29(4), 726-748.
Howell, J.S. & Pender, M. (2015 [this issue]). The costs and benefits of enrolling in an
academically matched college. Economics of Education Review.
Hoxby, C. M., & Bulman, G. B. (forthcoming). How tax deductions for higher education affect
college-going. Forthcoming in Economics of Education Review.
Hoxby, C., & Avery, C. (2013). The missing "one-offs": The hidden supply of high-achieving,
low-income students. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2013(1), 1-65.
Hoxby, C., & Turner, S. (2013). Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low
income students. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper,
(12-014).
Hurwitz, M., & Howell, J. (2014). Estimating causal impacts of school counselors with
regression discontinuity designs. Journal of Counseling & Development, 92(3), 316-327.
Hurwitz, M., Smith, J., Niu, S., & Howell, J. (2014). The Maine question: How is 4-year college
enrollment affected by mandatory college entrance exams?. Educational Evaluation and
Policy Analysis, 0162373714521866.
Hyman, J. (2014). ACT for all: The effect of mandatory college entrance exams on
postsecondary attainment and choice. Working paper. Retrived from: http://wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~jmhyman/Hyman_ACT_for_All.pdf.
Jackson, C. K. (2010). A little now for a lot later: A look at a Texas Advanced Placement
incentive program. Journal of Human Resources, 45(3), 591-639.
Jenkins, D., Speroni, C., Belfield, C., Jaggars, S. S., & Edgecombe, N. (2010). A model for
accelerating academic success of community college remedial English students: Is the
Accelerated Learning Program (ALP) effective and affordable? CCRC Working Paper
No. 21. Community College Research Center, Columbia University.
Kain, J. F., O'Brien, D. M., & Jargowsky, P. A. (2005). Hopwood and the top 10 percent law:
How they have affected the college enrollment decisions of Texas high school graduates
(p. 31). Texas School Project, University of Texas at Dallas.
Kane, T. J. (1996). Lessons From the largest school voucher program ever: Two decades of
experience with Pell Grants. In B. Fuller, R. Elmore, & G. Orfield (Eds.) Who chooses?
Who loses? Culture, institutions and the unequal effects of school choice. New York:
50

Teachers College Press.
Kane, T. J. (2007). Evaluating the impact of the DC Tuition Assistance Grant Program. Journal
of Human Resources, 42(3): 555–82.
Karlan, D., McConnell, M., Mullainathan, S., & Zinman, J. (2010). Getting to the top of mind:
How reminders increase saving (No. w16205). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Karp, M. M. (2015), Dual enrollment, structural reform, and the completion agenda. New
Directions for Community Colleges, 2015: 103–111.
Kena, G., Aud, S., Johnson, F., Wang, X., Zhang, J., Rathbun,... Kristapovich, P. (2014). The
Condition of Education 2014. NCES 2014-083. National Center for Education Statistics,
Washington, DC.
Kena, G., Musu-Gillette, L., Robinson, J., Wang, X., Rathbun, A., Zhang, J., Wilkinson-Flicker,
S., Barmer, A., and Dunlop Velez, E. (2015). The Condition of Education 2015 (NCES
2015-144). U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics.
Washington, DC. Retrieved August, 3, 2015 from http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch.
King, J. E. (2004). Missed opportunities: Students who do not apply for financial
aid. Washington, DC: American Council on Education.
Kirst, M., & Venezia, A. (2004). From high school to college: Improving opportunities for
success. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Klasik, D. (2012). The college application gauntlet: A systematic analysis of the steps to fouryear college enrollment. Research in Higher Education, 53, 506-549.
Klasik, D. (2013). The ACT of enrollment: The college enrollment effects of state-required
college entrance exam testing. Educational Researcher, 42(3), 151-160.
Kraft, M. A., & Rogers, T. (2015). The underutilized potential of teacher-to-parent
communication: Evidence from a field experiment. Economics of Education Review, 47,
49-63.
Lavecchia, A. M., Liu, H. & Oreopoulos, P. (2014). Behavioral economics of education:
Progress and possibilities. NBER Working Paper No. 20609.
Leicht, K. T., Sullivan, T., Maltese, M., & Lloyd, K. (2003). Closing The Gap?: Admissions &
Enrollments at the Texas Public Flagships Before and After Affirmative Action.
publisher not identified.
Leslie, L. & Brinkman, P. (1988). The Economic Value of Higher Education. New York:
Macmillan.

51

Levin, H. M., & Garcia, E. (2013). Benefit-cost analysis of Accelerated Study in Associate
Programs (ASAP) of the City University of New York (CUNY). Center for the BenefitCost Studies in Education. Teachers College, Columbia University. URL:
http://cbcse.org/wordpress/wpcontent/uploads/2013/05/Levin_ASAP_Benefit_Cost_Report_FINAL_05222013.pdf
Light, A., & Strayer, W. (2000). Determinants of college completion: School quality or student
ability? Journal of Human Resources, 299-332.
Lochner, L., & Moretti, E. (2004). The effect of education on crime: Evidence from prison
inmates, arrests, and self-reports. American Economic Review,94(1), 155-189.
Loewenstein, G., Sunstein, C. R., & Golman, R. (2014). Disclosure: Psychology changes
everything. Economics, 6, 391-419.
Long, B. T. (2004). Does the format of an aid program matter? The effect of in‐kind tuition
subsidies.” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 767‐782.
Long, B. T. (2008). What is known about the impact of financial aid? Implications for policy.
National Center for Postsecondary Research (NCPR) Working Paper.
Long, B. T., & Riley, E. (2007). Financial aid: A broken bridge to college access?. Harvard
Educational Review, 77(1), 39-63.
Long, M. C. (2004). College applications and the effect of affirmative action. Journal of
Econometrics, 121(1), 319-342.
Martorell, P., & McFarlin, I. J. (2011). Help or hindrance? The effects of college remediation on
academic and labor market outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2),
436–454.
Martorell, P., McCall, B.P., & McFarlin, I. (2014). Do public tuition subsidies promote college
enrollment? Evidence from community college taxing districts in Texas. U.S. Census
Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP- 14-32. Available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2523453.
Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. (2015). Borrowing trouble? Student loans, the cost of borrowing,
and implications for the effectiveness of need-based grant aid (No. w20850). National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Matthews, C., Schooley, K., & Vosler, N. (2011). Implementation of a post-graduation summer
counseling intervention program for college-going seniors, Fulton County Schools.
Strategic Data Project Capstone Report. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Center for
Education Policy Research.
McFarlin, I. (2007, April). Do public subsidies promote college access and completion?
Evidence from community college districts. Paper presented at National Bureau of
52

Economic Research Education Meeting, Washington, D.C.
Mettler, S. (2014). How U.S. higher education promotes inequality—and what can be done to
broaden access and graduation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, Scholars Strategy
Network.
Milkman, K.L., Beshears, J., Choi, J.J., Laibson, D, & Madrian, B.C. (2012). Following through
on good intentions: The power of planning prompts. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 17995. Cambridge, MA.
Oakley, E. O. (2014). Testimony of Eloy Ortiz Oakley, Superintendent-President of Long Beach
City College, to the U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
on “Strengthening minority serving institutions: Best practices and innovations for
student success,” March 13, 2014.
http://www.help.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Oakley_Updated.pdf
Oreopoulos, P., & Dunn, R. (2013). Information and college access: Evidence from a
randomized field experiment. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(1), 3-26.
Owen, L. (2012). Narrowing the college opportunity gap: Helping students and families
navigate the financial aid process. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Oregon State
University.
Pallais, A. (2009). Taking a chance on college: Is the Tennessee Education Lottery Scholarship
Program a winner? Journal of Human Resources, 44(1), 199-222.
Pallais, A. (2015). Small Differences that Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College. Journal of Labor
Economics. 33(2):493-520.

Planty, M., Hussar, W., Snyder, T., Kena, G., KewalRamani, A., Kemp, J., Bianco, K., Dinkes,
R. (2009). The condition of education 2009 (NCES 2009-081). National Center for
Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Washington, DC.
Radford, A. W. (2013). Top student, top school?: How social class shapes where valedictorians
go to college. University of Chicago Press.
Roderick, M., Nagaoka, J., Coca, V. & Moeller, E. (2009). From high school to the future:
Making hard work pay off. Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Rosenbaum, J., Deil-Amen, R., & Person, A. (2006). After admission: From college access to
college success. New York: Russell Sage.
Rosinger, K. O. (2014, November). Financial aid award information and student enrollment and
borrowing decisions: Evidence from a randomized control trial. Paper presented at the
Association for Public Policy and Management Fall Conference, Albuquerque, NM.
Ross, R., White, S., Wright, J., & Knapp, L. (2013). Using behavioral economics for
53

postsecondary success. Idea42.
Rothstein, R. (2015). The Racial Achievement Gap, Segregated Schools, and Segregated
Neighborhoods: A Constitutional Insult. Race and Social Problems 7(1): 21-30.
Saavedra, A.R. (2011). The academic impact of enrollment in International Baccalaureate
Diploma Programs: A case study of Chicago Public Schools. RAND Corporation,
Working Paper No. WR-867-EDU.
Scott-Clayton, J. & and Park, R. S. (2015, February). Assessing the impact of Pell Grants on
community college students: Preliminary evidence. Presentation at the Association for
Education Finance and Policy annual meeting, Washington, DC.
Scott-Clayton, J. & Rodriguez, O. (2015). Development, discouragement, or diversion? New
evidence on the effects of college remediation policy. Education Finance and Policy, 10
(1): 4-45.
Scott-Clayton, J. (2011). On money and motivation: A quasi-experimental analysis of financial
incentives for college achievement. Journal of Human Resources 46 (3): 614–46.
Scott-Clayton, J., Crosta, P. M., & Belfield, C. R. (2014). Improving the targeting of treatment:
Evidence from college remediation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 36(3),
371-393.
Scrivener, S., Weiss, M. J., Ratledge, A., Rudd, T., Sommo, C. & Fresques, H. (2015).
Doubling graduation rates: Thee-year effects of CUNY's Accelerated Study in Associate
Programs (ASAP) for Developmental Education Students. MDRC: New York, NY.
URL: http://www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/doubling_graduation_rates_fr.pdf
Seftor, N., & Turner, S. (2002). Back to school: Federal student aid policy and adult college
enrollment. Journal of Human Resources 37 (2): 336–52.
Sherwin, J. (2012). Make me a match: Helping low-income and first-generation students make
good college choices. Policy Brief. MDRC.
Sjoquist, D. L., & Winters, J. V. (2012). Building the stock of college-educated labor revisited.
Journal of Human Resources, 47(1), 270-285.
Smith, J. (2013). The effect of college applications on enrollment. The BE Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy, 14(1), 151-188.
Smith, J., Hurwitz, M., & Avery, C. (2015). Giving college credit where it is due: Advanced
Placement exam scores and college outcomes (No. w21147). National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Smith, J., Hurwitz, M., & Howell, J. (2015). Screening mechanisms and student responses in
the college market. Economics of Education Review, 44, 17-28.

54

Smith, J., Pender, M., & Howell, J. (2013). The full extent of student-college academic
undermatch. Economics of Education Review, 32, 247-261.
Solis, A. (2015). Credit access and college enrollment. Paper presented at the 2015 meeting of
the American Economic Association, Boston, MA. Retrieved from
https://www.aeaweb.org/aea/2015conference/program/retrieve.php?pdfid=862
Speroni, C. (2011). Essays on the economics of high school to college transition programs and
teacher effectiveness (Doctoral dissertation). See Chapter 2, “High School Dual
Enrollment Programs: Are We Fast-Tracking Students Too Fast?” pp. 33-102. Columbia
University, New York, NY. URL:
http://academiccommons.columbia.edu/item/ac:174239.
Stanley, M. (2003). College education and the Mid-Century G.I. Bills. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118 (2): 671–708
Steinberg, L. (2008). A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking. Development
Review 28: 78-106.
Steinberg, L., Cauffman, E., Woolard, J., Graham, S., & Banich, M. (2009). Are adolescents
less mature than adults? Minors’ access to abortion, the juvenile death penalty, and the
alleged APA “Flip-Flop.” American Psychologist 64: 583-594.
Stephan, J. L., & Rosenbaum, J. E. (2013). Can high schools reduce college enrollment gaps
with a new counseling model?. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 35(2), 200219.
Thaler, R. H. & Mullainathan, S. (2008). "Behavioral Economics." The Concise Encyclopedia
of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty. Retrieved August 18, 2015 from the
World Wide Web: http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/BehavioralEconomics.html
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press.
Turner, L. J. (2014). The road to Pell is paved with good intentions: The economic incidence of
need-based student aid. University of Maryland working paper.
Turner, N. (2011). The effect of tax-based federal student aid on college enrollment. National
Tax Journal 64 (3): 839–62.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (2015). The Condition
of Education 2015 (NCES 2015-144).
Unlu, F., Yamaguchi, R., Bernstein, L., & Edmunds, J. (2010, March). Estimating impacts on
program-related subgroups using propensity score matching: Evidence from the Early
College High School Study. Presentation at the Society for Research on Educational
Effectiveness 2010 Spring Conference, Washington, D. C.
55

Walton, G.M., & Cohen, G.L. (2007). A question of belonging: Race, social fit, and
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92(1): 82-96.
Wiederspan, M. (2015 [this issue]). Denying loan access: The student-level consequences when
community colleges opt out of the Stafford Loan Program. Economics of Education
Review.
York, B. N., & Loeb, S. (2014). One step at a time: the effects of an early literacy text
messaging program for parents of preschoolers (No. w20659). National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Zhang, L., & Ness, E. C. (2010). Does state merit-based aid stem brain drain? Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32(2), 143-165.

56

