                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   A NEW DILEMMA: CAPITAL CONTROLS AND MONETARY POLICY IN SUDDEN
                           STOP ECONOMIES

                                        Michael B. Devereux
                                          Eric R. Young
                                           Changhua Yu

                                        Working Paper 21791
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21791


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2015




We thank seminar participants at the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research, the UBC macro-lunch,
and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank for comments. Devereux thanks SSHRC,
and the Royal Bank of Canada for financial support as well as support from ESRC award ES/1024174/1.
Young thanks the financial support and hospitality of the HKIMR and the Bankard Fund for Political
Economy at the University of Virginia. Yu thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China
71303044, and the financial support and hospitality of the HKIMR. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael B. Devereux, Eric R. Young, and Changhua Yu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A New Dilemma: Capital Controls and Monetary Policy in Sudden Stop Economies
Michael B. Devereux, Eric R. Young, and Changhua Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 21791
December 2015
JEL No. E44,E58,F38,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

The dangers of high capital flow volatility and sudden stops have led economists to promote the use
of capital controls as an addition to monetary policy in emerging market economies. This paper studies
the benefits of capital controls and monetary policy in an open economy with financial frictions, nominal
rigidities, and sudden stops. We focus on a time-consistent policy equilibrium. We find that during
a crisis, an optimal monetary policy should sharply diverge from price stability. Without commitment,
policymakers will also tax capital inflows in a crisis. But this is not optimal from an ex-ante social
welfare perspective. An outcome without capital inflow taxes, using optimal monetary policy alone
to respond to crises, is superior in welfare terms, but not time-consistent. If policy commitment were
in place, capital inflows would be subsidized during crises. We also show that an optimal policy will
never involve macro-prudential capital inflow taxes as a precaution against the risk of future crises
(whether or not commitment is available).


Michael B. Devereux                                 Changhua Yu
Department of Economics                             China Center for Economic Research
University of British Columbia                      National School of Development
997-1873 East Mall                                  Peking University
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1                               5 Yiheyuan Rd, Haidian,Beijing, 100871
CANADA                                              China
and NBER                                            changhuay@gmail.com
mbdevereux@gmail.com

Eric R. Young
University of Virginia
ey2d@virginia.edu
1        Introduction

    Recent experience of financial crises in many countries has altered the traditional support for fully

open international capital markets. Many emerging market economies have opened up their financial

markets in the last two decades and moved away from rigidly pegged exchange rates (see for instance Levy-

Yeyati and Sturzenegger, 2005; Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2008). Despite this move toward openness, these

countries have been subject to extremely volatile capital flows and crises associated with ‘sudden stops’ in

capital inflows (Bacchetta and van Wincoop, 2000; Kaminsky et al., 2005; Reinhart and Reinhart, 2009;

Fratzscher, 2012; Broner et al., 2013b). A new view has emerged suggesting that monetary policy alone

cannot adequately manage the external shocks facing small emerging economies and must be supplanted

with some type of capital control or macro-prudential policy (Farhi and Werning, 2012, 2014; Rey, 2015).

The central logic behind this recent consensus is that the welfare case for fully open capital markets

rests on a set of assumptions that fail to apply in contemporary international financial markets, so that

capital controls may constitute a second best optimal policy response. This new ‘orthodoxy’ promotes the

combination of capital controls and monetary policy as part of an optimal policy toolkit for open economies

(The Economist, 2013).

    Our paper revisits the case for capital controls in open economies with both financial frictions and

nominal rigidities. We employ a simple model of a small open economy subject to occasional ‘sudden

stops’. Monetary policy and capital controls are potentially useful as macroeconomic instruments. We

ask two simple questions: first, how useful is monetary policy in responding to financial crises associated

with ‘sudden stops’ in capital flows, ; and second, what are the benefits of capital controls in addition to

monetary policy?

    The combination of sticky prices and financial constraints that depend on asset prices offer the possi-

bility that monetary policy and capital controls may be used in tandem as part of an optimal policy. A

substantial empirical and theoretical literature makes the case that financial frictions render conventional

monetary policy tools less effective (see Cespedes et al., 2004; Devereux et al., 2006; Gertler et al., 2007;

Braggion et al., 2009).1 At the same time, as we noted, a series of recent papers have noted the possi-

bility that taxes on capital flows can correct pecuniary externalities associated with occasionally binding

borrowing constraints (Bianchi, 2011; Benigno et al., 2013; Bianchi and Mendoza, 2010, 2013; Jeanne and

    1
        Also see a recent survey by Frankel (2010).


                                                      1
Korinek, 2010). In principle, we might expect that these two policy levers would support each other as

part of an optimal policy package.

    Before answering these questions, however, we place one further requirement on the policy design - we

assume that policymakers lack commitment ability, so that both monetary and macro prudential policies

have to be ‘time-consistent’ in the sense that previous policy promises will only be kept if they are in

the interests of current decision makers (Klein et al., 2008). Subject to this requirement, we explore the

combination of optimal monetary and capital controls policies in an environment with financial frictions

and a combination of both internal and external shocks.

    The central results of the paper are two-fold and quite striking. First, we find that there is a role for

monetary policy to depart from the conventional optimal rule of maintaining strict price stability in face

of ‘sudden stop’ crises which lead to binding borrowing constraints in the baseline model. In such states

of the world, it is optimal for policy makers to provide some monetary stimulus and to allow a jump in

domestic inflation. The degree to which monetary policy can usefully respond to sudden stops depends

on how extensive are nominal rigidities - with sticky prices and wages, a highly active monetary policy is

both effective and optimal. Second, we find that in a time-consistent optimal policy equilibrium, policy

makers will find it optimal to impose capital inflow taxes in face of sudden stop crises. Such taxes will

relax the external borrowing constraint and partly cushion the economy from the negative impact of the

crises. But despite this positive effect, we find that capital controls are in fact welfare reducing. The time

consistent equilibrium in which policy makers apply capital controls leads to excessively low asset prices

and inefficiently low levels of net external debt accumulation by the small economy, relative to a policy

outcome without capital controls.

    In an environment where the policymaker lacks commitment, there is no guarantee that optimal policies

maximize welfare, even if the policy-maker is purely benevolent. This observation is the same point that

was first made by Kydland and Prescott (1977), but is implicit in a vast literature on dynamic public

finance and macroeconomic models of monetary and fiscal policy.2 In our case, the key element underlying

the problem of time-consistency is attributable to the nature of the borrowing constraints facing the

small economy. As in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Iacoviello (2005), we assume that the collateral

constraint on borrowing is tied to the value of assets that obtains when the debt comes due. As a result,

   2
     For instance see time-consistent monetary policy in Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983); time-consistent fiscal
policy in Benhabib and Rustichini (1997), Klein et al. (2008), Farhi et al. (2012) and others.


                                                           2
a policymaker who is concerned with macro prudential tools must focus on easing borrowing constraints

by targeting future asset prices. With full commitment in policy-making, this targeting would be done by

promising to take actions in the future. But in the absence of commitment, the only tool available is to

impose capital controls on current inflows in times of crises. In an equilibrium where all policymakers take

these actions, capital controls are excessive and the economy undertakes too little borrowing.

    The message of the paper is clear. Capital flow controls present an appealing additional policy lever

for emerging market countries, particularly because they directly attack the sources of inefficiency in

international capital markets. But without commitment in policy making, capital controls involve a severe

problem of time inconsistency, leading to an outcome with excessive capital inflow taxes which is worse

than an outcome with unregulated (and inefficient) capital flows. While the new orthodoxy suggests that

in principle, capital controls may be a beneficial addition to policy, we argue that once we recognize the

strategic setting in which policy is made, capital controls are not desirable.

    How would the analysis differ if policy-makers had the ability to commit to an optimal policy? While

we do not fully characterize the solution to the model under commitment, we show that an optimal policy

with commitment should imply a subsidy to capital inflows during a crisis. But without commitment, as

we have noted, capital inflows are taxed during a crisis.

    Our analysis also has implications for the role of capital taxes as ‘macro-prudential’ policy. Should

capital inflows be taxed during normal times in order to reduce the severity of crises when the crisis

eventually hits? A number of recent papers have made the case for such macro prudential policy (see

for instance Korinek, 2011, Bianchi and Mendoza, 2013). In our model, surprisingly, we find that macro

prudential policy is never optimal, whether or not policy commitment is available.

    This paper contributes to two growing branches of literature. First, it is related to the literature on

the remedies for pecuniary externalities. During a financial crisis, the collateral constraint binds, which

reduces the value of collateral, leading to an even tighter constraint, but private agents do not internalize

this effect when issuing debt. This may lead to over borrowing in competitive equilibrium, relative to a

social planner’s outcome (Bianchi, 2011).3 Bianchi and Mendoza (2010) show that state-contingent capital

inflow taxes will prevent overborrowing, which can be interpreted as a form of Pigouvian taxation (Jeanne

and Korinek, 2010). When there exist ex post adjustments of production between tradable and nontradable
   3
     The overborrowing result is relative to the allocation chosen by a constrained social planner or regulator that faces the
same borrowing constraint; relative to an unconstrained or first-best allocation, the economy in Bianchi (2011) generates
severe underborrowing.


                                                              3
sectors, the economy could exhibit underborrowing relative to the constrained efficient outcome (Benigno

et al., 2013). Korinek (2011) provides a comprehensive review on borrowing and macroprudential policies

during financial crises. As for optimal capital controls, Bianchi and Mendoza (2013) and Benigno et al.

(2012, 2014) explore time-consistent macroprudential policy.4

    The most closely related paper to ours is Bianchi and Mendoza (2013). They also investigate the role

of optimal, time consistent capital controls in a model with occasionally binding constraints. Our paper is

distinguished from Bianchi and Mendoza (2013) in two dimensions. First of course we incorporate a useful

role for monetary policy. Second but more importantly, in our model, the constraint on borrowing depends

upon the expectation of the future (resale) value of assets, following the tradition of Kiyotaki and Moore

(1997) and Iacoviello (2005), whereas Bianchi and Mendoza (2013) use the current value of assets.5 The

different constraints lead to quite different incentives facing policymakers. Bianchi and Mendoza (2013),

identify an important role for a macro prudential tax; a capital inflow tax that is levied in good times, when

there is a positive probability of a binding constraint in the next period. Once a crisis occurs however,

the capital inflow tax is set close to zero. Moreover, this time consistent policy will always raise welfare in

their model. The reason is that a policymaker in their model needs to restrict capital inflows on the edge

of a crisis in order to sustain current asset prices, the value of collateral and access to international capital

market. By contrast we find that the policy maker will never use macro-prudential taxes - it is never

optimal to tax capital flows outside of a crisis. But when there is a sudden stop, the policy maker imposes

capital inflow controls to prop up the value of collateral assets in the future. But in an equilibrium, where

capital inflow controls are always used in a crisis, the price of capital and external borrowing are pushed

down so much that welfare is lower than that with unregulated capital markets.

    Our paper is also related to recent studies exploring monetary policy in the context of financial crises.

Rey (2015) and Passari and Rey (2015) present evidence that the global financial cycle constrains monetary

policy even under the flexible exchange rate regime when capital flows are unrestricted, and recommend

the use of capital flow management. Bruno and Shin (2015a,b) provide a linkage between cross-border

bank capital flows and global factors, particularly US monetary policy. Farhi and Werning (2012, 2014)
   4
      Korinek and Simsek (2013) study an aggregate demand externality at the zero lower bound, wherein the inability of the
nominal interest rate to drop below zero when needed to stimulate consumption creates a positive role for macroprudential
policy. Since their paper is in a closed-economy setting the particular policies they advocate are quite different from ones that
would arise in our model. In any case, our economy does not encounter the ZLB given a reasonable inflation target, so we can
safely abstract from the issues they raise.
    5
      Either constraint can be motivated by an underlying microeconomic model of lending with limited enforcement. It is an
open question what type of constraint fits the data best.


                                                               4
investigate optimal capital controls and monetary policy in a Gali and Monacelli (2005) type of small open

economy model with risk premium shocks, and show that capital controls help restore monetary autonomy

in a fixed exchange rate regime and work as terms of trade manipulation in a flexible exchange rate regime.6

The most related papers on exchange rate policy are Fornaro (2015) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2015).

Fornaro (2015) considers a small open economy similar to ours but focuses on simple policy rules, whereas

our paper investigates the optimal monetary policy and optimal capital controls. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe

(2015) study a model with fixed exchange rates, downward nominal wage rigidity, and free capital mobility.

In their paper, a correctly scaled devaluation can eliminate the effects of wage rigidity. In contrast, our

paper starts with a standard small open economy New Keynesian model with sticky prices and/or wages.

The pecuniary externality arises from collateralized borrowing, which cannot be completely undone by

monetary policy. This opens the possibility of exploring the combination of monetary policy and capital

controls in our paper. The novel result of our paper is that while the case for the benefits of capital controls

as a supplement to monetary policy is present in our model, the end result is that the use of capital controls

leads to worse outcomes in equilibrium.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the baseline model with sticky prices and

characterizes the competitive equilibrium under a certain set of policy. Section 3 characterizes allocations

under optimal monetary policy and optimal capital controls. Section 4 provides a simplified finite-period

model and discusses the time-inconsistency problem in optimal capital controls. Section 5 calibrates the

model and section 6 quantitatively conducts the positive and normative analysis of the baseline model.

Section 7 extends the baseline model by allowing sticky prices and sticky wages. The last section concludes.



2       The model

    We consider a monetary version of a small open economy akin to Mendoza (2010) and Cespedes, Chang

and Velasco (2004). There exist infinitely lived firm-households with a unit measure in a small country.

Competitive domestic firms import intermediate inputs and hire domestic labor and physical capital to

produce wholesale goods. These wholesale goods are differentiated into various varieties by domestic

monopolistically competitive final goods producers, which are then aggregated by competitive bundlers

into consumption composites. These composites either are consumed by domestic households or exported
    6
    Capital controls as terms of trade manipulation are first explored by Costinot et al. (2014) in a two-country deterministic
endowment economy.


                                                              5
to the rest of the world. International financial markets are incomplete. Domestic households can trade

only foreign currency denominated, non-state contingent bonds with foreigners.

     Wholesale good production takes a form of Cobb-Douglas production


                                              Mt = At (YF,t )αF Lαt L KtαK ,                                          (1)


with αF + αL + αK ≤ 1. Mt denotes the production of wholesale good, At is country-wide exogenous

technological shock, YF,t represents imported intermediate inputs, Lt labor demand and Kt physical capital.
                                                                                  ∗ ) is exogenously given
     Suppose that the price of intermediate inputs in the rest of world (denoted PF,t

to the small economy. We posit that foreign demand for domestic consumption composites, Xt , is given

by
                                                                      −ρ
                                                               Pt
                                                 Xt =                        ζt∗ ,                                    (2)
                                                              Et Pt∗

ζt∗ stands for a foreign demand, Et represents the nominal exchange rate, and Pt∗ is the foreign CPI price
                                                          ∗ = 1. ρ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution
level, which we normalize to unity hereafter and so does PF,t

between imports and locally produced goods in the foreign consumption basket.7 The share of expenditures

in the foreign country (the rest of world) on imports from the home country remains small enough to be

ignored in the analysis.


2.1      Firm-households

     A representative firm-household has preferences given by

                                                        +∞
                                                        X
                                                   E0         β t U (ct , lt ),                                       (3)
                                                        t=0

                                                                                        ∗
where E0 stands for mathematical expectations conditional on information up to date 0. Rt+1 denotes the
                                                                                              ∗
foreign real interest rate. We assume that the subjective discount factor is constrained by βRt+1 < 1 to

generate an equilibrium where firm-households are net borrowers in the deterministic steady state. The




     7
     This foreign demand function can be derived from a world economy as of Gali and Monacelli (2005). ρ characterizes the
elasticity of substitution among varieties produced in the world.


                                                                6
period utility function takes the GHH (Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffman, 1988) form

                                                                               1−σ
                                                                        l1+ν
                                                             
                                                                 ct − χ 1+ν
                                                                        t
                                                                                      −1
                                            U (ct , lt ) =                                 .                                (4)
                                                                        1−σ

    Similar to Mendoza (2010), households can borrow from abroad to finance consumption and imported

intermediate inputs. Borrowing must be undertaken in foreign currency.8 Borrowing from abroad requires

physical capital kt+1 as collateral:

                                                                                                 
                                         ∗                        ∗                   Qt+1 kt+1
                                  ϑYF,t PF,t (1   + τN,t ) −     Bt+1   ≤ κt Et                       ,                     (5)
                                                                                        Et+1

 ∗
Bt+1 stands for domestic savings in dollar terms at the end of period t. The term τN,t captures the presence
                                                                               ∗ (1 + τ
of a fiscal tax on intermediate imports, which is discussed below. Hence YF,t PF,t     N,t ) represents the

total expenditure on intermediate inputs in terms of the foreign good, and ϑ measures the fraction of

imported inputs YF,t which are financed in advance. Qt+1 denotes the nominal capital price in domestic

currency units, and kt+1 is the capital that the household accumulates in period t. The parameter κt

characterizes the loan-to-value ratio in the spirit of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). The interpretation of (5)

is that the collateralized expected foreign currency value of the capital stock brought into the next period

must be at least as great as the foreign currency value of household intertemporal borrowing plus the

working capital loans that households take out within period t to finance intermediate imports.

    Firm-households are equal owners of domestic firms and consequently they make identical consumption

and borrowing decisions. We write the decisions for the wholesale good producer explicitly. The determi-

nation of other factors and products can be obtained from the maximum of the representative firm’s profits

in the corresponding competitive factor and product markets, which are omitted in the firm-household’s

budget constraint. The representative firm-household faces the budget constraint

                                          ∗ E
                                  Bt+1 Bt+1   t
              Pt ct + Qt kt+1 +        +   ∗    (1 − τc,t ) ≤ Wt lt + kt (RK,t + Qt ) + Bt + Bt∗ Et + Tt
                                  Rt+1   Rt+1



     8
       Empirical evidence shows that emerging economies borrow primarily in foreign currency from international investors (for
instance see, Jeanne, 2003) and do so using short term bonds (see Broner, Lorenzoni and Schmukler, 2013a). In the literature
this situation is called ‘liability dollarization’ and plays an important role in the financial accelerator that leads to sudden
stops in our model. If bonds were denominated in local currency, during a sudden stop the value of outstanding debt would
fall and mitigate the effects of the crisis.


                                                                    7
                                                                    ∗
                                                                                           
                      + PM,t M (YF,t , Lt , Kt ) − (1 + τN,t )YF,t PF,t Et − Wt Lt − RK,t Kt + Dt .                           (6)

The left-hand side of the equation displays consumption expenditures Pt ct , purchases of capital Qt kt+1 ,

bond purchases denominated in domestic currency Bt+1 /Rt+1 , (Rt+1 is the domestic nominal interest rate)
                ∗ E /R∗ . As in the literature (Bianchi and Mendoza, 2010; Farhi and Werning, 2012;
and in dollars Bt+1 t t+1

Farhi and Werning, 2014), we assume that the government subsidizes foreign bond purchases at the rate of

τc,t . Hence τc,t > 0 is equivalent to a tax on foreign borrowing (if τc,t is negative this represents a subsidy

to foreign borrowing). The right-hand side shows various income sources, including labor income Wt lt ,

(Wt is the nominal wage) gross return on capital kt (RK,t + Qt ), (RK,t is the marginal product of capital)

gross return on domestic bond holdings Bt , foreign savings Bt∗ Et , lump-sum transfers from government

Tt , profits from wholesale good producers PM,t Mt − (1 + τN,t )YF,t Et − Wt Lt − RK,t Kt and profits from

other firms Dt . As noted above, we assume that wholesale producers are taxed by the fiscal authorities on

their purchases of imported intermediate inputs at rate τN,t . This tax is designed to exploit the country’s

implicit monopoly power in its export good, and is explicitly derived in the Appendix C.9 The wholesale

good production Mt is given by equation (1). We assume that working capital loans incur no interest rate

payments as in Bianchi and Mendoza (2013).

    Let µt et be the Lagrange multiplier associated with the collateral constraint (5). Let a lower case price

variable denote the real price, i.e., qt = Qt /Pt , wt = Wt /Pt . The consumer price index inflation rate

is defined as πt = Pt /Pt−1 and the real exchange rate (also the terms of trade) et = Et Pt∗ /Pt . Higher

et implies depreciation of the real exchange rate. We can derive the first order conditions for household

optimality as follows. The optimality condition for labor supply reads


                                                               wt = χltν .                                                    (7)


The optimality conditions for the household’s portfolio choice over capital, domestic and foreign currency

bonds yield
                                                                                         
                                                 qt+1 et         Uc (t + 1)
                             qt = µt κt Et              + Et β              (rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) ,                                (8)
                                                  et+1             Uc (t)
                                                                           
                                                           Uc (t + 1) Rt+1
                                                  1 = Et β                    ,                                               (9)
                                                             Uc (t) πt+1
   9
     We see this assumption as essentially technical, designed to isolate the terms of trade externality from the pecuniary
externality specific to the borrowing constraints. In the analysis below, τN,t will be set at a level so that in normal times, the
policy authorities have no further incentive to manipulate the economy’s terms of trade.


                                                                   8
                                                                          
                                             ∗          Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗
                              1 − τc,t = µt Rt+1 + Et β                Rt+1 ,                            (10)
                                                          Uc (t)    et

where Uc (t) denotes the marginal utility of consumption. Condition (8) says that in choosing to acquire

an additional unit of capital, the household trades off the cost of the capital against the expected benefit

in terms of the returns and capital gains next period, adjusted by the stochastic discount factor, and in

addition, there is a current benefit in terms of a looser borrowing constraint when µt > 0, which depends

on the expected next period price of capital. Condition (10) indicates that the cost of purchasing a foreign
                           ∗
currency bond (1 − τc,t )/Rt+1 must be weighed against the expected benefit next period in terms of the

discounted return, plus the additional benefit which comes from a looser borrowing constraint when µt > 0.

   The optimal demand for intermediate inputs, labor, and capital for the wholesale firm-household is

given implicitly by
                                           αF Mt
                                    pM,t         = (1 + τN,t )et (1 + ϑµt ) ,                            (11)
                                            YF,t

                                                       αL Mt
                                                pM,t         = wt ,                                      (12)
                                                        Lt
                                                      αK Mt
                                               pM,t         = rK,t .                                     (13)
                                                       Kt

Note that (11) implies that the cost to the household-firm of importing intermediate inputs is increasing

in the real exchange rate (which is also equivalent to the terms of trade in this setting) and also increasing

in the multiplier on the collateral constraint µt . Since intermediate inputs must be partially financed by

borrowing, a tightening of the collateral constraint increases the real cost of importing for the firm. wt

denotes the real cost of labor faced by a firm.

   Finally, we can establish that the complementary slackness condition becomes

                                                                            
                                         qt+1 kt+1
                           et µt κt Et               + b∗t+1 − ϑ(1 + τN,t )YF,t = 0,                     (14)
                                           et+1

                                         ∗
where we have replaced the nominal bond Bt+1 with real bonds b∗t+1 = Bt+1
                                                                      ∗ /P ∗ .
                                                                          t



2.2   Final good producers

   There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive final good producers with measure one, each of

which differentiates wholesale goods into a variety of final goods. Varieties are imperfect substitutes, and



                                                          9
final good producers have a monopoly power over their varieties. All consumption varieties are aggregated

into a consumption composite via a CES aggregator with elasticity of substitution θ.

    Let Pt (i) be the price of variety Yt (i). Cost minimization implies that the price for the consumption

composite can be written as
                                                                                              1
                                                          Z       1                        1−θ
                                                                                1−θ
                                                  Pt =                 (Pt (i))       di              ,
                                                               0

and the demand for variety Yt (i) reads

                                                                                   −θ
                                                                           Pt (i)
                                                        Yt (i) =                          Yt .                                                     (15)
                                                                            Pt

    The technology employed by a firm i is linear


                                                              Yt (i) = Mt (i).                                                                     (16)


    Firms set prices in terms of domestic currency (whether for domestic sales or export). They can reset

their prices each period but suffer an asymmetric price adjustment cost. Profits per period gained by firm

i equals total revenues net of wholesale prices and of price adjustment costs

                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                           Pt (i)
                          DH,t (i) ≡ (1 + τH ) Pt (i)Yt (i) − PM,t Yt (i) − φ                                               Yt Pt ,
                                                                                                          Pt−1 (i)

                                                                       
                                                              Pt (i)
with asymmetric price adjustment cost φ                      Pt−1 (i)       following Varian (1975) and Kim and Ruge-Murcia

(2009)                                                                                      
                             
                                  Pt (i)
                                                      exp γ PPt−1
                                                                t (i)
                                                                   (i) − π    − γ    Pt (i)
                                                                                    Pt−1 (i) − π   −1
                         φ                      ≡ φP
                                 Pt−1 (i)                                                 γ2

where π is the inflation target and τH denotes a subsidy rate by the government in order to undo the

monopoly power of final good producers. In the price adjustment cost function φ(·), φP characterizes the

Rotemberg price adjustment cost (see Rotemberg, 1982) and γ captures the asymmetry of price adjustment

cost. When γ > 0, the price adjustment displays a pattern of upward rigidity, while γ < 0 is for downward

rigidity.10

                                                                                                                  2
  10                                                                                      φP        Pt (i)
       One can show that the second-order approximation to φ(·) is                         2       Pt−1 (i)
                                                                                                              −π        , which is exactly the Rotemberg
quadratic price adjustment cost. The asymmetry of price adjustment cost follows from the third-order component of φ(·),
                 3
φP γ    Pt (i)
 6     Pt−1 (i)
                −π .


                                                                           10
   Firm i solves
                                                            +∞
                                                                                  !
                                                            X            Ph
                                         max           Eh            Λh,t DH,t (i) ,
                                     {Pt (i),Yt (i)}                     Pt
                                                               t=h

subject to demand for variety i (15) and the production technology (16). The stochastic discount factor is

given by Λh,t = β t−h Uc (t)/Uc (h) with h ≤ t.

   In a symmetric equilibrium, all firms choose the same price, Pt (i) = Pt , when resetting their prices.

Consequently, the supply of each variety is identical: Yt (i) = Yt . The optimality condition for price-setting

can be simplified as

                                                                      exp (γ(πt − π)) − 1
                       Yt [(1 + τH ) − θ (1 + τH − pM,t )] − φP Yt πt                     +
                                                                               γ
                                                                                                        (17)
                                               exp (γ(πt+1 − π)) − 1
                       Et Λt,t+1 φP πt+1 Yt+1                            = 0.
                                                         γ

   Real profits from intermediate producers are

                                         DH,t
                                dH,t ≡        = (1 + τH )Yt − pM,t Yt − φ(πt )Yt
                                          Pt                                                              (18)
                                     = Yt [(1 + τH ) − pM,t − φ(πt )] .


with
                                                   exp (γ (πt − π)) − γ (πt − π) − 1
                                 φ(πt ) = φP
                                                                  γ2

Notice that if there are no price adjustment costs, φP = 0, and no monopoly power for providing varieties,

i.e. τH = 1/(θ − 1) > 0, we then have pM,t = 1.


2.3    Market clearing conditions

   The labor market clearing condition implies that lt = Lt . Per capita consumption must equal total

consumption, so that ct = Ct . If we assume that foreigners don’t hold domestic currency denominated

bonds, then the domestic bond market equilibrium requires bt+1 = 0.

   The capital stock is in fixed supply. The domestic capital market clearing condition yields Kt+1 =

kt+1 = 1. The wholesale good market clearing condition reads

                                         Z    1                Z    1
                                                  Yt (i)di =            Mt (i)di = Mt .                   (19)
                                          0                     0




                                                                11
Consumption composites are either consumed by domestic households or exported to the rest of world


                                                Yt [1 − φ(πt )] = Ct + Xt .                                             (20)


    Finally, profits from final good producers are dt = dH,t .


2.4    Government policy

    To balance its budget, the government’s lump-sum transfer is given by

                                                                 τc,t b∗t+1 et
                                                                              
                                      Tt = − τH Yt + τN,t YF,t +       ∗         Pt                                     (21)
                                                                    Rt+1

The government chooses the production subsidy τH , the tax on imports, τN,t , and capital control τc,t . We

will look at various alternatives for monetary policy. In our baseline case, where monetary policy is not

chosen optimally, we assume an inflation targeting rule represented by a Taylor rule:

                                                           π απ  Y αY
                                                             t         t
                                              Rt+1 = R                        .                                         (22)
                                                            π         Y

A variable without a superscript denotes the value of that variable at the deterministic steady state.

    Combining firm-households’ budget constraints (6) with the relevant market clearing conditions and

taxation policy (21), we obtain that trade surpluses lead to net foreign asset accumulation:

                                                                 b∗t+1
                                                                           
                                                                          ∗
                                            Xt − et YF,t =          ∗  − bt et .                                        (23)
                                                                 Rt+1


2.5    Competitive equilibrium

    A competitive equilibrium consists of a sequence of allocations {Lt , Ct , YF,t , Yt , Kt+1 , b∗t+1 }, and a

sequence of prices {wt , qt , µt , Rt+1 , rK,t , et , πt , pM,t }, for t = · · · , 0, 1, 2, · · · , given fiscal subsidies τH

and τN,t , monetary policy Rt+1 and capital inflow policy τc,t chosen by the fiscal authority and monetary

authority, such that (a) allocations solve households and firms’ problem given the public policy and (b)

prices clear corresponding markets. The full set of conditions for a competitive equilibrium is set out in

Appendix A.




                                                             12
3        Optimal policy

3.1      Optimal monetary policy

     We first explore the environment where the policy-maker’s options are restricted solely to monetary

policy. The monetary authority solves a Ramsey planner’s problem to maximize a representative house-

hold’s lifetime utility. The optimal policy is implemented only by a monetary policy instrument; e.g. the

nominal interest rate, within a regime of flexible exchange rates. Here we focus on the time-consistent

optimal policy under discretion and look for a Markov-perfect equilibrium.11 The current planner takes as

given the decisions of future planners but internalizes how those choices depend on the future debt level

b∗t+1 chosen today.

     Assume that the constant subsidy rate τH is set at τH = 1/(θ − 1) to undo the monopoly power of

differentiated producers in an economy without uncertainty. Likewise, we assume that the export tax is

set at the rate τN,t = 1/(ρ − 1) to offset the terms of trade monopoly.12 The monetary authority chooses

the paths for inflation rates πt to maximize a representative household’s life-time utility. Let the value

function for a representative domestic firm-household be V (b∗t , Zt ) where Zt represents the set of exogenous

state variables. The problem faced by the government reads,

                                                                                                         L1+ν
                      V (b∗t , Zt ) = max U (C̃t ) + βEt V (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), with C̃t ≡ Ct − χ             t
                                     {Ξ}                                                                 1+ν

with

                                 Ξ ≡ {Lt , Ct , Yt , YF,t , b∗t+1 , qt , µt , rK,t , et , pM,t , πt },

subject to the set of competitive equilibrium conditions from Appendix A.


3.2      Optimal monetary and capital control policies

     We now contrast the above problem with an expanded policy menu where the policy maker chooses

both monetary policy and a policy for capital flow taxes. Again assume that the constant subsidy rate τH is

set at τH = 1/(θ − 1) to undo the monopoly power in an economy without uncertainty and that an optimal

export tax τN,t = 1/(ρ − 1) is in place. Focus again on the time-consistent optimal Markov/Ramsey policy
    11
     Non-Markovian equilibria are very difficult to compute. For a study of non-Markovian optimal policy in a closed-economy
New Keynesian model, see Dong (2015).
  12
     See Appendix C for an explicit derivation of these tax/subsidy rates.


                                                                 13
under discretion. But we now allow the optimal policy to be implemented both by a monetary policy

instrument and a capital inflow tax τc,t . The problem facing the planner with the option of capital taxes

is equivalent to the optimal monetary policy problem except that the Euler equation for foreign bonds is

omitted as a constraint. Then, given the solution to the extended planners problem, the optimal capital

inflow tax τc,t can then be inferred from the condition

                                                                              
                                               ∗            Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗
                              τc,t = 1 −   µt Rt+1   − Et β                R     .
                                                              Uc (t)    et t+1


4    A simplified example

    Before we present the solution to the full model, it is instructive to examine a simple finite-horizon

example to build intuition for the results in the quantitative model. We assume a common world good,

so there is no terms of trade movement, all prices are perfectly flexible, so there is no scope for monetary

policy, and no monopolistic competition in domestic retail production, allowing us to ignore the distortion

due to markup pricing. Our focus is solely on the comparison of capital inflow taxes/subsidies with and

without commitment, when borrowing is restricted by collateral constraints.

    There are only four time periods t = 0, 1, 2, 3. In period t = 0, 1, household borrowing has to be

collateralized by domestic physical capital, whose values are endogenously determined by domestic markets.

In period t = 2, borrowing also is restricted by a collateral requirement but the value of collateral is

exogenously given. In period t = 3, no borrowing is undertaken, so there is no collateral constraint.

    The advantage of allowing an exogenous credit limit in period t = 2 is that the ‘financial accelerator’

operates only in the first two periods t = 0, 1. In the last period t = 3, households repay all outstanding debt

and consume all remaining income, so production, imports, labor supply and production are determined

independently of credit conditions, and given production income, consumption only depends on the the

level of debt inherited from period t = 2. Physical capital depreciates completely after production in

the last period. The structure of the model implies that decisions in the last two periods pin down the

capital price in period t = 1. Finally, the policy instrument available to a social planner is a capital inflow

tax/subsidy τc,t .

    The model here is a finite period special case of the main model of section 2. The representative




                                                         14
firm-household has utility defined by                  ( t=3                      )
                                                        X
                                                  E0           β t U (ct , lt )
                                                         t=0

The budget constraints for periods t = 0, 1, 2 are given by

                             b∗t+1
            qt kt+1 + ct +         (1 − τc,t ) = qt kt + b∗t + [AF (kt , lt , YF,t ) − p∗F YF,t ] + Tt , t = 0, 1, 2
                              R∗

and budget constraint in the last period t = 3 is


                                        c3 = b∗3 + [AF (k3 , l3 , YF,3 ) − p∗F YF,3 ]


   The household faces a collateral constraint in the first two periods analogous to those described in the

main model.

                                    κt Et (qt+1 kt+1 ) ≥ −b∗t+1 + ϑp∗F YF,t , t = 0, 1

   In period t = 2, the collateral constraint is described by:


                                             κt q̄ ≥ −b∗t+1 + ϑp∗F YF,t , t = 2


where q̄ is constant and defined in Appendix B. The initial debt condition b∗0 is fixed.

   The social planner chooses a capital flow tax/subsidy τc,t and returns the revenue accrued to the

household with a lump-sum transfer. In period t = 2, there is no benefit to a capital tax, so the planner

will choose τc,2 = 0.

   We compare outcomes where policymakers can commit to a sequence of capital flow taxes/subsidies at

t = 0 to one where policy is made with discretion recursively at times t = 1 and t = 0. It is also revealing

to define a first-best outcome where borrowing may be undertaken without any financial frictions at all.

The Appendix B describes the detailed conditions which define each policy outcome.

   We assume that households have an incentive to front-load consumption; i.e. βR∗ < 1. In addition,

assume perfect foresight, so all shocks are known at time t = 0. In the first best equilibrium, production,

income and employment are constant because of GHH preferences. Any pre-existing debt is paid down

over time. Since βR∗ < 1, in the first-best equilibrium, household consumption decreases over time as well.

   In the competitive equilibrium, with zero capital taxes, κt and initial debt are set so that the borrowing


                                                               15
constraint binds for period t = 0, 1, 2.        13


    Figure 1 illustrates the solution to the finite period model in the competitive equilibrium with zero

capital taxes, compared to the first best outcome. The economy begins with initial assets b∗0 = −0.2, and

debt must be zero at the end of period t = 3, so in all cases, debt must be drawn down before the end

period. In the first best case, labor supply, imported intermediates and output are constant across periods,

and effective consumption has a slight downward sloping profile. Debt is reduced evenly across periods

and is zero at the end of period t = 3. The price of capital starts high and falls smoothly over time, since

capital is worth nothing in the last period.

    In a competitive equilibrium, households cannot issue new debt in the amount required to sustain the

first-best consumption path. As a result, the collateral constraints become binding, effective consumption

is constrained, and labor supply and output are below the first-best level. The binding collateral constraint

reduces the household’s equilibrium discount factor, and pushes down the profile of asset prices, leading to

a further tightening of the debt constraints through the debt-deflation process. Figure 1 shows that in the

competitive equilibrium with binding constraints, the consumption profile is sharply upward sloping, the

Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint is positive and falling over time, leading to an inefficiently

low level of labor supply, imported intermediates, and output. Since the collateral constraint is gradually

relaxed, output and both inputs rise over time until at t = 3 they attain their first-best level. The asset

price falls below that of the first-best in all periods.14

    With commitment, the planner in period t = 0 can choose a sequence of consumption, borrowing,

employment and imported inputs to maximize household utility for t = 0, 1, 2, 3, constrained by the

collateral constraints, the firm-households profit maximization conditions, and the pricing equation for the

capital stock. This last equation can be represented as follows for periods t = 0, 1 and t = 2, respectively:

                                                                    
                                          Uc (t + 1)
                          qt = Et       β            (rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) + µt κt Et {qt+1 } , t = 0, 1                        (24)
                                            Uc (t)

   13
       We set the leverage parameter to κt = 0.4 for t = 0, 1, 2 and initial assets b∗0 = −0.2. Structural parameter values
are the same as those in the infinite-period model (see table 3) except that αF = 0.16 and ϑ = 0.5, which will be described
in detail later. The parameter governing the share of working capital is set to ϑ = 0.5, which is much lower than that in
the infinite-period model. The reason is that the capital price in the four-period model is much lower than that in the full
dynamic model. The import share is set to αF = 0.16, and αK = 1 − αF − αL , to make the graphs more visible. Alternative
parameterizations do not change the qualitative results.
   14
      Katagiri, Kato and Tsuruga (2013) show that in this model the optimal policy is to intervene to set the multiplier equal
to zero in any period in which it would otherwise be positive; that policy is time-consistent and implements the first-best
allocation. The size of the required interventions may be prohibitive for real economies where other constraints on policymakers
may become relevant; the size of the required transfers gets larger as the economy approaches the natural debt limit.


                                                              16
                             (a) Beginning−of−period Bond                                   (b) Effective consumption
                     0                                                           0.45


                 −0.05                                                            0.4


                  −0.1                                                           0.35


                 −0.15                                                            0.3


                  −0.2                                                           0.25
                         0       1          2             3            4                0        1               2      3
                                          Period                                                      Period
                                (c) Lagrange multiplier                                         (d) Capital price
                   0.4                                                            0.8


                   0.3                                                            0.6


                   0.2                                                            0.4


                   0.1                                                            0.2


                     0                                                             0
                         0           1                2                3                0        1               2      3
                                          Period                                                      Period
                                         (e) Import                                                  (f) Labor
                 0.115                                                          1.005

                  0.11                                                             1

                 0.105                                                          0.995

                   0.1                                                           0.99

                 0.095                                                          0.985

                  0.09                                                           0.98

                 0.085                                                          0.975
                         0           1                2                3                0        1               2      3
                                          Period                                                      Period

                                                          First best             Competitive equilibrium



Figure 1: A four-period model. Variables in the first best allocation and in the competitive equilibrium without
capital controls.




                                                                           17
                        (a) Beginning−of−period Bond                       (b) Effective consumption
             0.05                                               0.45


                0
                                                                 0.4

            −0.05
                                                                0.35
             −0.1

                                                                 0.3
            −0.15


             −0.2                                               0.25
                    0      1         2           3     4               0       1              2               3
                                   Period                                           Period

                           (c) Lagrange multiplier                             (d) Capital price
              0.8                                                0.7
                                                                                    First best
                                                                 0.6                Competitive equilibrium
              0.6                                                                   Discretion
                                                                 0.5                Commitment
                                                                 0.4
              0.4
                                                                 0.3

                                                                 0.2
              0.2
                                                                 0.1

                0                                                 0
                    0          1             2         3               0       1              2               3
                                   Period                                           Period




Figure 2: A four-period model. Variables in the competitive equilibrium without capital controls, optimal capital
controls with full commitment and optimal capital controls with discretion.




                                                           18
                                                                   
                                                 Uc (3)
                                       q2 = E2 β        (rK,3 + q3 ) .
                                                 Uc (2)

   The planner attempts to relax the collateral constraint so as to flatten the time profile of effective

consumption, relative to that of the competitive equilibrium. To achieve this goal, the planner needs to

raise q1 , since this is the asset price governing the first period collateral constraint. This can be done

by raising the equilibrium discount factor for t = 1, through a capital inflow subsidy applied in period

t = 1. The easing of the collateral constraint leads to a fall in the Lagrange multiplier for t = 0, which

encourages increased period t = 0 consumption, relative to period t = 1 consumption. Since the optimal

policy requires maintaining high period t = 1 consumption relative to t = 2 consumption, the planner

balances the capital inflow subsidy in period t = 1 with an inflow tax in period t = 0 (see the upper panel

of table 1).

   Figure 2 describes the full response of the economy in the commitment outcome. The pattern is non-

monotonic. Since an optimal policy to ease collateral involves subsidizing period t = 1 consumption, the

collateral constraint binds more tightly at t = 1 relative to the competitive equilibrium, while it is relaxed

in period t = 0 (relative to the competitive equilibrium). As a result, output and inputs rise relative to the

initial competitive equilibrium in the first period, but fall in the second period. But the policy is successful

at moving the consumption profile more in the direction of the first best outcome and leads to a uniformly

higher price of capital.

   Under discretion, the planner sets the capital control conditional on the state in each period (here

the level of borrowing and exogenous shocks). Unlike the case with commitment, the planner ignores the

impact of current policy on past planner decisions. Given debt levels at period t = 1, the planner will

choose allocations to maximize the representative agent’s welfare from t = 1 onwards. Then, taking the

policy functions implied by the planner’s decisions at t = 1 as given, the planner in t = 0 will choose an

optimal allocation for t = 0.

   Figure 2 describes the time path of the relevant variables under the discretionary policy as described

above. Again, the planner would like to maximize welfare of the representative agent by tilting the

effective consumption profile more to the present, relative to that in the competitive equilibrium. But

without commitment, the time t = 1 capital flow policy cannot be credibly determined by the planner at

time t = 0. Rather, the time t = 1 policy is chosen by the planner at time t = 1, taking the time t = 1

level of external debt and the currently binding collateral constraint as given. From the perspective of


                                                      19
                  Table 1: Optimal capital inflow tax and welfare in the simplified model
                  Panel A: Optimal capital inflow tax (%)
                                Commitment                                     Discretion
                  Period t = 0           14.8                                        14.8
                  Period t = 1          -53.0                                         4.1

                  Panel B: Welfare change relative to competitive equilibrium (%)
                  First Best    Commitment                                     Discretion
                  3.25                  0.32                                        -0.03
                  Notes: Welfare is measured by the certainty equivalence of effective consump-
                  tion.


      Table 2: Optimal capital inflow tax and welfare in a model with alternative credit constraints
                Panel A: Optimal capital inflow tax (%)
                                Commitment                                   Discretion
                Period t = 0              0.5                                        0.5
                Period t = 1            -11.1                                      -11.2

                  Panel B: Welfare change relative to competitive equilibrium (%)
                  First Best    Commitment                                     Discretion
                  0.78                  0.06                                         0.06
                  Notes: The collateral constraint takes a form of κt qt kt+1 ≥ −b∗t+1 + ϑp∗F YF,t
                  with t = 0, 1 as in Bianchi and Mendoza (2011, 2013). Welfare is measured by
                  the certainty equivalence of effective consumption.


time t = 1, the planner wishes to relax the t = 1 constraint. Any policy which targets the q1 price will not

directly affect the time t = 1 collateral constraint. Rather, the planner at time t = 1 attempts to increase

the asset price q2 by imposing a capital inflow tax, reducing the level of debt brought into period t = 2.

By increasing the equilibrium discount factor, for any initial level of debt −b∗1 that the time t = 1 planner

is faced with, she can raise q2 by reducing the debt level brought into period 2. So, instead of subsidizing

capital inflows in period 1, as the full commitment policy would do, the time consistent planner taxes

inflows at time 1.

   The time t = 0 policy can then be computed from the perspective of the planner at time 0, taking as

given the actions of the time t = 1 planner. Again, the optimal policy for the t = 0 planner is to attempt

to raise q1 . But she cannot do raise q1 now by committing to a capital subsidy in time t = 1, since she

doesn’t have this commitment ability. The optimal time consistent policy is to impose an even slightly

higher capital inflow tax in time t = 0 than that under commitment, which again by raising the equilibrium

discount factor, increases the the asset price q1 .


                                                        20
     When we put together the time path of capital taxes in the time consistent policy profile, we see,

remarkably, that the optimal policy under discretion leads to an effective consumption profile which is in

fact steeper than that of the untaxed competitive equilibrium, with a profile of borrowing for t = 0 and

t = 1 that is lower than the competitive equilibrium. The optimal policy under discretion exacerbates the

degree to which the collateral constraints restrict the household’s borrowing profile. Another way to see

this result is to note that the asset price at time t = 1, which determines the initial borrowing level, and

the time profile of consumption, is lower than that under commitment and also (marginally) lower than

that in a competitive equilibrium.

     Hence, a lack of commitment can lead to a capital control policy outcome that is not just ineffective,

but is perverse, resulting in a time profile of consumption, asset prices and debt that is further away from

the efficient level than would be a constrained competitive equilibrium without any policy at all. The

bottom panel of table 1 establishes this result in terms of welfare: relative to the competitive equilibrium,

welfare is higher under commitment and lower under discretion.

     It is instructive to compare these results to those that would apply if collateral were valued at the

current price qt (as in Bianchi and Mendoza, 2013, for instance), rather than the expected price tomorrow

Et [qt+1 ].15 . Table 2 presents the results for optimal capital taxes with this alternative collateral constraint.

Capital controls and welfare under discretion are almost the same as those under commitment in this case.

Under discretion, the policymaker at period t = 1 wants to relax the credit constraint by increasing the

asset price in that period, q1 . Subsidizing capital inflows can increase consumption in that period, which

in turn leads to a higher current asset price. This capital inflow subsidy is essentially equivalent to that

which would be chosen in period t = 0 under commitment.16



5        The Quantitative Model

5.1      Calibration

     The model period is one quarter. Table 3 lists parameter values in the baseline model. The preference

parameters are quite standard and taken from the literature. In normal times without a binding constraint,

    15
      The fact that kt rather than kt+1 serves as collateral in Bianchi and Mendoza (2013) does not make a significant difference,
since the only difference is whether a particular term is multiplied by β.
   16
      Note that Bianchi and Mendoza (2013) primarily focus on macroprudential policy, which requires capital flow taxes
applied in periods before financial distress occurs. We discuss the relevance of macroprudential taxes in our model below.


                                                               21
optimal inflation equals its target. Therefore, domestic nominal interest rates reflect domestic real interest

rates. We set the subjective discount factor β = 0.975, in line with the literature for emerging economies

(Uribe and Yue, 2006; Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007), implying an annual real interest rate of 10%. Relative

risk aversion is set to σ = 2 and the inverse of Frisch labor supply elasticity is ν = 1.

    The leverage shock κt determines the borrowing capacity in a country. We take a two-state Markov

chain to capture the leverage shock: κL = 0.35 and κH = 0.5. These two states are consistent with the

leverage change from pre-crisis period to crisis period for US nonfinancial corporations (Graham, Leary and

Roberts, 2014) and the corporate leverages in Asian emerging economies (IMF, 2014).17 The transition

matrix is given by                                                         
                                                        pL,L     1 − pL,L 
                                           Πl =                          .
                                                
                                                      1 − pH,H     pH,H

We set pL,L = 0.775 and pH,H = 0.975 such that the duration of a high leverage regime equals 40 quarters

and the unconditional probability of a low leverage regime is 10% (Bianchi and Mendoza, 2013), implying

that a typical leverage crisis will happen every ten years.

    Parameters in the production function are set to match imports share (15% of GDP, see Hanson,

2012), labor share (65% of GDP, see Mendoza, 2010) and the external debt-GDP ratio (40%) in emerging

economies before the Global Financial Crisis.18 Given the leverage specification above and relevant ratios,

we set αF = 0.13, αL = 0.57 and αK = 0.03. Parameter ϑ is set to 1.3, implying a share of working

capital 20% of GDP (Mendoza, 2010).19 The equilibrium labor supply in normal times (without credit

constraints) is normalized to be one, which implies that χ = 0.4.

    Nominal rigidity is introduced through a Rotemberg price adjustment cost. Price adjustment takes

around four quarters. We set φP = 76 as in Aruoba, Cuba-Borda and Schorfheide (2013), and assume a

small downward price rigidity γ = −100.20 Following the new Keynesian literature (Christiano, Eichen-

baum and Evans, 2005; Gali, 2015), we set the elasticity of varieties in both domestic and foreign con-

  17
      Mendoza (2010) uses a similar leverage κt = 0.2 and κt = 0.3 in his analysis.
  18
      Data from World Development Indicators show that, just before the onset of the Global Financial Crisis, many emerging
economies accumulated a large amount of external debt stocks, around 40% of Gross National Income. Data source: World
Development Indicators with indicator code: DT.DOD.DECT.GN.ZS.
   19
      Note that ϑ captures the role of working capital only when credit constraints bind. This value is higher than Mendoza
(2010) and Bianchi and Mendoza (2013), but is consistent with Uribe and Yue (2006).
   20
      The Rotemberg price adjustment cost relates the Calvo price stickiness via φP = α(θ −1)/((1−α)(1−αβ)) in an economy
without collateral constraints (Khan, 2005). 1 − α measures the probability of Calvo style price adjustment in each period.
Empricial evidence shows that prices rise faster than fall (Peltzman, 2000) and small price increases occur more frequently
than small price decreases for price changes (Chen, Levy, Ray and Bergen, 2008).


                                                            22
                               Table 3: Parameter values
Parameter                                                                       Values
Preference
β                  Subjective discount factor                                     0.975
σ                  Relative risk aversion                                             2
ν                  Inverse of Frisch labor supply elasticity                          1
χ                  Parameter in labor supply                                        0.4

Production
αF                 Intermediate input share in production                          0.13
αL                 Labor share in production                                       0.57
αK                 Capital share in production                                     0.03
ϑ                  Share of working capital                                         1.3
φP                 Price adjustment cost                                             76
γ                  Asymmetry of price adjustment cost                              -100
θ                  Elasticity of substitution among imported varieties               10
ρ                  Elasticity of substitution in the foreign countries               10

ζ                  Steady state of foreign demand shock                           0.101
R∗                 Steady state of world interest rate                            1.015
A                  Steady state of TFP shock                                          1

ρA                 Persistence of TFP shocks                                       0.95
σA                 Standard deviation of TFP shocks                               0.008
ρR                 Persistence of foreign interest rate shocks                      0.6
σR                 Standard deviation of foreign interest rate shocks           0.00623
pH,H               Transitional probability of high leverage to high leverage     0.975
pL,L               Transitional probability of low leverage to low leverage       0.775

Policy variables
απ , αY , αe       Coefficients in the Taylor rule
                                                                                    1
τH                 Subsidy to final goods producers                                θ−1
                                                                                    1
τN,t               Gross subsidy to exports                                        ρ−1




                                            23
sumption baskets as θ = ρ = 10, implying a price markup of 11%.

    The real exchange rate is normalized to be one in a deterministic steady state when the collateral

constraint binds, which requires ζt∗ = 0.101. Domestic productivity and the foreign interest rate each

follow an AR(1) process:

                                 ln(At+1 ) = (1 − ρA ) ln(A) + ρA ln(At ) + A,t+1

                                     ∗
                                 ln(Rt+1 ) = (1 − ρR ) ln(R∗ ) + ρR ln(Rt∗ ) + R,t+1

where mean productivity is normalized to be one A = 1 and the world quarterly real interest rate R∗ = 1.015

(Mendoza, 2010). We assume that the local productivity shock is uncorrelated with the global liquidity

shock.21 Following the literature (i.e., Backus, Kehoe and Kydland, 1992), we set the standard deviation

of the productivity shock to σA = 0.008 and its persistence to ρA = 0.95. The standard deviation of the

foreign interest rate is set to σR = 0.00623 and its persisence ρR = 0.60 (Rudebusch, 2002, 2006). We

then discretize the continuous AR(1) process into a two-state Markov chain based on Tauchen and Hussey

(1991) in the computation of the model.22


5.2    Solution method

    We solve the model using time iteration, as in Coleman (1990) and Benigno et al. (2013). When

necessary, we use a homotopy algorithm to solve the system of nonlinear equations (Eaves and Schmedders,

1999; Devereux and Yu, 2014). To solve the Ramsey problems we follow Benigno et al. (2012, 2014) and

solve the nonlinear optimization problem using feasible sequential quadratic programming.23 All functions

are approximated using B-splines. The Appendix G provides details about the algorithms solving the

model.




  21
     Allowing for correlated shocks would slightly change households’ precautionary savings but would not alter the main
messages in this paper.
  22
     Adding additional states into the Markov chain alters the quantitative answers but not the qualitative ones.
  23
     specifically, we use the NLPQLP routine developed by Schittkowski (2014), who we thank for providing the code.


                                                          24
6     Results

6.1    Competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting

    We first assume a simple policy rule whereby the central bank sets inflation equal to the target: i.e.

a price stability rule. This rule is equivalent to the Taylor rule described above with a very high weight

on inflation deviations from target.24 In order to put the policy comparisons on an equal basis, we also

assume that in the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting, the fiscal authority imposes the

constant taxes described above to correct the distortions due to monopoly power and the terms-of-trade

manipulation.25

    The model exhibits the characteristics of Fisherian debt-deflation described in previous literature. A

leverage shock that causes the collateral constraint to bind leads to a spike in µt , forcing debt to fall,

leading also to a fall in import demand, output, and current and expected future asset prices. This in turn

exacerbates the shock by further tightening the collateral constraint.

    These responses to a leverage shock are described in the Figure 3, which illustrates the policy mapping

from initial debt levels to the endogenous variables of the model, conditional on different shock outcomes.

The Figure illustrates the effect of a shift from the best shock to the worst shock, given the existing level

of assets b∗t .26 The panels of the Figure show the outcomes for current asset prices, the real exchange rate,

the Lagrange multiplier and borrowing. We see that both qt and Et (qt+1 /et+1 ) declines sharply when b∗t is

in the region where the constraint binds. In each panel we see that the collateral constraint is substantially

more likely to bind, for given b∗t , for the worst shock states. As the collateral constraint becomes binding,

there is a kink in the policy function. For instance, given the realization of κt a fall in b∗t which precipitates

a binding constraint causes the mapping b∗t+1 (b∗t ) to become flatter, as the collateral constraint reduces the

borrowing capacity of the economy. By contrast, the mapping from b∗t to production and output becomes

steeper, as the binding collateral constraint increases the effective cost of imports.

    What role does the real exchange rate play in the dynamics? From Figure 3, we see that as debt

   24
      While not optimal as defined by the time-consistent Ramsey problem, this rule is useful as a comparison since it represents
an optimal monetary policy in a wide variety of modern new Keynesian settings both in closed and open economies (e.g. Gali,
2015)
   25
      Thus, we are not considering the incentive to use monetary policy to substitute for these taxes, as is done by Costinot,
Lorenzoni and Werning (2014). It seems clear that such a substitution is welfare-reducing, since the nominal interest rate is
being put to a task it is not suited ideally to perform; instead, it is optimal to give the government an additional tool.
   26
      The ‘best shock’ refers to scenarios when domestic households face low foreign interest rate, high domestic productivity
and high domestic leverage, while the ‘worst shock’ is the case with high foreign interest rate, low domestic productivity and
low domestic leverage.


                                                               25
                                 Capital price                                     Real exchange rate
               1.2                                                 1.15


                 1                                                  1.1


               0.8                                                 1.05


               0.6                                                   1


               0.4                                                 0.95
                     −0.4   −0.35 −0.3      −0.25 −0.2                    −0.4   −0.35 −0.3     −0.25 −0.2
                                      b∗t                                                 b∗t
                              Lagrange multiplier                                        Bond
               0.8                                                −0.15
                                            CE Worst shock
                                            CE Best shock          −0.2
               0.6
                                                                  −0.25
               0.4
                                                                   −0.3
               0.2
                                                                  −0.35

                 0                                                 −0.4
                     −0.4   −0.35 −0.3      −0.25 −0.2                    −0.4   −0.35 −0.3     −0.25 −0.2
                                      b∗t                                                 b∗t



Figure 3: Policy functions in the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting. The ‘best shock’ refers
to policy functions when domestic households face low foreign interest rate, high domestic productivity and high
domestic leverage, while the ‘worst shock’ shows the case with high foreign interest rate, low domestic productivity
and low domestic leverage.




                                                             26
                                  Output                                      Capital price
                  1                                              5

                  0
                                                                 0
                −1

                −2
                                                               −5
                −3

                −4
                                                               −10
                −5

                −6                                             −15
                 −2       −1        0        1        2          −2      −1        0          1      2
                                  Period                                         Period

                            Real exchange rate                            Bond−GDP ratio (%)
                2.5                                            −33

                  2                                            −34

                                                               −35
                1.5
                                                               −36
                  1
                                                               −37
                0.5
                                                               −38
                  0                                            −39

               −0.5                                            −40
                  −2      −1        0        1        2          −2      −1        0          1      2
                                  Period                                         Period



Figure 4: Event analysis in the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting. A typical five-period event
window is chosen as: (a) no binding collateral constraints in the first two periods t = −2, −1, (b) binding constraint
at period t = 0 and (c) no restrictions in the last two periods t = 1, 2. The events in the figure are an average of
all event series in a simulation of 200, 000 periods. Each panel reports the percent deviation from the unconditional
mean of that variable except for the Bond-GDP ratio.




                                                          27
increases, for a given exogenous state, the economy experiences continued real exchange rate depreciation.

Intuitively, given higher initial debt levels, the path of consumption must be lower and lower, and in

order to replace this fall in demand for domestic goods, the real exchange rate must depreciate. This is

associated with a gradual fall in intermediate imports, employment and output. As debt rises above the

threshold where the collateral constraint binds, there is a sharper fall in consumption, and a much steeper

relationship between debt and the real exchange rate. The real exchange rate depreciation leads to a larger

fall in imported intermediates, exacerbating the negative impact of the binding borrowing constraint.

   But the real exchange rate plays an additional role with respect to the borrowing constraint. As we

noted above, the one period ahead expected value Et (qt+1 /et+1 ) begins to decline sharply as external debt

approaches the point where the collateral constraint is likely to bind. An expectation that the collateral

constraint will bind in the immediate future must also imply an anticipated sharp future real exchange

rate depreciation (as explained below), which leads to a tightening of the present collateral constraint.

   We can see the dynamics of a crisis in Figure 4, which presents a consecutive five-period window

of ‘event analysis’, where the event is defined in the following way: collateral constraints don’t bind in

the first two periods t = −2, −1, only bind at period t = 0 and there are no restrictions on collateral

constraints in the last two periods t = 1, 2. As the constraint binds in period 0 there is a sharp rise of the

Lagrange multiplier µ0 , which precipitates a persistent decline in foreign debt and a steep fall in imported

intermediates, labor, output, and consumption. The price of capital also falls sharply, and as noted, there

is a substantial real exchange rate depreciation.


6.2   Optimal monetary policy

   The analysis so far assumed that monetary policy follows a strict inflation targeting rule, whether the

economy is in crisis or not (whether the collateral constraint is binding or not). We now explore the time

consistent Ramsey optimal monetary policy in the model with occasionally binding collateral constraints.

As described in sub-section 3.1 above, for now, we focus attention solely on the use of a monetary policy

instrument (e.g. the nominal interest rate), assuming no possibility for a capital flow tax.

   Figures 5 describe the equilibrium policy functions for the time consistent Ramsey equilibrium (we also

include the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting for contrast). Again the Figure describes

the equilibrium mapping from net foreign assets to the endogenous variables, conditional on different values

for the leverage shocks, but now rather than representing the competitive equilibrium, this represents the

                                                     28
mapping implied by the optimal monetary rule. When the collateral constraint is not binding (in the

Figure this requires that b∗t ≥ −0.217(−0.385) for the worst (best) shock) the optimal monetary rule is

identical to the strict inflation targeting competitive equilibrium. The inflation rate is maintained strictly

equal to the target rate independent of the realization of the leverage shock.27

    As debt rises above the these thresholds however, so that the collateral constraint is binding, we see

that monetary policy does diverge from the strict inflation targeting rule. Figure 5 shows that in the case

of the worst (best) shock realization, as b∗t falls below −0.217(−0.385) the policy maker raises the inflation

rate above zero, and inflation rises monotonically with the level of external debt. Given the aggregate

Philips curve implied by the price setting equation (17), the rise in inflation provides a stimulus offsetting

the negative aggregate demand effects of the leverage shock. As Figure 5 shows, intermediate imports,

employment, and total output fall by less under the optimal monetary policy than under the strict inflation

targeting policy.

    In the event analysis, which is not reported here, we compare the events under an optimal monetary

policy and under the strict inflation targeting policy. The main difference between the two is that output,

employment and intermediate imports fall by less under an optimal monetary policy. But since the crisis

is not persistent, this difference has a negligible effect of the response of domestic consumption relative

to the inflation targeting policy. Likewise, the real exchange rate and the price of capital respond almost

identically under an optimal monetary policy as under the inflation targeting rule. We conclude from this

result and from the fact that outside the crisis period optimal monetary policy adheres to strict inflation

targeting that, under this specification for price nominal rigidities, while optimal monetary policy should

depart from inflation targeting during a crisis, it does so simply to provide an aggregate demand stimulus.

Monetary policy plays no clear macro-prudential role, neither by attempting to tighten so as to reduce

debt accumulation before the crisis, nor to ease the degree to which the borrowing constraint is binding

during the crisis (to see this last point note that the Lagrange multiplier response under strict inflation

targeting is essentially equivalent to the response under an optimal monetary policy during the crisis).




   27
     This statement is not trivial. Although the leverage constraint does not bind when b∗t satisfies the conditions stated in the
previous sentence, the shocks are persistent, and it could be the case that a severe leverage shock combined with a debt level
close to the threshold would precipitate a response of monetary policy designed to reduce the risk future binding constraints.


                                                               29
                                Inflation (%)                                        Labor
                0.3                                               1.1


                0.2                                              1.05


                0.1                                                1


                  0                                              0.95


               −0.1                                               0.9
                      −0.4 −0.35 −0.3 −0.25 −0.2                        −0.4 −0.35 −0.3 −0.25 −0.2
                                     b∗t                                               b∗t
                                   Import                                         Capital price
                0.1                                               1.2


               0.08                                                1


               0.06                                               0.8


               0.04                                               0.6


               0.02                                               0.4
                      −0.4 −0.35 −0.3 −0.25 −0.2                        −0.4 −0.35 −0.3 −0.25 −0.2
                                     b∗t                                               b∗t
                             Real exchange rate                                      Bond
               1.15                                             −0.15

                                                                 −0.2
                1.1
                                                                −0.25
               1.05
                                                                 −0.3
                  1
                                                                −0.35

               0.95                                              −0.4
                      −0.4 −0.35 −0.3 −0.25 −0.2                        −0.4 −0.35 −0.3 −0.25 −0.2
                                     b∗t                                               b∗t

                          CE Worst shock          CE Best shock            M Worst shock          M Best shock



Figure 5: Policy functions in the optimal monetary policy without capital controls (M) and the competitive equilib-
rium with strict inflation targeting (CE). The ‘best shock’ refers to policy functions when domestic households face
low foreign interest rate, high domestic productivity and high domestic leverage, while the ‘worst shock’ shows the
case with high foreign interest rate, low domestic productivity and low domestic leverage.




                                                           30
6.3    Optimal monetary and capital controls

   We now combine monetary policy with capital controls, where the policy-maker may employ capital

inflow controls with monetary policy responses. Before analyzing the full solution to the time-consistent

Ramsey problem with capital controls, we ask what incentive would the planner have to employ capital

inflow controls, in addition to utilizing optimal monetary policy as described above. To understand these

incentives, we display one of the first order conditions from the Ramsey problem without nominal rigidities

as follows (see Appendix D):


                                                Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗        ∗
                                     1 = βEt                   R   + µt Rt+1 + τc,t ,
                                                  Uc (t)    et t+1

with
                                                ∗
                                            µt Rt+1
                                                                                      
                                                                        ∂(qt+1 /et+1 )
                                   τc,t ≡             −1 + (ρ − 1)κt Et                  .
                                               ρ                           ∂b∗t+1

   The first condition may be interpreted as follows. The left hand side measures the cost of increasing

saving this period (accumulating net foreign assets) in terms of the foreign good. The right hand side

measures the benefits which are three-fold. First, there is the increase in net wealth brought into the next

period, which increases utility through an increase in consumption. Second, there is the benefit to private

households in terms of relaxing the current collateral constraint, measured by the second expression on

the right hand side. The third expression, denoted τc,t , decomposed in the second equation, captures the

net additional benefit to foreign assets perceived by the planner, and thus represents the incentive for the

planner to intervene directly in capital flows. We see this comprises of two parts, one negative, and one

positive. Thus, in principle, the planner may wish to set a negative or positive tax on capital inflows, or

equivalently, to subsidize or tax foreign borrowing. Moreover, the relative strength of the two components

depends on the foreign elasticity of demand for home exports ρ. With a very low elasticity, it is more likely

that τc,t < 0, so that foreign borrowing is subsidized. But as ρ rises, given that Et (∂(qt+1 /et+1 )/∂b∗t+1 ) > 0,

it is more likely that τc,t > 0.

   To understand the logic behind these two components, take the first component. This arises due to

the presence of the constant import tax 1 + τN designed to offset the terms of trade externality. With a

constant import tax, private households face a different marginal benefit of an additional unit of borrowing

than does the planner. When the collateral constraint binds, private households perceive an additional



                                                              31
unit of debt has an excess cost µt /et in terms of domestic consumption. But the planner facing the same

calculation takes into account that an additional unit of debt will increase consumption by et (1 + τN ),

which is the marginal product of intermediate imports in production. So the planner’s excess cost of debt

is evaluated as µt /(et (1 + τN )), which is less than that of the private sector. For this reason alone, the

planner would wish to subsidize borrowing. The lower is ρ, the elasticity of foreign demand for domestic

exports, the higher is τN , and the higher is the motivation to subsidize foreign borrowing.

    Against this, however, is the fact that when the collateral constraint binds, the planner will wish to

take actions to relax the constraint. She can do this by increasing net foreign assets brought into the next

period, thereby increasing period t + 10 s capital price, since ∂( eqt+1
                                                                     t+1
                                                                         )/∂b∗t+1 > 0. This effect depends on the

planner explicitly taking account of the equilibrium mapping from net foreign assets to future asset prices,

which is implicit in the time-consistent policy choice. These choices in turn relax the collateral constraint

in the current period. Since this margin is not taken into account by private households, the desire to raise

period t + 1 capital price through this channel leads the planner to impose a capital inflow tax when the

period t collateral constraint binds.

    In the calibrated model below, we find that the second factor is always dominant, so that the time

consistent planner will always impose a capital inflow tax, when µt > 0.28

    We now summarize the outcome under optimal capital controls under discretion in the following propo-

sition.

Proposition 1. When ρ is large enough, τc,t > 0 if µt > 0 under discretion.

    Note that the planner ignores the impact of a capital tax on the current asset price qt , since this has

no direct bearing on the planner’s problem.29 . We can formally show that the planner will never impose a

tax at time t unless the constraint is currently binding, even under commitment; that is, capital controls

are never prudential in the sense of Jeanne and Korinek (2013).

Proposition 2. If µt = 0, then τc,t = 0 .

Proof. See Appendix E.
   28
       With nominal rigidities, the expression for τc,t becomes more complicated; nevertheless, the quantitative results show that
optimal inflation is essentially equal to its target and price stickiness doesn’t matter for optimal capital controls. Therefore,
τc,t defined in the main text can capture the driving forces in the baseline model with nominal rigidities. When both wages
and prices are sticky, as in section 7 , the issue becomes more complex. Nevertheless, the quantitative solutions still lead to
capital inflow taxes in states where the collateral constraint binds.
    29
       See Appendix D


                                                               32
                                      Inflation (%)                                               Labor
                 0.3                                                       1.02


                 0.2                                                         1


                 0.1                                                       0.98


                   0                                                       0.96


                −0.1                                                       0.94
                       −0.4   −0.35    −0.3      −0.25   −0.2                     −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                           b∗t                                                      b∗t
                                      Capital price                                 Expected capital−price−RER ratio
                 1.4                                                       1.15

                 1.2                                                        1.1

                   1                                                       1.05

                 0.8                                                         1

                 0.6                                                       0.95

                 0.4                                                        0.9
                       −0.4   −0.35    −0.3      −0.25   −0.2                     −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                           b∗t                                                      b∗t
                                         Bond                                                Capital flow tax
               −0.15                                                        0.4


                                                                            0.3
                −0.2

                                                                            0.2

               −0.25
                                                                            0.1


                −0.3                                                         0
                       −0.4   −0.35    −0.3      −0.25   −0.2                     −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                           b∗t                                                      b∗t

                                                      M Worst shock           M and C worst shock



Figure 6: This graph reports policy functions under optimal monetary policy only (M), and the best responses of
period t Ramsey planner with both monetary and capital control instruments (M and C) given period t + 1 planner
choosing optimal monetary policy only. The ‘worst shock’ shows the case with high foreign interest rate, low domestic
productivity and low domestic leverage.




                                                                      33
    The intuition for this result depends on whether the planner has commitment or not, but the result

holds in either case. Suppose the constraint is not binding today µt = 0 but will bind in some state

tomorrow. Under discretion, a capital inflow tax will reduce current consumption by reducing borrowing;

since the constraint is not binding there is no direct current collateral effect and so there is no offsetting

increase in borrowing capacity that would allow higher current consumption. Moreover, the effect of a

current capital inflow tax on qt+1 through the indirect mechanism in equation (8) above has no direct

benefit in terms of relaxing next period’s constrained borrowing. What the planner would like to do is to

increase qt+2 but that is infeasible, since this depends on the next period’s planner’s actions. Hence, when

the current collateral constraint does not bind, there is no benefit to a capital inflow tax. This implies

that there is no scope for using capital taxes as ‘macro-prudential’ instruments - unlike much of the recent

literature, we find that capital taxes will not be used to reduce the risk of future crises.

    Surprisingly, this result also extends to the case with policy commitment. Under commitment, the

current government can increase qt+2 , but it does so by using τc,t+1 ; there is no reason to ‘move early’ since

the current level of consumption does not need to be distorted and the future level of consumption only

needs to be adjusted if the constraint actually turns out to bind.30 We show this in Appendix E.                       31


    This result would change if collateral is valued at qt , for the reasons we discussed in the four-period

finite horizon model – the planner now can influence the constraint in the next period directly via changing

the level of debt, and so will engage in ex ante interventions even if µc,t = 0. That is a macro-prudential

tax is then used actively in cases where a crisis is likely in the future.

    Figure 6 describes the policy functions implied by the following experiment. Imagine that all future

planners follow the time-consistent optimal monetary policy alone, without capital control policy. But

then we allow the current planner to choose an optimal capital flow tax in addition to optimal monetary

policy, which will be conditional on the net debt level and the exogenous state of the world. Note that

this is not an equilibrium policy setting, since we are assuming that the current planner has a policy menu

wider than do future planners. Nevertheless, the experiment illustrates the incentive to use capital inflow

taxes. Figure 6 shows that the planner will raise the capital inflow tax from zero, but will keep inflation

equal to the target in all states. The rise in the capital tax raises net foreign assets, increases expected
   30
      In Jeanne and Korinek (2013), collateral is valued at the worst asset price that obtains tomorrow; ex ante policy arises in
their model because the government lacks sufficient instruments to deal with the binding constraint tomorrow. Imposing their
constraint in our model would not change our results, but would substantially complicate the solution due to the possibility
of discontinuities in the decision rules.
   31
      Note however that we do not characterize the full quantitative solution to the problem under policy commitment.


                                                               34
next period capital price, relative to that in the Ramsey optimal monetary policy. The relaxation of the

collateral constraint implies that intermediate imports, labor and output fall by less in the crisis than under

the Ramsey optimal monetary policy. Nevertheless, Figure 6 also shows that the current capital price will

fall relative to that in the Ramsey optimal monetary policy case. The time t planner ignores this decline,

since the collateral constraint at time t is unaffected by the time t capital price.

   But Figure 6 does not represent the equilibrium policy functions. In equilibrium, the planner in every

period will have access to the capital inflow tax. How do the results change in an equilibrium where the

capital tax is utilized in all periods? Figure 7 illustrates the results for the equilibrium policy game. Here

we see a striking difference from Figure 6. Both the price of capital and the expected capital price to real

exchange rate ratio (which governs the degree to which the collateral constraint binds) are systematically

lower than that of the optimal Ramsey monetary policy, even in states where the collateral constraint

does not bind. As a corollary to this, net debt is everywhere below that of the Ramsey optimal monetary

policy; the economy has systematically lower borrowing in the time-consistent equilibrium with capital

taxes. Since the capital price is lower in the economy with inflow taxes, the threshold debt level which

causes the collateral constraint to bind is lower in this equilibrium also.

   How can the outcome with optimal capital inflow taxes differ so starkly from the economy with optimal

monetary policy alone? The key feature is that in this setting, time-consistent optimal taxes are deployed in

any state where the collateral constraint is binding, taking into account their ability to influence expected

future asset prices, but ignoring their impact on current asset prices. In an equilibrium, this lowers asset

prices uniformly, since financial markets are forward looking, and the possibility of future crisis events

which trigger a rise in capital inflow taxes will reduce the equilibrium price of assets at any given period.

With lower asset prices on average, at any given level of debt, the collateral constraint is more likely to be

binding, conditional on the state of the world. But this in turn leads households to increase precautionary

saving, and the average debt level for the economy falls.

   In the out-of-equilibrium experiment discussed above, we noted that the capital inflow tax cushioned

the impact of a crisis on the real economy, leading to a higher level of output, labor and intermediate

imports conditional on a given level of debt, and state of the world. But in the equilibrium with time

consistent inflow taxes, this situation is no longer necessarily the case. Figure 7 shows that, since the crisis

is triggered at lower levels of debt, output, employment and imports may be lower than in the Ramsey

monetary policy equilibrium conditional on the level of debt and the state of the world. Likewise, the real

                                                      35
                                       Inflation (%)                                            Labor
                 0.3                                                     1.02

                                                                           1
                 0.2
                                                                         0.98
                 0.1
                                                                         0.96
                   0
                                                                         0.94

                −0.1                                                     0.92
                       −0.4   −0.35     −0.3      −0.25   −0.2                  −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                            b∗t                                                   b∗t
                                      Capital price                               Expected capital−price−RER ratio
                 1.2                                                      1.1

                   1                                                     1.05

                 0.8                                                       1

                 0.6                                                     0.95

                 0.4                                                      0.9

                 0.2                                                     0.85
                       −0.4   −0.35     −0.3      −0.25   −0.2                  −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                            b∗t                                                   b∗t
                                          Bond                                             Capital flow tax
               −0.15                                                      0.4

                                                                          0.3
                −0.2
                                                                          0.2

                                                                          0.1
               −0.25
                                                                           0

                −0.3                                                     −0.1
                       −0.4   −0.35     −0.3      −0.25   −0.2                  −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                            b∗t                                                   b∗t

                                      CE Worst shock             M Worst shock           M and C Worst shock



Figure 7: Policy functions in the optimal monetary policy without capital controls (M), optimal monetary and
capital controls (M and C), and the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting (CE). The ‘worst shock’
shows the case with high foreign interest rate, low domestic productivity and low domestic leverage.




                                                                    36
                                 Inflation                                Capital inflow tax (%)
              0.08                                                10

              0.06                                                 8

                                                                   6
              0.04
                                                                   4
              0.02
                                                                   2
                 0                                                 0

             −0.02                                               −2
                 −2       −1        0         1         2         −2     −1        0          1       2
                                  Period                                         Period

                                  Output                                  Bond−GDP ratio (%)
                 1                                               −28

                 0                                               −30
                −1
                                                                 −32
                −2
                                                                 −34
                −3
                                                                 −36
                −4

                −5                                               −38

                −6                                               −40
                 −2       −1        0         1         2          −2    −1        0          1       2
                                  Period                                         Period
                                 CE with PI targeting        Optimal M        Optimal M and C


Figure 8: Event analysis in the optimal monetary policy without capital controls (M), optimal monetary and capital
controls (M and C), and the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting (CE). A typical five-period event
window is chosen as: (a) no binding collateral constraints in the first two periods t = −2, −1, (b) binding constraint
at period t = 0 and (c) no restrictions in the last two periods t = 1, 2. The events in the figure are an average of
all event series in a simulation of 200, 000 periods. Each panel reports the percent deviation from the unconditional
mean of that variable except for the capital inflow tax and Bond-GDP ratio.




                                                            37
exchange rate is systematically higher, given a lower level of consumption and aggregate demand.

    These results show that an equilibrium where optimal capital taxes are chosen without commitment

may have undesirable side effects. In subsection 6.4 below we translate these differences into welfare terms.

There we see that welfare may be lower in the Ramsey equilibrium with capital control policy, without

commitment, than in the competitive equilibrium without optimal policy. This result is quite different than

the existing literature, where capital controls, even if not fully optimal, are at least welfare-improving.32

    Figure 8 illustrates the crisis event analysis in the equilibrium with capital controls, and compares this

to the outcome of the competitive equilibrium and the Ramsey optimal monetary policy. The definition of

a crisis is equivalent to that of Figure 4. With capital taxes, the policy maker completely eschews active

monetary policy, and maintains a strict inflation targeting at all times. Instead, as described above, when

the collateral constraint binds, the policymaker imposes a capital inflow tax. The tax leads to a fall in net

external debt, which allows for a relaxation of the collateral constraint (the Lagrange multiplier rises by

less than in the Ramsey equilibrium with optimal monetary policy). As a result the average crisis is less

severe with the capital inflow tax.33


6.4     Welfare gains

    The lifetime utility for a representative household in the small economy, conditional on the initial debt

level and exogenous shocks, reads
                                                        (∞                   )          (∞                  )
                                                                                                      1−σ
                                                         X                               X
                                                                                                  t C̃t−1
                            W el(b∗0 , Z0 )   ≡ E0               t
                                                                β U (C̃t )       = E0         β                 .            (25)
                                                                                                     1−σ
                                                          t=0                           t=0


                                                            ^
We define a certainty equivalence of effective consumption C(b ∗ , Z ) in a policy regime as
                                                               0    0

                                                                       1−σ
                                                                                           1−σ
                                                ∞            ^ ∗                    ^ ∗, Z )
                                              X
                                                          t C(b0 , Z0 )     − 1  C(b     0     −1 1
                     W el(b∗0 , Z0 ) = E0               β                         =   0
                                                                                                      .
                                                                  1−σ                  1−σ      1−β
                                                  t=0




   32
       A related result can be found in Young (2012), where it is optimal to ‘tie the hands’ of the current government by giving
it fewer options; the reason there is that the government’s objective function is not perfectly aligned with the private sector.
    33
       Note that this statement is not inconsistent with the discussion above indicating that the impact of a binding constraint
may be more severe with capital inflow taxes than without, since in that case we were comparing outcomes with equal levels
of net external assets. In the average crisis event of Figure 8, net external assets are always higher in the economy with capital
inflow taxes.


                                                                      38
Rearranging the equation yields

                                                                                  1
                                   ^
                                  C(b∗ , Z ) = [W el(b∗ , Z )(1 − σ)(1 − β) + 1] 1−σ .                                   (26)
                                     0    0           0    0



    Figure 9 shows the welfare gains for the “best” and “worst” states as previously described.34 The

Figure shows welfare relative to that in the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting, and as

before, the evaluation is conditional on net external assets. The first point to note is that welfare for the

Ramsey optimal monetary policy, is almost identical to that of the competitive equilibrium. This is not

exactly true, since it is possible to show that the Ramsey equilibrium raises welfare very slightly relative

to the competitive equilibrium, particularly for very high levels of net external debt, where crises are more

likely. But the welfare gains for the optimal Ramsey monetary policy relative to strict inflation targeting

are extremely small.

    By contrast, the Figure shows that welfare is unambiguously lower in the time-consistent Ramsey

equilibrium with both optimal monetary and capital control policy. Moreover, the welfare losses are

greater, the higher is the level of net external debts.

    Welfare gains are similar in shape across states, but are a bit larger in bad times. Furthermore, the

relative welfare losses associated with capital controls are much larger in the bad state than in the good

one.


6.5    Moment analysis

    Table 4 illustrates the moments for a series of variables in the model across the different regimes, in-

cluding the frequency with which crises occur. A crisis scenario is defined as a binding collateral constraint.

The occurrence of crisis doesn’t change much across various monetary and capital control policy regimes.

Compared to the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting but without any capital controls,

optimal monetary policy alone slightly reduces the volatility of fundamentals. With capital controls in

place, the economy has a lower debt and higher consumption in the stationary equilibrium since house-

holds increase their precautionary savings. A lower debt is associated with a less severe financial crisis,

which can be seen from the lower value of external finance premium. Note that capital price under capital

                                                                              j       
  34
      Let C̃ j denote the consumption certainty equivalence in regime j. Then C̃
                                                                               C̃ i
                                                                                    − 1 × 100 measures the percentage increase
of effective consumption in regime i such that the household’s welfare in regime i is the same as that in regime j.


                                                             39
                      (a) Welfare gains (%) relative to CE (Worst state)       (b) Welfare gains (%) relative to CE (Best state)
                                                                              0

                      0
                                                                           −0.02
                  −0.05

                   −0.1
                                                                           −0.04
                  −0.15

                   −0.2                                                    −0.06

                  −0.25
                                                                           −0.08
                   −0.3
                                             Optimal M
                  −0.35                      Optimal M and C
                                                                            −0.1
                   −0.4

                  −0.45                                                    −0.12
                      −0.4     −0.35     −0.3     −0.25     −0.2               −0.4    −0.35     −0.3     −0.25      −0.2
                                          Bond   b*t                                               Bond b*t



Figure 9: Welfare gains in the optimal monetary policy without capital controls (M) and optimal monetary and
capital controls (M and C), relative to the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting (CE). Welfare gains
are measured by the percentage changes of certainty equivalence of effective consumption across policy regimes.
The ‘best shock’ refers to policy functions when domestic households face low foreign interest rate, high domestic
productivity and high domestic leverage, while the ‘worst shock’ shows the case with high foreign interest rate, low
domestic productivity and low domestic leverage.



control is also lower than that without controls.


6.6    Policy under commitment: an example

    The previous sections show that without commitment, capital inflow taxes will be imposed in a crisis,

and welfare will be lower relative to a regime of optimal monetary policy without capital controls. An

obvious question is what happens if there is some commitment device which binds policymakers to stick to a

particular policy prescription? A full characterization of optimal policies under commitment is beyond the

scope of this paper.35 Nevertheless, we know from the finite-period example in section 4 that a policymaker

would subsidize capital inflows in the second period when the credit constraint binds since this will have the

effect of relaxing first period credit constraints.36 Following a similar argument, we ask whether subsiding

capital inflows during a crisis could improve welfare in the full dynamic model. We conjecture a simple but

operational capital inflow subsidy, τc,t = −ςµt , for a small positive constant ς. This capital inflow subsidy


   35
      Solving for the optimal policy under commitment involves a large increase in the number of state variables required for
the solution for policy functions.
   36
      Farhi and Werning (2014) study optimal capital controls under commitment in a world economy of many small open
economies akin to Gali and Monacelli (2005) but with risk premium shocks. They find that dealing with a sudden stop requires
a temporary subsidy on inflows and a tax on outflows.


                                                                     40
                    Table 4: Model moments
                                   CE      M                M and C
Probability of crisis (%)           9.0     9.0                  7.8

Mean
Effective consumption                   0.4376    0.4376       0.4381
Output                                  0.7379    0.7380       0.7385
Bond                                   -0.2926   -0.2922      -0.2644
Real exchange rate                      0.9882    0.9882       0.9881
Capital price                           1.0021    1.0021       0.9409
External finance premium (%)              0.77      0.77         0.44

Standard deviation(%)
Effective consumption                    1.25      1.24           1.24
Output                                   1.93      1.91           1.86
Bond                                     1.56      1.56           1.51
Real exchange rate                       0.77      0.77           0.82
Capital price                            3.60      3.60           3.98
External finance premium                 3.58      3.59           2.15

Correlation with output
Effective consumption                     0.85      0.84          0.81
Output                                    1.00      1.00          1.00
Bond                                      0.16      0.17          0.20
Real exchange rate                        0.48      0.49          0.47
Capital price                             0.88      0.88          0.83
External finance premium                 -0.40     -0.38         -0.31
Notes: The moments are generated by a simulation of 210,000 periods
with dropping the first 10,000 periods. A crisis scenario is defined as
a binding collateral constraint. The column ‘CE’ denotes the com-
petitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting, ‘M’ for optimal
monetary policy without capital controls and ‘M and C’ for optimal
monetary and capital controls.




                                  41
is tied to the severity of a crisis. A deeper crisis requires a larger subsidy to restore borrowing capacity

and therefore to maintain a higher consumption than that without subsidy. We assume that policymakers

honor this capital control policy in each period. Although it is in effect only in a crisis, the capital inflow

subsidy affects households’ borrowing and consumption both in crises and in normal times.

     Figure 10 displays policy functions under commitment with ς = 0.2 when monetary policy maintains

inflation strictly equal to the targets, and the exogenous shocks lead to the worst possible state.37 Subsiding

capital inflows in a crisis increases effective consumption for every given level of debt. Higher effective

consumption leads to a higher current capital price and expected ratio of future capital price to future

real exchange rate, which in turn expands borrowing capacity and increases the cutoff debt level that

triggers the binding collateral constraint. Compared with the competitive equilibrium without capital

inflow tax/subsidy, imports, employment and output are higher when capital inflow subsidy is in place.

Therefore, a higher borrowing capacity and a higher effective consumption implies higher welfare for

domestic households (see figure 11).



7        Sticky Wages

     A broad message of this paper is that in open economies with financial frictions but without policy

commitment monetary policy should not be combined with capital controls. But in Figure 5 above, we

noted that the effect of an optimal monetary policy, relative to strict inflation targeting, was minimal.

Although the optimal monetary policy calls for a sharp deviation from inflation targeting during a crisis,

the crisis response under strict inflation targeting and the optimal monetary policy was relatively small.

A similar message comes from the welfare evaluation. The reason for this is familiar from the literature

on New Keynesian models. Nominal rigidities in prices can be relatively easily overcome by strict inflation

targeting - we find that this message extends to the response to crises to a substantial extent.

     But with more extensive nominal rigidities, the role for monetary policy can be much greater. Here,

we illustrate this briefly, by extending our model of nominal rigidities to include both price and wage

stickiness.38 The model details are delegated to the Appendix F.
    37
     We do not explore the optimal level of ς. For smaller or larger than ς = 0.2 capital inflow subsidies, we obtain the same
qualitative results.
  38
     A number of papers have documented the role of rigid wages, in particular downwardly rigid wages, for emerging economies
during financial crises (for instance, Card and Hyslop, 1997, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2015); it is also the case that the
importance of optimal monetary policy is enhanced if wages are sticky (the quantitative deviations from pure inflation targeting
were quite small in the previous section and the welfare consequences were negligible).


                                                              42
                                  Effective consumption                            Expected capital−price−RER ratio
                  0.45
                                                                          1.1
                   0.4
                                                                         1.05
                  0.35                                                     1

                   0.3                                                   0.95
                                                 M
                                                                          0.9
                  0.25                           M and C
                                                 CE with subsidy         0.85
                   0.2                                                    0.8
                         −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2                   −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                           b∗t                                                    b∗t
                                         Output                                                  Bond
                                                                        −0.15
                  0.72

                   0.7
                                                                         −0.2
                  0.68

                  0.66
                                                                        −0.25
                  0.64

                  0.62
                                                                         −0.3
                   0.6
                         −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2                   −0.4   −0.35   −0.3     −0.25   −0.2
                                           b∗t                                                    b∗t



Figure 10: Policy functions in the optimal monetary policy without capital controls (M), optimal monetary and
capital controls (M and C), and a competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting and an ad hoc state-
contingent capital inflow subsidy τc,t = −0.2µt (CE with subsidy), when domestic households face high foreign
interest rate, low domestic productivity and low domestic leverage.




                                                                   43
                        (a) Welfare gains (%) relative to CE (Worst state)                    (b) Welfare gains (%) relative to CE (Best state)
                  0.3                                                              0.06

                                                                                   0.04
                  0.2

                                                                                   0.02
                  0.1
                                                                                      0
                   0
                                                                                  −0.02
                 −0.1
                                                                                  −0.04
                 −0.2
                                                   Optimal M                      −0.06
                                                   Optimal M and C
                 −0.3                                                             −0.08
                                                   CE with subsidy

                 −0.4                                                              −0.1

                                                                                  −0.12
                    −0.4      −0.35       −0.3         −0.25     −0.2                  −0.4         −0.35       −0.3         −0.25     −0.2
                                            Bond b*t                                                              Bond b*t




Figure 11: Welfare gains in the optimal monetary policy without capital controls (M), optimal monetary and
capital controls (M and C), and a competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting and an ad hoc state-
contingent capital inflow subsidy τc,t = −0.2µt (CE with subsidy), relative to the competitive equilibrium with strict
inflation targeting (CE). Welfare gains are measured by the percentage changes of certainty equivalence of effective
consumption across policy regimes. The ‘best shock’ refers to policy functions when domestic households face low
foreign interest rate, high domestic productivity and high domestic leverage, while the ‘worst shock’ shows the case
with high foreign interest rate, low domestic productivity and low domestic leverage.



   Figure 12 reports variables of interest in a typical event analysis and figure 13 shows the welfare gains

across policy regimes. With downward nominal wage rigidity, the competitive equilibrium with strict

inflation targeting suffers a large decline in employment and output. Under optimal monetary policy, the

monetary authority creates inflation and devalues the domestic currency to restore domestic employment

and output. The effect of monetary policy is substantial compared to the case without downward nominal

wage rigidity. Figure 12 shows that output losses can be reduced by one half under the optimal monetary

policy in crisis.39 When output is less depressed under optimal monetary policy, households repay a larger

amount of debt in order to smooth consumption. In terms of welfare, households are significantly and

uniformly better off than in the competitive equilibrium with strict inflation targeting (see panel (a)-(b)

in figure 13).

   When both monetary policy and capital controls are in place, again without commitment, the policy

maker sets a positive capital inflow tax, 9.5%, in the peak period of a crisis and imposes zero capital

controls out of crisis. However, unlike the previous case, where active monetary policy was not combined
  39
     Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2015) and Na, Schmitt-Grohé, Uribe and Yue (2014) also show that depreciating domestic
currency can significantly reduce unemployment and output losses in crisis when nominal wages are downwardly rigid.


                                                                             44
                                   Inflation                                    Capital inflow tax (%)
                  0.4                                                10

                  0.3                                                 8

                  0.2                                                 6

                  0.1                                                 4

                   0                                                  2

                 −0.1                                                 0
                    −2      −1       0         1         2            −2       −1        0          1    2
                                   Period                                              Period

                                   Output                                       Bond−GDP ratio (%)
                   2                                                −28

                   0                                                −30

                                                                    −32
                  −2
                                                                    −34
                  −4
                                                                    −36
                  −6
                                                                    −38
                  −8                                                −40

                 −10                                                −42
                   −2       −1       0         1          2           −2       −1         0        1     2
                                   Period                                               Period
                                     CE with PI targeting          Optimal M        Optimal M and C


Figure 12: Event analysis in a model with sticky prices and sticky wages for the optimal monetary policy without
capital controls (M), optimal monetary and capital controls (M and C), and the competitive equilibrium with strict
inflation targeting (CE). A typical five-period event window is chosen as: (a) no binding collateral constraints in the
first two periods t = −2, −1, (b) binding constraint at period t = 0 and (c) no restrictions in the last two periods
t = 1, 2. The events in the figure are an average of all event series in a simulation of 200, 000 periods. Each panel
reports the percent deviation from the unconditional mean of that variable except for the capital inflow tax and
Bond-GDP ratio.




                                                              45
                                                  (a)                                                                          (b)
            0.43                                                                  0.43
                                                                                                                                         0.047814
                                                                    71
                                46                         0.  0574
            0.42            87            66                                      0.42
                           0       24
                        0.       07
                               0.
            0.41                                                                  0.41         0.047
                                                                                                    814
                                                                                                 0.054212
             0.4                                                                   0.4           0.06061
                                                                                                 0.067008
                                                                                                 0.073406
            0.39          0.05                                                    0.39           0.079804
                                    7471                                                         0.086202
                                                                                                                              0.0926
               −0.35     −0.3                   −0.25                 −0.2          −0.35            −0.3                    −0.25                   −0.2


                                                  (c)                                                                          (d)
            0.43                                                                  0.43


            0.42                                                                  0.42
                    −0.1289
                   −0.14928


                                     −0.10852
                   −0.19004
                   −0.16966




                                                                                                     −0.055901
                                                                                                                 −0.053195

                                                                                                                             −0.050488

                                                                                                                                         −0.047782


                                                                                                                                                      −0.045076
                                                                                         −0.061314
                                                                                         −0.058608
                                                                                         −0.064021
                                                  4

                                                             3
                                                −0.08813

                                                           −0.06775




            0.41                                                                  0.41


             0.4                                                                   0.4


            0.39                                                                  0.39

               −0.35     −0.3                   −0.25                 −0.2          −0.35            −0.3                    −0.25                   −0.2




Figure 13: Welfare gains in a model with sticky prices and sticky wages for the optimal monetary policy without
capital controls (M) and optimal monetary and capital controls (M and C), relative to the competitive equilibrium
with strict inflation targeting (CE). Welfare gains are measured by the percentage change of effective consumption
equivalence across policy regimes. The vertical axis is the past real wage wt−1 and the horizontal axis stands for
debt level b∗t . Panel (a)-(b) are for M policy relative to the CE with strict price inflation targeting under the worst
and best state respectively, and (c)-(d) for M and C policy relative to M policy under the worst and best state
respectively. The ‘best shock’ refers to policy functions when domestic households face low foreign interest rate, high
domestic productivity and high domestic leverage, while the ‘worst shock’ shows the case with high foreign interest
rate, low domestic productivity and low domestic leverage.




                                                                             46
with capital controls in a crisis, the optimal monetary now combines both capital controls and monetary

policy to react to a crisis. Monetary policy generates inflation and currency devaluation to dampen the

adverse shocks to the economy (see figure 12). Again, due to the time consistency problem, higher capital

controls lead to a lower welfare for households (see panel (c)-(d) in figure 13).



8     Conclusion

     This paper has studied the optimal conduct of monetary policy and capital controls during a ”Sudden

Stop” engineered by a binding collateral constraint. We highlight several main results here in the conclu-

sion. First, inflation targeting is optimal outside Sudden Stops, but during a financial crisis it is optimal

to generate some domestic inflation; this result comes from the absence of a tool designed specifically

to deal with the underlying causes of the crisis (the financial accelerator). Second, capital controls are

suboptimal but will be used in a time-consistent equilibrium, and therefore should not be placed under

the control of the monetary authority. Third, the case for ex ante intervention is heavily dependent on

arbitrary choices regarding the valuation of collateral and therefore could be related to the optimal choice

of financial regulation.

     There are many extensions that we plan to consider going forward. In particular, we plan to use the

model to study the optimal use of monetary and capital control policy in the presence of a fixed exchange

rate – the ‘dilemma-not-trilemma’ argument currently playing out in the literature states that monetary

policy is severely weakened by the absence of capital controls even if exchange rates are fixed. Exactly

what this statement means is unclear – does it mean that interventions must be larger to achieve the same

goals, or does it mean that the optimal adjustment is smaller, or perhaps something else entirely? Since a

fixed exchange rate may inhibit some of the adverse movements in the value of collateral, our model may

imply that pegs are occasionally useful.



References

Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath (2007) ‘Emerging Market Business Cycles: the Cycle is the Trend.’

    Journal of Political Economy 115, 69–102




                                                     47
Aruoba, S. Boragan, Pablo Cuba-Borda, and Frank Schorfheide (2013) ‘Macroeconomic Dynamics Near

  the ZLB: A Tale of Two Countries.’ Working Paper 19248, National Bureau of Economic Research, July

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop (2000) ‘Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: Liberalization,

  Overshooting, and Volatility.’ In ‘Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies: Theory, Evidence, and

  Controversies’ NBER Chapters (National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc) pp. 61–98

Backus, David K, Patrick J Kehoe, and Finn E Kydland (1992) ‘International Real Business Cycles.’

  Journal of Political Economy 100(4), 745–75

Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983) ‘Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary

  Policy.’ Journal of Monetary Economics 12(1), 101 – 121

Benhabib, Jess, and Aldo Rustichini (1997) ‘Optimal Taxes without Commitment.’ Journal of Economic

  Theory 77(2), 231 – 259

Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Chris Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric Young (2012) ‘Optimal

  Policy for Macro-Financial Stability.’ CEP Discussion Papers dp1172, Centre for Economic Performance,

  LSE, October

Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R. Young (2013)

  ‘Financial Crises and Macro-prudential Policies.’ Journal of International Economics 89(2), 453–470

Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R Young (2014)

  ‘Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A Pecuniary Externality Perspective.’

  CEPR Discussion Papers 9936, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers, April

Bianchi, Javier (2011) ‘Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle.’ American Eco-

  nomic Review 101(7), 3400–3426

Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique G. Mendoza (2010) ‘Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ’Macro-prudential’

  Taxes.’ NBER Working Papers 16091, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, June

  (2013) ‘Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy.’ NBER Working Papers 19704, National Bu-

  reau of Economic Research, Inc, December



                                                  48
Braggion, Fabio, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Jorge Roldos (2009) ‘Optimal Monetary Policy in a ‘Sudden

  Stop’.’ Journal of Monetary Economics 56(4), 582 – 595

Broner, Fernando A., Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio L. Schmukler (2013a) ‘Why Do Emerging Economies

  Borrow Short Term?’ Journal of the European Economic Association 11, 67–100

Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L. Schmukler (2013b) ‘Gross Capital Flows:

  Dynamics and Crises.’ Journal of Monetary Economics 60(1), 113 – 133. Carnegie-NYU-Rochester

  Conference

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (2015a) ‘Capital Flows and the Risk-taking Channel of Monetary

  Policy.’ Journal of Monetary Economics 71(C), 119–132

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (2015b) ‘Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity.’ Review of

  Economic Studies 82(2), 535–564

Calvo, Guillermo A (1978) ‘On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy.’ Econo-

  metrica 46(6), 1411–28

Card, David, and Dean Hyslop (1997) ‘Does Inflation Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?’ In

  ‘Reducing inflation: Motivation and strategy’ (University of Chicago Press) pp. 71–122

Cespedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andres Velasco (2004) ‘Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate

  Policy.’ American Economic Review 94(4), 1183–1193

Chen, Haipeng (Allan), Daniel Levy, Sourav Ray, and Mark Bergen (2008) ‘Asymmetric Price Adjustment

  in the Small.’ Journal of Monetary Economics 55(4), 728–737

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2005) ‘Nominal Rigidities and the

  Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.’ Journal of Political Economy 113(1), 1–45

Coleman, Wilbur John (1990) ‘Solving the Stochastic Growth Model by Policy-Function Iteration.’ Journal

  of Business and Economic Statistics 8(1), 27–29

Costinot, Arnaud, Guido Lorenzoni, and Ivan Werning (2014) ‘A Theory of Capital Controls as Dynamic

  Terms-of-Trade Manipulation.’ Journal of Political Economy 122(1), 77 – 128


                                                    49
Devereux, Michael B., and Changhua Yu (2014) ‘International Financial Integration and Crisis Contagion.’

  NBER Working Papers 20526, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc

Devereux, Michael B., Philip R. Lane, and Juanyi Xu (2006) ‘Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy in

  Emerging Market Economies.’ The Economic Journal 116(511), 478–506

Dong, Bingbing (2015) ‘Forward Guidance and Optimal Credible Monetary Policy.’ Manuscript, University

  of Virginia

Eaves, B. Curtis, and Karl Schmedders (1999) ‘General Equilibrium Models and Homotopy Methods.’

  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 23(9-10), 1249–1279

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning (2012) ‘Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal Capital Controls with

  Fixed Exchange Rates.’ NBER Working Papers 18199, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, June

  (2014) ‘Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital Controls and Exchange Rates with Volatile Capital Flows.’

  IMF Economic Review 62(4), 569–605

Farhi, Emmanuel, Christopher Sleet, Ivan Werning, and Sevin Yeltekin (2012) ‘Non-linear capital taxation

  without commitment.’ Review of Economic Studies 79(4), 1469–1493

Fornaro, Luca (2015) ‘Financial Crises and Exchange Rate Policy.’ Journal of International Economics

  95(2), 202–215

Frankel, Jeffrey (2010) ‘Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets.’ In Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed.

  Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, vol. 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics (Elsevier)

  chapter 25, pp. 1439–1520

Fratzscher, Marcel (2012) ‘Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis.’ Journal

  of International Economics 88(2), 341 – 356. {NBER} Global

Gali, Jordi (2015) Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Key-

  nesian Framework (the Second Edition, Princeton University Press)

Gali, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli (2005) ‘Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small

  Open Economy.’ The Review of Economic Studies 72(3), 707–734


                                                    50
Gertler, Mark, Simon Gilchrist, and Fabio M. Natalucci (2007) ‘External Constraints on Monetary Policy

  and the Financial Accelerator.’ Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39(2/3), pp. 295–330

Graham, John R., Mark T. Leary, and Michael R. Roberts (2014) ‘A Century of Capital Structure: the

  Leveraging of Corporate America.’ Journal of Financial Economics pp. –

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W Huffman (1988) ‘Investment, Capacity Utilization,

  and the Real Business Cycle.’ American Economic Review 78(3), 402–17

Hanson, Gordon H. (2012) ‘The Rise of Middle Kingdoms: Emerging Economies in Global Trade.’ Journal

  of Economic Perspectives 26(2), 41–64

Iacoviello, Matteo (2005) ‘House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the Business

  Cycle.’ The American Economic Review 95(3), 739–764

IMF (2014) Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific World Economic and Financial Surveys, Inter-

  national Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., 20090, USA

Jeanne, Olivier (2003) ‘Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?’ IMF Working Papers

  03/177, International Monetary Fund, September

Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek (2010) ‘Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation

  Approach.’ American Economic Review 100(2), 403–07

  (2013) ‘Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up After the Crash.’ NBER Working Papers 18675,

  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, January

Kaminsky, Graciela L., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Vegh (2005) ‘When It Rains, It Pours: Pro-

  cyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies.’ In ‘NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Volume

  19’ NBER Chapters (National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc) pp. 11–82

Katagiri, Mitsuru, Ryo Kato, and Takayuki Tsuruga (2013) ‘Managing Financial Crises: Lean or Clean?’

  Technical Report

Khan, Hashmat (2005) ‘Price-setting Behaviour, Competition, and Markup Shocks in the New Keynesian

  Model.’ Economics Letters 87(3), 329–335


                                                 51
Kim, Jinill, and Francisco J. Ruge-Murcia (2009) ‘How Much Inflation is Necessary to Grease the Wheels?’

  Journal of Monetary Economics 56(3), 365–377

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore (1997) ‘Credit Cycles.’ Journal of Political Economy 105(2), 211–48

Klein, Paul, Per Krusell, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (2008) ‘Time-Consistent Public Policy.’ Review of

  Economic Studies 75(3), 789–808

Korinek, Anton (2011) ‘The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls: A Research Agenda.’ IMF

  Economic Review, International Monetary Fund

Korinek, Anton, and Alp Simsek (2013) ‘Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage.’ Working paper, MIT,

  October

Kydland, Finn E, and Edward C Prescott (1977) ‘Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of

  Optimal Plans.’ Journal of Political Economy 85(3), 473–91

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2008) ‘The Drivers of Financial Globalization.’ The

  American Economic Review 98(2), pp. 327–332

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger (2005) ‘Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds vs.

  Words.’ European Economic Review 49(6), 1603–1635

Mendoza, Enrique G (2010) ‘Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage.’ American Economic Review

  100(5), 1941–1966

Na, Seunghoon, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, Martin Uribe, and Vivian Z Yue (2014) ‘A Model of the Twin

  Ds: Optimal Default and Devaluation.’ Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research

Passari, Evgenia, and Helene Rey (2015) ‘Financial Flows and the International Monetary System.’ The

  Economic Journal 125(584), 675–698

Peltzman, Sam (2000) ‘Prices Rise Faster than They Fall.’ Journal of Political Economy 108(3), 466–502

Reinhart, Carmen, and Vincent Reinhart (2009) ‘Capital Flow Bonanzas: an Encompassing View of the

  Past and Present.’ In ‘NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008’ NBER Chapters (National

  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc) pp. 9–62


                                                  52
Rey, Helene (2015) ‘Dilemma not Trilemma: the Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Indepen-

  dence.’ Working Paper 21162, National Bureau of Economic Research, May

Rotemberg, Julio J (1982) ‘Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output.’ Review of Economic

  Studies 49(4), 517–31

Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2002) ‘Term Structure Evidence on Interest Rate Smoothing and Monetary Policy

  Inertia.’ Journal of Monetary Economics 49(6), 1161 – 1187

  (2006) ‘Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?’ International Journal of Central Banking 2(4), 85–135

Schittkowski, Klaus (2014) ‘NLPQLP: A fortran implementation of a sequential quadratic programming

  algorithm with distributed and non-monotone line search - user’s guide, version 4.2.’ Report, Department

  of Computer Science, University of Bayreuth

Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2015) ‘Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency Pegs,

  and Involuntary Unemployment.’ forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy

Tauchen, George, and Robert Hussey (1991) ‘Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate

  Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models.’ Econometrica 59(2), 371–96

The Economist (2013) ‘Just in Case.’ The Economist October 12, http://www.economist.com/news/special–

  report/21587383–capital–controls–are–back–part–many–countries–financial–armoury–just–case

Uribe, Martin, and Vivian Z. Yue (2006) ‘Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives Whom?’

  Journal of International Economics 69(1), 6–36

Varian, Hal R (1975) ‘A Bayesian Approach to Real Estate Assessment.’ Studies in Bayesian Econometrics

  and Statistics in Honor of Leonard J. Savage pp. 195–208

Young, Eric R. (2012) ‘Robust Policymaking in the Face of Sudden Stops.’ Journal of Monetary Economics

  59(5), 512–527




                                                   53
Not for Publication Appendices
A     A system of competitive equilibrium conditions
    A system of competitive equilibrium conditions are listed as follows.

                                                                   wt = χLνt ,
                                                                                     
                                                    qt+1     Uc (t + 1)
                             qt = µt κt et Et        + Et β             (rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) ,
                                                    et+1       Uc (t)
                                                                                 
                                                  ∗           Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗
                                  1 − τc,t = µt Rt+1 + Et β                  R      ,
                                                                Uc (t)    et t+1
                                                                       
                                                       Uc (t + 1) Rt+1
                                              1 = Et β                     ,
                                                         Uc (t) πt+1
                                        (1 + τN,t )et (1 + µt ϑ) YF,t = αF pM,t Yt ,

                                                           wt Lt = αL pM,t Yt ,

                                                  rK,t Kt = αK pM,t Yt ,
                                                                          
                                                  qt+1 Kt+1
                                    et µt κt Et               + b∗t+1 − ϑYF,t = 0,
                                                     et+1
                                                                     µt ≥ 0
                                                              
                                               qt+1 Kt+1
                                   κt Et                           + b∗t+1 − (1 + τN,t )ϑYF,t ≥ 0
                                                  et+1
                                                    Yt = At (YF,t )αF Lα   αK
                                                                       t Kt ,
                                                                         L



                                                                    exp (γ(πt − π)) − 1
                              Yt [(1 + τH )(1 − θ) + θpM,t ] − φP Yt πt
                                                                             γ
                                                                                 
                                    Uc (t + 1)              exp (γ(πt+1 − π)) − 1
                              +Et β            φP πt+1 Yt+1                         = 0.
                                     Uc (t)                           γ
                                     Yt [1 − φ(πt )] = Ct + eρt ζt∗ + (Kt+1 − Kt )qt ,
                                                                ∗          
                                               ρ ∗                bt+1    ∗
                                          (et ) ζt − YF,t et =      ∗  − bt et ,
                                                                  Rt+1
                                                            Kt+1 = Kt = 1
                                                                             1            1
                                      Fiscal policies: τH =                     , τN,t =
                                                                            θ−1          ρ−1
                                  Monetary and capital control policies: τc,t , Rt+1


B     Equilibrium conditions in the simplified model
   This appendix describes the equilibrium conditions under various policy regimes in the four-period simplified
model. We first discuss the competitive equilibrium, then the first best allocation. Allocations under full commitment
and under discretion are in the last two subsections.




                                                                       54
B.1    The competitive equilibrium
    In the competitive equilibrium, firm-households at each period choose consumption, borrowing, capital stock,
labor and imports, given capital price and capital control policies. Observe that there’s no financial friction in the
last period. Labor supply, imports and output are exogenously-determined in period t = 3
                                       "                            1
                                             1−αF      αF # (1+ν)(1−α F )−αL
                                          αL        αF
                                   L3 = A                                      ,
                                          χ         p∗F

                                                                     αF
                                                 YF,3 = χL1+ν
                                                          3                ,
                                                                    αL p∗F
                                                 Y3 = A(YF,3 )αF Lα
                                                                  3 ,
                                                                   L




                                                   rK,3 K3 = αK Y3 .

Capital price is zero q3 = 0 since it is fully depreciated after production, and consumption only depends on the
inherited debts
                                                c3 = b∗3 + Y3 − p∗F YF,3 .

   At period t = 0, 1, the optimality conditions are as follows

                                     µt κt Et (qt+1 kt+1 ) + b∗t+1 − ϑp∗F YF,t = 0,
                                                                             
                                                                                                                (B.1)

                                         κt Et (qt+1 kt+1 ) ≥ −b∗t+1 + ϑp∗F YF,t

                                                       µt ≥ 0
                                                                   
                                         Uc (t + 1)
                               qt = Et β            (rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) + µt κt Et {qt+1 } ,                       (B.2)
                                            Uc (t)
                                                                            
                                                     ∗          Uc (t + 1) ∗
                                      1 − τc,t = µt R + Et β              R ,                                   (B.3)
                                                                 Uc (t)
                                              p∗F (1 + µt ϑ) YF,t = αF Yt ,                                     (B.4)
                                                                         1
                                                              αF
                                                         αL AYF,t
                                                                    1+ν−α
                                                                              L
                                              Lt =                                ,
                                                            χ
                                                     rK,t Kt = αK Yt ,

                                              Yt = A(YF,t )αF Lα     αK
                                                                t Kt ,
                                                                 L

                                                                ∗         
                                                                bt+1
                                          Yt − YF,t p∗F = ct +       −  b∗
                                                                         t   ,
                                                                 R∗
                                                Kt+1 = Kt = kt+1 = 1

   At period t = 2, the optimality conditions can be written as

                                           µt κt q̄ + b∗t+1 − ϑp∗F YF,t = 0,
                                                                      
                                                                                                                (B.5)

                                               κt q̄ ≥ −b∗t+1 + ϑp∗F YF,t

                                                           µt ≥ 0



                                                             55
                                                                               
                                                     Uc (t + 1)
                                         qt = Et β              (rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) ,                                      (B.6)
                                                        Uc (t)
                                                                               
                                                                   Uc (t + 1) ∗
                                         1 − τc,t = µt R∗ + Et β             R ,                                        (B.7)
                                                                     Uc (t)
                                                 p∗F (1 + µt ϑ) YF,t = αF Yt ,                                          (B.8)
                                                                              1
                                                                 αF
                                                            αL AYF,t
                                                                         1+ν−α
                                                                                   L
                                                 Lt =                                  ,
                                                               χ
                                                        rK,t Kt = αK Yt ,

                                                 Yt = A(YF,t )αF Lα    αK
                                                                  t Kt ,
                                                                   L

                                                                  ∗        
                                                        ∗         bt+1    ∗
                                             Yt − YF,t pF = ct +       − bt ,
                                                                   R∗
                                                  Kt+1 = Kt = kt+1 = 1

    Now twelve equations (B.1)-(B.4) and (B.5)-(B.8) can sole for twelve variables {qt , YF,t , µt , b∗t+1 } with t = 0, 1, 3,
given the initial state b∗0 and government policy τc,t . Other variables can be solved based on the remaining equations.


B.2     The first best allocation
    The only friction in this simplified model is the collateral constraint and the only uncertainty comes from leverage
shocks. Both of these originate from the financial sector. If there were no financial frictions, leverage shocks would
not affect aggregate variables and financial variables at all. As a benchmark, we first consider an economy without
financial frictions, where collateral constraints are always slack in every period. Note that without credit constraints,
labor, imports and production are completely exogenous and the economy collapses to an endowment economy. In
the current case with only leverage shocks, firm-households’ labor income and profits in all periods are constant as
in period t = 3. The optimality conditions read

                                                      Uc (t + 1) ∗
                                               1=β              R , t = 0, 1, 2
                                                       Uc (t)

                                                                   b∗t+1
                                                                             
                                       ct = Yt − YF,t p∗F −              − b∗
                                                                            t   , t = 0, 1, 2
                                                                    R∗
                                                  c3 = Y3 − p∗F YF,3 + b∗3 .

Now we have seven unknowns {ct , b∗t+1 } with t = 0, 1, 2, and c3 in seven equations.


B.3     Equilibrium under commitment
    We now turn to the optimal capital control policies. Under commitment, policy makers in each period can
commit themselves to a policy path τc,t with t = 0, 1, specified at the initial period t = 0. They choose such a policy
path to maximize the lifetime utility of a representative household subject to the implementability constraints. The
social planner under commitment is defined as follows.
                                                            ( t=3                  )
                                                             X
                                                                     t
                                                 max E0             β U (ct , lt )
                                                  Ξ
                                                              t=0




                                                                56
with
                                                      Ξ ≡ {qt , YF,t , µt , b∗t+1 }t=0,1,2

subject to

                                        µt κt Et (qt+1 ) + b∗t+1 − ϑp∗F YF,t = 0, t = 0, 1
                                                                           

                                               κt Et (qt+1 ) ≥ −b∗t+1 + ϑp∗F YF,t , t = 0, 1

                                                                   µt ≥ 0, t = 0, 1

                                                      µ2 [κ2 q̄ + b∗3 − ϑp∗F YF,2 ] = 0,

                                                           κ2 q̄ ≥ −b∗3 + ϑp∗F YF,2

                                                          µ2 ≥ 0
                                                                  
                                        Uc (t + 1)
                              qt = Et β            (rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) + µt κt Et {qt+1 } , t = 0, 1
                                         Uc (t)
                                                                            
                                                          Uc (3)
                                              q2 = E2 β          (rK,3 + q3 ) ,
                                                          Uc (2)
                                                                            
                                                       ∗           Uc (3) ∗
                                              1 = µ2 R + E2 β             R ,
                                                                   Uc (2)
                                                 p∗F (1 + µt ϑ) YF,t = αF Yt , t = 0, 1, 2

    Variables {ct , Lt , Yt , rK,t } are functions of {qt , YF,t , µt , b∗t+1 }, given the initial state b∗0 . The associated capital
control can be backed out from the bond Euler equation
                                                                            
                                                               ∗Uc (t + 1) ∗
                                       τc,t   = 1 − µt R − Et β           R , t = 0, 1.
                                                                 Uc (t)

B.4     Equilibrium under discretion
    Under discretion, the planner at each period will reset the level of capital control to maximize the lifetime utility
of a representative agent conditional on the information up to that period, here the level of borrowing and exogenous
shocks. The planner will ignore the impact of current policy on the past households’ decisions, while policy makers
take such impact into account under commitment.


B.4.1     Social planner’s problem at period t=1
    Consider first the policy maker’s problem at period t = 1.
                                                                           ( t=3                         )
                                                                            X
                                              V1 (b∗1 ; κ1 )   = max E1             β   t−1
                                                                                              U (ct , lt )                     (B.9)
                                                                    Ξ
                                                                              t=1

with
                                                        Ξ ≡ {qt , YF,t , µt , b∗t+1 }t=1,2

subject to
                                                  µ1 [κ1 E1 (q2 ) + b∗2 − ϑp∗F YF,1 ] = 0,

                                                       κ1 E1 (q2 ) ≥ −b∗2 + ϑp∗F YF,1 ,


                                                                         57
                                                                       µ1 ≥ 0,

                                                         µ2 [κ2 q̄ + b∗3 − ϑp∗F YF,2 ] = 0,

                                                              κ2 q̄ ≥ −b∗3 + ϑp∗F YF,2

                                                                       µ2 ≥ 0

                                                                          
                                                        Uc (2)
                                             q1 = E1 β         (rK,2 + q2 ) + µ1 κ1 E1 {q2 } ,
                                                        Uc (1)
                                                                                   
                                                                 Uc (3)
                                                    q2 = E2 β           (rK,3 + q3 ) ,
                                                                 Uc (2)
                                                                                   
                                                             ∗            Uc (3) ∗
                                                    1 = µ2 R + E2 β              R ,
                                                                          Uc (2)
                                                      p∗F (1 + µt ϑ) YF,t = αF Yt , t = 1, 2

    Variables {ct , Lt , Yt , rK,t } are functions of {qt , YF,t , µt , b∗t+1 }, given the initial state b∗1 . The associated capital
control can be backed out from the bond Euler equation
                                                                                    
                                                                            Uc (2) ∗
                                                    τc,1 = 1 − µ1 R∗ − E1 β        R .
                                                                            Uc (1)

     Once obtain the solution to problem (B.9) given initial condition (b∗1 ; κ1 ), we can write the variables of interest
and maximal lifetime utility as functions of the beginning-of-period borrowing and exogenous shock, qt (b∗1 ; κ1 ),
YF,t (b∗1 ; κ1 ), µt (b∗1 ; κ1 ), b∗t+1 (b∗1 ; κ1 ), Lt (b∗1 ; κ1 ), ct (b∗1 ; κ1 ), rK,t (b∗1 ; κ1 ), c̃t (b∗1 ; κ1 ) for t = 1, 2, and V1 (b∗1 ; κ1 ).


B.4.2       Social planner’s problem at period t=0
     At the first period t = 0, the policy maker faces a following problem

                                              V0 (b∗0 ; κ0 ) = max U (c0 , l0 ) + βE0 {V1 (b∗1 ; κ1 )}                                         (B.10)
                                                                 Ξ

with
                                                              Ξ ≡ {q0 , YF,0 , µ0 , b∗1 }

subject to
                                                 µ0 [κ0 E0 (q1 (b∗1 ; κ1 )) + b∗1 − ϑp∗F YF,0 ] = 0,

                                                     κ0 E0 (q1 (b∗1 ; κ1 )) ≥ −b∗1 + ϑp∗F YF,0 ,

                                                                    µ0 ≥ 0,
                                              ∗
                                                                                          
                                    Uc (c̃1 (b1 ; κ1 ))
                          q0 = E0 β                     (rK,1 (b∗1 ; κ1 ) + q1 (b∗1 ; κ1 )) + µ0 κ0 E0 {q1 (b∗1 ; κ1 )} ,
                                        Uc (c̃0 )
                                                          p∗F (1 + µ0 ϑ) YF,0 = αF Y0 .

   Once the policymaker at period t = 0 solves problem (B.10), the allocations across all periods can be pinned
down completely.




                                                                          58
B.5     Specification of shocks
    The only exogenous disturbance is the leverage shock κt . For simplicity, we assume that uncertainty is resolved
in the very beginning of period t = 0. The leverage parameter is fixed at κt = 0.4 for t = 0, 1, 2. Parameter q̄ is
chosen such that the credit constraint at period t = 2 is binding when it also binds at period t = 1, say q̄ = q2F B /1.35,
where superscript F B denotes the first-best. This specification makes the ‘financial accelerator’ work in the first two
periods t = 0, 1.


C     Derivation of import tax
    In the baseline infinite-period model, domestic policy maker has an incentive to manipulate terms of trade
and pecuniary externality simultaneously. In order to focus on the role of capital controls for fixing pecuniary
externalities, we put an exogenous import tax to correct the terms of trade manipulation in normal times. To
simplify the derivation, we assume that the policymaker faces a collateral whose value is exogenously determined.
The social planner faces a following problem

                                                                          +∞
                                                                          X
                                                   max               E0         β t U (Ct , Lt ),
                                           {Ct ,Yt ,Lt ,et ,b∗
                                                             t+1 }        t=0

subject to
                                                    Yt = Ct + (et )ρ ζt∗ ,
                                                                ∗            
                                               ρ ∗              bt+1        ∗
                                          (et ) ζt − YF,t et =     ∗     − bt et ,
                                                                Rt+1
                                                   κt q̄ + b∗t+1 − ϑYF,t ≥ 0,

                                                     Yt = At (YF,t )αF Lα
                                                                        t .
                                                                          L




    The optimality conditions can be written as
                                                             wt = χLνt ,
                                               ρ
                                                   et (1 + µt ϑ) YF,t = αF Yt ,
                                             ρ−1
                                                                               
                                               ∗            Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗
                                       1 = µt Rt+1 + Et β                   Rt+1 .
                                                               Uc (t)   et
There is a constant export markup ρ/(ρ − 1) in the social planner’s optimality conditions. To be consistent with
this allocation and also following the literature, we impose a constant import tax τN,t ≡ 1/(ρ − 1) in the competitive
equilibrium. With this constant tax, capital controls do not target the terms of trade manipulation in normal times.


D     Optimal capital controls under commitment
    This section derives the optimality conditions faced by a Ramsey planner under commitment. For simplicity, we
consider a perfect foresight model, but the arguments in the perfect foresight model go through unchanged for the
stochastic infinite horizon model.
    Assume that the exogenous shocks are realized at the very beginning of the initial period t = 0. The planner
chooses a sequence of state-contingent capital inflow tax {τc,t }+∞
                                                                 t=0 at period t = 0 to maximize a representative
household’s lifetime utility and commits to honor this policy profile at every following period. Equivalently, the



                                                                     59
planner chooses a sequence of allocations and prices subjective to the implementability constraints. The inflow
tax τc,t is then backed out from the household’s bond Euler equation. We consider first a model without nominal
rigidities.
    The problem faced by the Ramsey planner reads

                                                +∞
                                                X                                            L1+ν
                                                                                              t
                                         max           β t U (C̃t ), with C̃t ≡ Ct − χ
                                          {Ξ}
                                                 t=0
                                                                                             1+ν

with
                                           Ξ = {C̃t , Lt , Yt , YF,t , b∗t+1 , qt , ηt , rK,t , et }

subject to
                                                          qt+1    Uc (t + 1)
                              λ2,t : − qt + µt κt et           +β            (rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) = 0,                   (D.1)
                                                          et+1     Uc (t)
                                      λ6,t : (1 + τN,t )et (1 + µt ϑ) YF,t − αF Yt = 0,                              (D.2)

                                                       λ7,t : χL1+ν
                                                                t   − αL Yt = 0,                                     (D.3)

                                                        λ8,t : rK,t − αK Yt = 0,                                     (D.4)
                                                qt+1
                                  λ9,t : κt          + b∗t+1 − ϑYF,t (1 + τN,t ) − almt = 0,                         (D.5)
                                                et+1
                                                λ10,t : − Yt + At (YF,t )αF Lα
                                                                             t
                                                                               L
                                                                                 =0                                  (D.6)
                                                                 L1+ν
                                             λ12,t : Yt − C̃t − χ  t
                                                                       − eρt ζt∗ = 0,                                (D.7)
                                                                 1+ν
                                                                      ∗           
                                                       ρ−1 ∗          bt+1       ∗
                                      λ13,t     : (et ) ζt − YF,t −     ∗    − bt = 0.                               (D.8)
                                                                      Rt+1
where λj,t with j = 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13 denote the Lagrange multipliers for the corresponding constraints. µt =
             3                              3
(max(0, ηt )) and almt = (max(0, −ηt )) . The optimality conditions are written as follows.
   The effective consumption C̃t at period t = 0

                                                                     U0 (1)
                                     Uc (0) − λ12,0 − λ2,0 β                 Ucc (0)(rK,1 + q1 ),
                                                                     Uc2 (0)

and at period t > 0

                                         Ut (t + 1)                                   Ucc (t)
               Uc (t) − λ12,t − λ2,t β              Ucc (t)(rK,t+1 + qt+1 ) + λ2,t−1            (rK,t + qt ) = 0,    (D.9)
                                          Uc2 (t)                                    Uc (t − 1)

   Labor Lt
                                                                           Yt
                                      λ7,t χ(1 + ν)Lνt + λ10,t αL             − λ12,t χLνt = 0,                     (D.10)
                                                                           Lt
   Total production Yt
                                    − λ6,t αF − λ7,t αL − λ8,t αK − λ10,t + λ12,t = 0,                              (D.11)

   Imported goods YF,t

                                                                                              αF Yt
                         λ6,t (1 + τN,t )et (1 + ϑµt ) − λ9,t ϑ(1 + τN,t ) + λ10,t                  − λ13,t = 0,    (D.12)
                                                                                              YF,t



                                                                     60
   Capital price qt at period t = 0
                                                                 λ2,0 = 0,

and at period t > 0

                                      λ2,t−1               1  λ9,t−1     1          Uc (t)
                        − λ2,t +             µt−1 κt−1 et−1 +        κt−1 + λ2,t−1            = 0,                 (D.13)
                                        β                  et   β        et        Uc (t − 1)

   Lagrange multiplier for collateral constraint ηt

                                             qt+1 dµt                             dµt        dalmt
                                λ2,t κt et            + λ6,t (1 + τN,t )et YF,t ϑ     − λ9,t       = 0,            (D.14)
                                             et+1 dηt                             dηt         dηt

   Marginal product of capital rK,t at period t = 0

                                                                 λ8,0 = 0,

and at period t > 0
                                                                        Uc (t)
                                                       λ8,t + λ2,t−1              = 0,                             (D.15)
                                                                       Uc (t − 1)
   Real exchange rate et at period t = 0
                             q1
                λ2,0 µ0 κ0      + λ6,0 (1 + τN,t )YF,0 (1 + µ0 ϑ) − λ12,0 ρeρ−1
                                                                            0   ζ0∗ + λ13,0 (ρ − 1)eρ−2
                                                                                                    0   ζ0∗ = 0,
                             e1

and at period t > 0,
                                qt+1
                   λ2,t µt κt        + λ6,t (1 + τN,t )YF,t (1 + µt ϑ) − λ12,t ρeρ−1
                                                                                 t   ζt∗ + λ13,t (ρ − 1)eρ−2
                                                                                                         t   ζt∗
                                et+1

                                                 λ2,t−1               qt   λ9,t−1     qt
                                             −          µt−1 κt−1 et−1 2 −        κt−1 2 = 0,                      (D.16)
                                                   β                  et     β        et
   Borrowing b∗t+1
                                                 ∂(qt+1 /et+1 ) λ2,t β ∂ (Uc (t + 1)(rK,t+1 + qt+1 ))
                                 λ2,t µt κt et                 +
                                                    ∂b∗t+1       Uc (t)            ∂b∗t+1
                                                   λ13,t                       ∂(qt+1 /et+1 )
                                     + λ9,t −       ∗    + βλ13,t+1 + +λ9,t κt                = 0,                 (D.17)
                                                   Rt+1                           ∂b∗t+1
    Under commitment, the Ramsey planner takes into account of the effects of future allocations and prices on the
past allocations and prices, which works through Lagrange multipliers λ2,t−1 and λ9,t−1 . The logic in this model is
the same as that in the simplified finite-period model.
    Now consider a model with nominal rigidities. Policy instruments are monetary policy and capital controls. Note
that nominal rigidities are introduced through price adjustment costs deviating from a constant inflation target. Any
deviation from the target in normal times (non-crisis episodes) will reduce total output available to private agents
and distort factor prices in the economy. If monetary policy were in place, the monetary authority would completely
neutralize nominal rigidities through strict price stability period by period. This optimal monetary policy holds both
under discretion and under commitment in normal times. With both monetary policy and capital control instruments
at hand, monetary policy can completely stabilize domestic prices to offset nominal rigidities both in normal times
and in crisis, and the optimal capital controls are laid down as above.




                                                                    61
D.1     Optimal capital controls under discretion
     Under discretion, a Ramsey planner has a chance to re-optimize her problem at every period and does not take
into account of the effects of current policy on the responses of past endogenous variables. Therefore, the only
endogenous state variable inherited from the previous planner is borrowing b∗t+1 . The optimality conditions under
discretion are the same conditions as those in period t = 0 (equation D.9-D.17), λ2,t−1 = λ9,t−1 = 0, implying
λ2,t = λ8,t = 0, and λ12,t = Uc (t).
     First notice that when the collateral constraint binds at period t µt > 0, equation (D.14) implies that λ6,t = 0.
From equation (D.16), λ13,t = λ12,t et ρ/(ρ − 1). Combining equation (D.11) and (D.10) yields λ7,t = 0 and λ10,t =
λ12,t . The bond Euler equation (D.17) can then be written as

                                Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗   λ9,t ∗    λ9,t ∗   ∂(qt+1 /et+1 )
                          1=β                  R  +     R   +     R κt                                              (D.18)
                                 Uc (t)     et t+1 λ13,t t+1 λ13,t t+1    ∂b∗t+1

    When the import tax is given by τN,t = 1/(ρ − 1), equation (D.12) can be simplified as

                                                   λ9,t = λ10,t et µt > 0

and accordingly equation (D.18) can be rewritten as

                             Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗     ρ−1     ∗     ρ−1     ∗      ∂(qt+1 /et+1 )
                       1=β                  Rt+1 +     µt Rt+1 +     µt Rt+1 κt                                     (D.19)
                              Uc (t)     et         ρ             ρ                ∂b∗t+1

Alternatively,
                                              Uc (t + 1) et+1 ∗        ∗
                                       1=β                   R   + µt Rt+1 + τc,t                                   (D.20)
                                               Uc (t)     et t+1
with
                                              1    ∗     ρ−1      ∗      ∂(qt+1 /et+1 )
                                    τc,t ≡ − µt Rt+1  +       µt Rt+1 κt
                                              ρ            ρ                 ∂b∗t+1
                                                ∗                                 
                                           µt Rt+1                  ∂(qt+1 /et+1 )
                                         =           −1 + (ρ − 1)κt
                                               ρ                       ∂b∗t+1
When the elasticity ρ is large and the value of collateralized assets qt+1 /et+1 is steep with respect to borrowing b∗t+1 ,
the Ramsey planner under discretion always taxes capital inflow τc,t > 0 whenever the collateral constraint binds.
Similarly, when the collateral constraint does not bind at period t, one can show that λ6,t = 0, λ7,t = 0, λ9,t = 0,
λ10,t = λ12,t and λ13,t = λ12,t et ρ/(ρ − 1).


E      Proof of Proposition 2
    We state the proof explicitly for a deterministic finite horizon case based on the optimality conditions derived
from Appendix D, but the results go through unchanged for the stochastic infinite horizon model.
    Consider first the Ramsey planner decisions in periods t = {0, 1, 2, 3, ...} in a perfect foresight model where
constraints do not bind in t = {0, 1} and bind with certainty in t = {2, 3}. Note that the Lagrange multipliers
for the capital Euler equation λ2,t and the collateral constraint λ9,t carry the constraints under commitment into
period t + 1. In the optimality conditions under commitment, only (λ2,t−1 , λ9,t−1 ) and (λ2,t , λ9,t ) appear, and not
the multipliers (λ2,t+1 , λ9,t+1 ). Therefore, capital controls are not ‘macro-prudential’ in our model economy.
    When µ0 = 0 in period t = 0, we have λ2,0 = λ9,0 = 0 whenever λ2,−1 = λ9,−1 = 0. In period t = 1, we still have
λ2,1 = λ9,1 = 0 if µ1 = 0 both under commitment and under discretion, although constraints will bind at t = 2 with


                                                            62
certainty. We then have τc,0 = τc,1 = 0.
     Second, consider a more general case. In the case without commitment, λ2,t = λ9,t = 0 as long as µt = 0
for any period t as shown in Appendix D.1, even though the collateral constraint binds next period, and thereby
τc,t = 0. In the case with commitment, when the collateral constraints don’t bind for many periods to the extent
that λ2,t−1 = λ9,t−1 = 0, the argument starting from period t = 0 above still goes through and τc,t = 0 if µt = 0.
Note that the crisis is rare and isn’t persistent, the statement that τc,t = 0 when µt = 0 holds most of time under
commitment.
     The argument goes through unchanged if the constraint binds only with some probability in the next period.


F       A model with sticky prices and sticky wages
    We detail here only the model equations that change, rather than present the entire model again. We interpret
households now as being endowed with a specific type of labor, lt (j), for which they are the monopoly supplier to
the market. These labor services are aggregated into a labor composite

                                                  Z    1            θW −1
                                                                                   θ θW−1
                                                                                     W
                                           Lt =             lt (j)    θW
                                                                             dj              ,
                                                    0

where θW > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between different types of labor. The wage rate for one unit of aggregate
labor services is
                                                 Z 1                  1−θ1
                                                                             W
                                                             1−θW
                                           Wt =       Wt (j)       dj          ,
                                                    0

and the demand for labor of type j is
                                                                        −θW
                                                                Wt (j)
                                              lt (j) =                              Lt .
                                                                 Wt
For simplicity, we permit trade in a full set of contingent securities to eliminate differences across types.
    Labor income for a household with type j labor now has a new term. In the budget constraint labor income is
reduced by a fraction ψt (j), which will reflect resources lost in the adjustment of individual nominal wages. Following
Varian (1975) and Kim and Ruge-Murcia (2009), we permit asymmetric adjustment:

                                      φW 
                             ψt Ωind  = 2 exp γW Ωint     − γW Ωint
                                                                    
                                 t                t −1          t −1 −1 ,
                                       γW

where
                                                                     Wt
                                                   Ωind =                  ,
                                                    t
                                                                  πtϕ Wt−1
ϕ captures indexation of nominal wages to inflation, φW captures the convexity of adjustment costs, and γW controls
the asymmetry (specifically, γW < 0 implies it is costlier to reduce than increase nominal wages).
    We consider only symmetric equilibrium where nominal wages do not depend on j, leading to the wage Phillips
curve
                       ν
                         χlt                                    πW,t φW 
                               − (θW − 1) 1 + τW − ψt Ωind                    exp γW Ωind
                                                                                                   
            0 = θW                                          t     − ϕ                   t   −1 −1 +
                         wt                                          πt γ W
                       "                                                       #
                                     2
                         Uc (t + 1) πW,t+1 lt+1 φW              ind
                                                                            
                   βEt                1+ϕ           exp γW Ωt+1 − 1 − 1
                           Uc (t) πt+1       lt γ W

                              Wt
with wage inflation πW,t =   Wt−1 .


                                                                 63
   If wages are costlessly to adjust (φW = 0) then the real wage equals the disutility of labor times a constant
markup,
                                                   θW      1
                                           wt =                χlν ,
                                                 θW − 1 1 + τW t
we set τW = 1/ (θW − 1) to eliminate the monopoly distortion under flexible wages. In general, the evolution of the
real wage is determined the gap between wage inflation and price inflation,
                                                                      πW,t
                                                              wt =         wt−1 .
                                                                       πt
    We also need to modify the market clearing condition for composite consumption goods to account for the
resources lost via wage adjustment

                             Yt − φ (πt ) Yt − wt Lt ψt Ωint
                                                             
                                                         t     = Ct + Xt + qt (Kt+1 − Kt ) .

     There are three more parameters to be calibrated, φW , θW and γW , in the this extension. We set φW = 32,
θW = 3.5 as in Kim and Ruge-Murcia (2009), and focus on a small downward wage asymmetry γW = −20 for the
illustrative purpose. The wage indexation parameter is set as ϕ = 0 to study the nominal wage rigidity.


G     The solution algorithms
G.1     The solution algorithm for the competitive equilibrium
   We solve for policy functions in the competitive equilibrium based on the first-order necessary conditions in
Appendix A. First, the following transformation is used to take care of the occasionally binding constraints:

                                                                                      3
                                                             µt = (max(0, ηt ))                                  (G.1)
                                            
                                      qt+1                                                              3
                          κt Et                  + b∗t+1 − (1 + τN,t )ϑYF,t = almt ≡ (max(0, −ηt ))              (G.2)
                                      et+1
where ηt is a real number.
    Second, the endogenous state variable b∗t is discretized into 300 grid points. Combining with 8 grid points for
                                         ∗
the three exogenous shocks Zt ≡ (At , Rt+1   , κt ), there are 300 × 8 grid points in total. Third, we make use of time
iteration to find a fixed point of the model.
    Note that the following five variables, representing inputs, total output, the return on capital, and consumption
can be solved analytically as functions of bond holdings and the real exchange rate

                                                                                   b∗t+1
                                                                                             
                                                  YF,t =    (et )ρ−1 ζt∗   −          ∗
                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                         − bt ,
                                                                                   Rt+1
                                                                                           1
                                                       pM,t αL At (YF,t )αF
                                                                                      1+ν−α
                                                                                                L
                                                  Lt =                                              ,
                                                                χ
                                                            Yt = At (YF,t )αF Lα
                                                                               t ,
                                                                                 L




                                                             rK,t = αK pM,t Yt ,
                                                                                   L1+ν
                                                 C̃t = Yt [1 − φ(πt )] − χ          t
                                                                                        − eρt ζt∗ .
                                                                                   1+ν



                                                                       64
    Given policy functions for future variables b∗t+2 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), qt+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), et+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), ηt+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ),
pM,t+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), and πt+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), we can solve for b∗t+1 , Lt , C̃t , Yt , YF,t , qt , ηt , rK,t , et , pM,t and πt at each
grid point (b∗t , Zt ) from the system of equilibrium conditions by using a Newton-type nonlinear solver. Whenever
the nonlinear solver fails to find a solution, we then apply a homotopy path-following algorithm to find a good initial
guess for the nonlinear solver (Eaves and Schmedders, 1999). When policy functions in two consecutive periods are
close enough, say, the maximal difference is below  = 10−5 , the iteration stops; otherwise redo the iteration starting
from new policy functions obtained at period t.


G.2      The solution algorithm for the Ramsey problems
     We solve the Ramsey planner’s problem based on value function V (b∗t , Zt ) directly, subject to the implementability
constraints, which are defined in the main text. Similarly to the competitive equilibrium, the occasionally binding
constraint and its Lagrange multiplier are replaced by two smooth functions (G.1-G.2). We use time iteration to
find a fixed point of the model.
     Given policy functions for future variables b∗t+2 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), qt+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), et+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), ηt+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ),
pM,t+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), πt+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), and value function Vt+1 (b∗t+1 , Zt+1 ), we can find b∗t+1 , Lt , C̃t , Yt , YF,t , qt , ηt ,
rK,t , et , pM,t and πt to maximize the current value function Vt (b∗t , Zt ), subject to the implementability constraints,
at each grid point (b∗t , Zt ), by using a feasible sequential quadratic programming (Schittkowski, 2014). When policy
functions and value function in two consecutive periods are close enough, say, the maximal difference is below
 = 10−5 , the iteration stops; otherwise redo the iteration starting from new policy functions obtained at period t.




                                                                   65
