                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CONTROLLING FOR THE COMPROMISE EFFECT DEBIASES ESTIMATES OF
                      RISK PREFERENCE PARAMETERS

                                         Jonathan P. Beauchamp
                                           Daniel J. Benjamin
                                          Christopher F. Chabris
                                            David I. Laibson

                                          Working Paper 21792
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w21792


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2015




We thank Helga Fehr-Duda, Philipp Koellinger, Kevin McCabe, Ted OíDonoghue, Matthew Rabin,
Charlie Sprenger, as well as the Editor Charles Noussair and two anonymous referees, for helpful comments.
For research assistance, we are grateful to Jonathan Cohen, Brice Cooke, Jaesun Lee, and especially
Brendan Price, Alexandra Roulet, and Stephen Tino. Research reported in this publication was supported
by the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers R01AG021650
and P01AG005842 to the NBER and R21AG037741 to Cornell University. The content is the sole
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes
of Health or of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Beauchamp and Laibson thank the Pershing
Square Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior for financial support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Daniel J. Benjamin, Christopher F. Chabris, and David I. Laibson.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Controlling for the Compromise Effect Debiases Estimates of Risk Preference Parameters
Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Daniel J. Benjamin, Christopher F. Chabris, and David I. Laibson
NBER Working Paper No. 21792
December 2015, Revised November 2018
JEL No. B49,D03,D14,D83,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

The compromise effect arises when options near the "middle" of a choice set are more appealing. The
compromise effect poses conceptual and practical problems for economic research: by influencing
choices, it distorts revealed preferences, biasing researchers' inferences about deep (i.e., domain general)
preferences. We propose and estimate an econometric model that disentangles and identifies both deep
preferences and the context-dependent compromise effect. We demonstrate our method using data
from an experiment with 550 participants who made choices over lotteries from multiple price lists.
Following prior work, we manipulate the compromise effect by varying the middle options of each
multiple price list and then estimate risk preferences without modelling the compromise effect. These
naïve parameter estimates are not robust: they change as the compromise effect is manipulated. To
eliminate this bias, we incorporate the compromise effect directly into our econometric model. We
show that this method generates robust estimates of risk preference parameters that are no longer sensitive
to compromise-effect manipulations. This method can be applied to other settings that exhibit the compromise
effect.


Jonathan P. Beauchamp                                Christopher F. Chabris
Department of Economics                              100 North Academy Avenue
Harvard University                                   Danville, Penn 17822-3069
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  United States
beauchamp.jonathan@gmail.com                         chabris@gmail.com

Daniel J. Benjamin                                   David I. Laibson
Center for Economics and Social Research             Department of Economics
University of Southern California                    Littauer M-12
635 Downie Way, Suite 312                            Harvard University
Los Angeles, CA 90089-3332                           Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                             and NBER
daniel.benjamin@gmail.com                            dlaibson@gmail.com
1    Introduction

    The compromise e§ect arises when options in a choice set can be ordered on common dimensions

or attributes (such as price, quantity, size, or intensity), and decision makers tend to select the

options in the ìmiddleî of the choice set. For example, suppose a group of respondents were

asked whether they wanted a free nature hike of either 1 mile or 4 miles. Now suppose that a

di§erent, otherwise identical group were asked whether they preferred a free nature hike of 1, 4, or

7 miles. A compromise e§ect could lead to a greater fraction of respondents choosing 4 miles in

the second choice set (see Simonson 1989 for a closely related empirical result and Kamenica 2008

for a discussion of microfoundations).

    The compromise e§ect poses conceptual and practical problems for economic research. By ináu-

encing choices, the compromise e§ect distorts revealed preferences, biasing researchersí inferences

about deep (i.e., domain general) preferences.

    In this paper, we propose and estimate an econometric model that disentangles and separately

identiÖes both the deep preferences and the (situational) compromise e§ect that is ináuencing

the expression of those deep preferences. To demonstrate our approach, we conduct a laboratory

experiment with 550 participants in which we elicit risk preferences using a multiple price list

(MPL). We study this context because, despite the limitations of the MPL procedure, it is among

the most commonly used methods to elicit preferences in the economics literature (e.g., Tversky and

Kahneman 1992, Holt and Laury 2002, Harrison, List, and Towe 2007, Andersen, Harrison, Lau,

and Rutstrˆm 2008) and because the compromise e§ect has been carefully and robustly documented

already in the context of inferring risk preferences using an MPL (Birnbaum 1992, Harrison, Lau,

Rutstrˆm, and Sullivan 2005, Andersen, Harrison, Lau, and Rutstrˆm 2006, Harrison, Lau, and

Rutstrˆm 2007). We use the term compromise e§ect as short-hand for a bias toward the middle

option, which is what these papers document.

    The screenshot below is drawn from our own experiment and is typical of MPL experiments.

In this example, a participant is asked to make seven binary choices. Each of the seven choices is

between a gamble and a sure-thing alternative. The gamble doesnít change across the seven rows,

while the sure-thing alternative varies from high to low.




                                                 3
   A subject who displayed a strong compromise e§ect would act as if she were indi§erent between

the gamble and the sure-thing in the middle row, which is row (d). Such indi§erence would imply

that she is risk seeking because the gamble has a lower expected value than the sure thing in row

(d). In this example, a strong compromise e§ect would lead a participant who may otherwise be

risk-averse to make risk-seeking choices.

   Following prior work (Birnbaum 1992, Harrison, Lau, Rutstrˆm, and Sullivan 2005, Andersen,

Harrison, Lau, and Rutstrˆm 2006, Harrison, Lau, and Rutstrˆm 2007, and Harrison, List, and

Towe 2007), we experimentally vary the middle option using scale manipulations. SpeciÖcally, we

hold the lowest and highest alternatives of the MPL Öxed and manipulate the locations of the

Öve intermediate outcomes within the scale. For example, compare the screenshot above to the

screenshot that follows, which has new alternatives in rows (b) through (f), although rows (a) and

(g) are the same. With respect to this second MPL, an agent who acts as if the middle option, row

(d), is her indi§erence point would be judged to be risk averse.




In our experiment, each participant is exposed to one of Öve di§erent scale treatment conditions.

   To econometrically disentangle risk preferences from the compromise e§ect, we augment a



                                                 4
discrete-choice model with additional parameters that represent a penalty for choosing a switch

point further from the middle. Note that our approach of incorporating the compromise e§ect into

the econometric model is di§erent from including treatment-condition indicators as controls. Sim-

ply controlling for treatment condition would not identify domain-general preferences because the

compromise e§ect can ináuence choices in every treatment condition (i.e., there is no benchmark,

compromise-e§ect-free treatment condition).

       The deep preferences we study in the current paper are prospect-theoretic preferences over risky

lotteries (e.g., Tversky and Kahneman 1992, Wakker 2010, Bruhin, Fehr-Duda, and Epper 2010).

Our ex-ante hypotheses focus on two parameters: curvature ! (which captures risk aversion over

gains and risk seeking over losses) and loss aversion " (which captures the degree to which people

dislike losses more than they like gains).1 Our analysis yields three main Öndings.

       First, our estimates of the compromise-e§ect parameters replicate the Öndings from earlier

work that participants have a bias toward choosing a switch point in the middle rows of the MPL

(e.g., Harrison, Lau, Rutstrˆm, and Sullivan 2005; see other references above). Moreover, our

quantitative estimates indicate that the bias is sizeable; we estimate that the attractiveness of the

middle rows relative to the extreme rows represents 17%-23% of the prospectsí monetary value.

       Second, when we estimate the prospect-theory model without controls for the compromise e§ect,

the scale manipulations have a very powerful e§ect on the (mis-) estimated preference parameters.

In particular, the compromise e§ect is strong enough to cause us to estimate either risk seeking

(as predicted by prospect theory) or risk aversion (the opposite of what is predicted by prospect

theory) in the loss domain, depending on the scale manipulations. The compromise e§ect is also

strong enough that, when manipulated, it can make behavior look as if there is essentially no loss

aversion (see the results for the Pull 2 treatment below).

       Third, when we estimate the prospect-theory parameters while including additional parameters

to capture the compromise e§ect, our estimates of ! and " are robust across the Öve scale treatment

conditions. The robustness of these preference-parameter estimates implies that they are not biased
   1
    We predicted that our scaling manipulations would not substantially change the estimated parameters of the
probability weighting function, because the prospects all have ìprobability-áippedî variants: i.e., for each MPL
featuring a prospect with probability p of monetary outcome xH and probability 1 ! p of monetary outcome xL , the
experiment includes another MPL featuring a probability-áipped prospect with probability 1 ! p of outcome xH and
probability p of outcome xL . Scaling manipulations will have (approximately) o§setting e§ects with respect to the
probability weighting function for these two probability-áipped prospects.



                                                        5
by the compromise e§ect. (When estimating the model pooling all of our experimental data, our
                            ^ = 1:31, which fall within the range of estimates in the existing
estimates are !^ = 0:24 and "
                        ^ toward the lower end of the range.)
literature, albeit with "

   In addition to the scale manipulations described above, we also study the e§ect of telling ex-

perimental participants the expected value of the risky prospects. We hypothesized that this ma-

nipulation would anchor the participants on the expected value, thereby nudging their preferences

toward risk neutrality. However, we Önd that expected value information does not a§ect measured

risk aversion nor measured loss aversion. Our null e§ect echoes the Öndings of Lichtenstein, Slovic,

and Zink (1969) and Montgomery and Adelbratt (1982). However, Harrison and Rutstrˆm (2008)

do Önd that providing expected value information signiÖcantly decreases risk aversion. The dif-

ference may arise because the prospects in their experiment are relatively complex, each involving

four possible outcomes (versus one or two in our experiment).

   This paper contributes to the literature on the compromise e§ect by estimating a model that

explicitly accounts for the compromise e§ect and enables us to separately estimate it from risk

preferences. Our sample is substantially larger than those used in earlier work, which allows us

to precisely estimate the e§ects of the scale manipulations. Moreover, because we pose gambles

involving losses as well as gambles involving gains, we can study the e§ect of scale manipulations

not only on risk aversion over gains, but also on risk aversion over losses and on loss aversion.

In addition, we provide estimates of the economic magnitude and importance of the compromise

e§ect relative to the prospectsí monetary value, and we examine the demographic correlates of the

parameters in our econometric model. A limitation of our experiment is that only one out of its

four parts (which involves 28 of the 62 sets of choices we analyze) is incentivized. Reassuringly, all

of our results still hold when we restrict attention to the incentivized data.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss our experimental design.

In Section 3, we describe our econometric discrete-choice model, which incorporates the compromise

e§ect. In Section 4, we list and discuss the Öve formal hypotheses that we test. In Section 5, we

report the results of the estimation of our model, and we test the robustness of the estimates to the

scale manipulations. Section 6 parallels Section 5 but examines the prospect-theory model without

controls for the compromise e§ect. Section 7 estimates the economic magnitude and importance

of the compromise e§ect in our data. Sections 8 brieáy analyzes the demographic correlates of

                                                  6
the main parameters of our econometric model (including !, ", and parameters that capture the

compromise e§ect). Section 9 brieáy discusses the results of our expected value manipulation.

Section 10 concludes.



2        Experiment

2.1       Design

        Throughout the experiment, we employ the Multiple Price List (MPL) elicitation method (Tver-

sky and Kahneman 1992, Holt and Laury 2002). At the top of each computer screen, a Öxed prospect

is presented. The Öxed prospect is usually a non-degenerate lottery; it is ìÖxedî in the sense that

it is an option in all of the binary choices on that screen. (The Öxed prospect changes across

screens.) On each screen, seven binary choices are listed below the Öxed prospect. Each binary

choice is made between the Öxed prospect (at the top of the screen) and what we refer to as an

alternative (or alternative prospect). The alternatives vary within a screen, with one alternative

for each of the seven binary choices. In some (but not all) cases, the alternatives are sure things.

Screenshots of the experiment are shown in the Introduction as well as in the Appendix, and the

original instructions of the experiment are shown in the Online Appendix.

        Our set-up for eliciting risk preferences is standard. Indeed, we designed many details of our

experimentósuch as giving participants choices between a Öxed prospect and seven alternativesó

to closely follow Tversky and Kahnemanís (1992; henceforth T&K) experiment in their paper that

introduced Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT). Moreover, our set of Öxed prospects is identical

to the set used by T&K. Further mimicking T&Kís procedure, our computer program enforces

consistency in the participantsí choices by requiring participants to respond monotonically to the

seven choices on the screen.2 Our algorithm for generating the seven alternatives is explained in

Section 2.2 and in the Online Appendix, where we also list the complete set of Öxed prospects and

alternatives.3
    2
      More precisely, participants have to select only two circles: the one corresponding to the worst alternative outcome
they prefer to the Öxed prospect and the one corresponding to the Öxed prospect in the following row. The other
circles are auto-Ölled. This procedure is a version of the ìSwitching MPLî (or ìsMPLî, see Andersen et al. 2006).
This procedure reduces participantsí fatigue and produces clean data, but it might have the unintended e§ect of
biasing participants to select a row near the middle and thus exaggerating the compromise e§ect.
    3
      Our procedure di§ers from T&Kís in three ways. First, T&K do not report the actual values they used. Second,
while their gambles were all hypothetical, our ìPart Aî gambles are incentivized. Third, for each screen, T&K



                                                            7
    Each participant faces a total of 64 screens in the experiment, each of which contains seven

choices between a Öxed prospect and alternatives. There are four types of screens that di§er from

each other in the kinds of prospects and alternatives they present. To make it easier for participants

to correctly understand the choices we are presenting to them, we divide the experiment into four

sequential parts (each with its own instruction screen), with each part containing a single type of

Öxed prospect and a single type of alternative. The order of the screens is randomized within each

part, with half the participants completing the screens in one order, and the other half completing

the screens in the reverse order.

    In Part A, the Öxed prospects are in the gain domain, and the alternatives are sure gains

(as in the example screens in the Introduction). There are 28 Öxed prospects that di§er both in

probabilities and money amounts, which range from $0 to $400. The seven alternatives for each

Öxed prospect range from the Öxed prospectís certainty equivalent for a CRRA expected-utility-

maximizer with CRRA parameter ! = 0:99 to the certainty equivalent for ! = "1 (which is risk

seeking).4 Because the range of estimates of ! in the literature falls well within this interval (Booij,

van Praag, and van de Kuilen, 2010), the interval likely covers the relevant range of alternatives for

the participants. Each participant is told that there is a 1/6 chance that one of his or her choices

in Part A will be randomly selected and implemented for real stakes at the end of the experiment.

The expected payout for a risk-neutral participant who rolls a 6 is about $100. The remaining

parts of the experiments involve hypothetical stakes.

    In Part B, the Öxed prospects now have outcomes in the loss domain, and the alternatives are

sure losses. The 28 prospects and alternatives in Part B are identical to those in Part A but with

all dollar amounts multiplied by -1.

    Parts C and D depart somewhat from the baseline format of our experiment, in that the

alternatives are now risky prospects rather than sure things. Moreover, in Part C, the Öxed prospect

is the degenerate prospect of a sure thing of $0 and is not listed at the top of each screen. The

seven alternatives on each of the four screens in Part C are mixed prospects that have a 50% chance
implement a two-step procedure: after Önding the point at which participants switch from preferring the alternative
outcomes to preferring the Öxed prospect, the participant make choices between the Öxed prospect and a second set
of seven alternative outcomes, linearly spaced between a value 25% higher than the lowest amount accepted in the
Örst set and a value 25% lower than the highest amount rejected. We avoid this two-step procedure (which Harrison,
Lau and Rutstrˆm, 2007, call an ìIterative Multiple Price Listî) to maintain incentive compatibility.
   4
     We use # = 0:99 because # = 1 corresponds to log utility and implies a certainty equivalent of $0 for any prospect
with a chance of a $0 outcome.


                                                          8
of a loss and 50% chance of a gain. For example, one of the screens in Part C is:




On any given screen, the amount of the possible loss is Öxed, and the seven mixed prospects involve

di§erent amounts of the possible gain. Part C has four screens, each with a di§erent loss amount:

$25, $50, $100, and $150.

   Part D also comprises four screens, each containing choices between a Öxed 50%-50% risky

prospect and seven alternative 50%-50% risky prospects. On two of the four screens, both the Öxed

prospect and the alternatives are mixed prospects, i.e., one possible outcome is a gain and the other

is a loss, as in the following:




On the other two screens, the Öxed and the alternative prospects involve only gains. On any given

screen, one of the two possible realizations of the alternative prospect is Öxed, and the seven choices

on the screen involve di§erent amounts of the other possible realization of that prospect. For each

screen in Parts C and D, the alternative prospects range from the amount that would make an

individual with linear utility, no probability distortion, and loss insensitivity (" = 0) indi§erent to

the Öxed prospect to the amount that would make an individual with loss aversion " = 3 indi§erent.

   After Parts A-D, participants complete a brief questionnaire that asks age, race, educational



                                                  9
background, standardized test scores, ZIP code of permanent residence, and parentsí income (if

the participant is a student) or own income (if not a student). It also asks a few self-reported

behavioral questions, including general willingness to take risks and frequency of gambling.


2.2   Treatments

   As detailed below, the experiment has a 5 # 2 design, with Öve ìPullî treatments, which vary

the set of alternatives, crossed with two ìEVî treatments, which vary whether the expected value of

the prospects is displayed or not. Each participant is randomly assigned to one of the ten treatment

cells and remains in this cell for all screens and all parts (A-D) of the experiment.

   The Pull treatments allow us to assess whether the compromise e§ect impacts measured risk

and loss preferences. The Öve treatments are identical in the set of Öxed prospects and in the Örst

and seventh alternative on each screen but di§er from each other in the intermediate (the second

through sixth) alternatives. For instance, in Part A for the illustrative Öxed prospect above in

the screenshots in the Introductionóa 10% chance of gaining $100 and a 90% chance of gaining

$50óthe alternatives (a) through (g) are shown in the positive half of Figure 1 for all Öve Pull

treatments.

   The Öve treatments are labeled Pull -2, Pull -1, Pull 0, Pull 1, and Pull 2. In the Pull 0

treatment, the alternatives are evenly spaced, aside from rounding to the nearest $0.10, from the

low amount of $53.60 to the high amount of $57.00. In the Pull 1 and the Pull 2 treatments, the

intermediate alternatives are more densely concentrated at the monetary amounts closer to zero.

These treatments are designed to resemble T&Kís experiment, in which the second through sixth

alternatives are ìlogarithmically spaced between the extreme outcomes of the prospectî (T&K,

p. 305). Conversely, in the Pull -1 and Pull -2 treatments, the intermediate alternatives are more

densely concentrated at the monetary amounts farther from zero. Pull 2 and Pull -2 are more skewed

than Pull 1 and Pull -1. We refer to the di§erent treatments as ìPullsî to convey the intuition

that they pull the distributions of the intermediate alternatives toward zero (for the positive Pulls)

or away from zero (for the negative Pulls).




                                                 10
11
     FIGURE 1. Alternative outcomes by Pull treatment for example screens. The right side of the Ögure shows alternative outcomes by Pull treatment for an
     example screen from Part A with a Öxed prospect o§ering a 10% chance of gaining $100 and a 90% chance of gaining $50. The left side of the Ögure shows
     alternative outcomes by Pull treatment for an example screen from Part B with a Öxed prospect o§ering a 10% chance of losing $100 and a 90% chance of
     losing $50.
       Analogously, in Parts C and D, Pull 1 and Pull 2 pull the distribution of the varying amounts

of the intermediate alternative prospect on each screen toward zero, and Pull -1 and Pull -2 do the

opposite. The Online Appendix describes the precise algorithm we use to determine the second

through sixth alternatives and shows the complete set of Öxed prospects and alternatives for each

Pull treatment and for each part of the experiment.

       The EV treatments di§er in whether or not we inform participants about the expected values of

the prospects. Because we anticipated that many participants would be unfamiliar with the concept

of expected value, simple language is used in the ìEV treatmentî to describe it. For instance, in

Part A, the following appears below the Öxed prospect at the top of the screen: ìOn average, you

would gain $55 from taking this gamble.î


2.3      Procedures and Sample

       The experiment was run online from March 11 to March 20, 2010. Our sample was drawn from

the Harvard Business School Computer Lab for Experimental Researchís (CLER) online subject

pool database. This database contains several thousand participants nationwide who are available

to participate in online studies. Participants had to be at least 18 years old, eligible to receive

payment in the U.S., and not on Harvard Universityís regular payroll. At the time we ran the

experiment, members of the CLER online subject pool database were mainly recruited through

áyer postings around neighboring campuses.

       At the launch of the experiment, the CLER lab posted a description to advertise the experiment

to the members of the online subject pool database. Any member of the pool could then participate

until a sample size of 550 was reached. Each participant was pseudo-randomly assigned to one

Pull and to one EV treatment to ensure that our treatments were well-balanced. A total of 521

participants completed all four parts of the experiment. The mean response time for the participants

who completed the experiment in less than one hour was 32 minutes.5

       In addition to the above-described incentive payment for Part A, participants were paid a total

of $5 if they began the experiment; $7 if they completed Part A; $9 if they completed Parts A

and B; $11 if they completed Parts A, B, and C; and $15 if they completed all four parts of the
   5
    Participants were allowed to complete the experiment in more than one session and some response times exceeded
24 hours. Of the 497 participants for whom we have response time data, 405 took less than an hour.



                                                       12
experiment.


2.4     Summary Statistics of the Raw Data from the Experiment

      Online Appendix Section 3 includes Ögures that show the percentage of choices where the

safe option was chosen, by Pull and EV treatments, separately for Parts A, B, C, and D of the

experiment. These Ögures give a Örst impression of the data we collected in our experiment, but

caution is warranted in interpreting them because the di§erent Pull treatments involve di§erent

sets of choices, and the raw data are thus not directly comparable across treatments.



3      Model and Estimation

3.1     Baseline CPT Model

      We assume that participantsí deep preferences can be modeled according to CPT. For prospect

P = (xH ; pH ; xL ; pL ) with probability pH of monetary outcome xH and probability pL = 1 " pH of

monetary outcome xL , we assume that utility has the form:
                   8                                                                          9
                   >
                   > !(pH ) $ u (xH ) + (1 " !(pH )) $ u (xL )              if 0 < xL < xH    >
                                                                                              >
                   >
                   >                                                                          >
                                                                                              >
                   <                                                                          =
(1)       U (P ) =   "!(pL ) $ " $ u ("xL ) " (1 " !(pL )) $ " $ u ("xH )   if xL < xH < 0 > ;
                   >
                   >                                                                        >
                   >
                   >                                                                        >
                                                                                            >
                   : !(pH ) $ u (xH ) " !(pL ) $ " $ u ("xL )                if xL < 0 < xH ;


where ! ($) is the cumulative probability weighting function and satisÖes ! (0) = 0 and ! (1) = 1,

u ($) is the Bernoulli utility function and satisÖes u(0) = 0, and " is the coe¢cient of loss aversion.
                                                                                 x1"#
We assume that u ($) takes the CRRA (a.k.a. ìpower utilityî) form, u(x) =        1!$ ,   as is standard in

the literature on CPT (e.g., Fox and Poldrack 2014; T&K).

      We use the Prelec (1998) probability weighting function:


                                      !(p) = exp(",(" log(p))% );


where -, , > 0. The - and , parameters regulate the curvature and the elevation of !(p),

respectively.




                                                    13
3.2       Modeling the Compromise E§ect

      We model the compromise e§ect by assuming that, in addition to their deep CPT preferences,

participants su§er a loss in utility from choosing a switchpoint farther from the middle row on

the screen. Formally, recall that on each screen q of the experiment, a participant makes choices

between a Öxed prospect, denoted Pqf , and seven alternatives presented in decreasing order of

monetary payo§, denoted Pq1 , Pq2 , ..., Pq7 .6 Following Hey and Orme (1994), we use a Fechner

error speciÖcation and assume that on any screen q, the participant chooses Pqi over Pqf if and

only if

               U (Pqi )                U (Pqf )                               U (Pqi ) " U (Pqf )
(2)                     + ci + "qAlt >          + "qf          ()      "q <                       + ci ,
                 0q                      0q                                            0q

where ci is a constant that depends on the row i in which the alternative Pqi appears, 0 q is

parameter to regulate the relative importance of the utility function vs. the other arguments, and

"qf , "qAlt , and "q are preference shocks that vary across (but not within) screens. We assume that

"qf " "qAlt ' "q ( N (0; 1). We refer to ci as the parameter for the compromise e§ect of row i, and

we assume that 47i=1 ci = 0, implying no bias on average toward selecting either the alternative or

the Öxed prospect. In other words, the constraint implies that this set of parameters does not have

an average e§ect (summing across all rows in the MPL) on the preference between the alternative

and the Öxed prospect.

      Our estimation strategy jointly estimates three sets of parameters: (i) the prospect theory

preference parameters for loss aversion, "; utility curvature, !; and the form of the probability

weighting function, f-; ,g; (ii) a vector of row-by-row compromise e§ect parameters, fci g7i=1 ;

and (iii) the scaling parameters, 0 q , that scale utility di§erences for each screen, q. From our

perspective, the scaling parameters are nuisance parameters. The incorporation of the (varying)

scaling parameters partially addresses the critique of random utility models identiÖed by Wilcox

(2011) and Apesteguia and Ballester (2018). Our use of varying scaling parameters follows the

spirit of the recommendations of Wilcox (2011). The solution of Apesteguia and Ballester (2018) ñ

stochastic preferences parameters ñ could also be incorporated into our framework, though it would

involve substantial computational hurdles because we have four preference parameters.
  6
      In Part C, the alternative prospects are presented in increasing order of monetary payo§.


                                                          14
3.3    Estimation

    We estimate the model via Maximum Likelihood Estimation, pooling participants together

and clustering the standard errors at the participant level. We impose the parameter restriction

! < 1. 15 of the 28 Öxed prospects in Part A have a chance of yielding $0 (and likewise for Part

B). Accordingly, ! + 1 would imply that any strictly positive alternative sure outcome would be

preferred with probability 1. Every participant in the experiment made choices ruling out such

extreme risk aversion, except for one participant.7

    We simplify the estimation in two ways. First, we reduce the number of 0 q parameters by

assuming that 0 q is identical for screens involving prospects of similar magnitudes.8 Second, we

assume that ci takes the quadratic functional form ci = 5 0 +5 1 $i+5 2 $i2 . With this functional form,

the constraint 47i=1 ci = 0 implies a linear restriction among the parameters, 5 0 = "45 1 " 205 2 , so

we estimate the two parameters 5 1 and 5 2 .

    For each speciÖcation, we produce three sets of estimates. First, we estimate !, -, and , (and

the other parameters) with data from all screens from Parts A-D.9 To do so, we assume that !,

-, , are the same in the gain and loss domains. Note that ! is then the coe¢cient of relative risk

aversion in the gain domain and the coe¢cient of relative risk seeking in the loss domain. Second,

we estimate ! + , -+ , and , + (and the other parameters) with data from Part A only (which only

includes questions in the gain domain and is incentivized). Lastly, we estimate ! ! , -! , and , !

(and the other parameters) with data from Part B only (which only includes questions in the loss

domain).

    We exclude from the estimation data participants for whom the MLE algorithm does not con-

verge (after 500 iterations) when the CPT model is estimated separately for each participant with

data from Parts A-D. We identiÖed 28 such participants out of a total of 521 participants who
    7
      As discussed below, we excluded from the estimation participants for whom the MLE did not converge when
estimated using only their data. This participantís data were excluded as a result.
    8
      For Part A we estimate a % q parameter for each of Öve groups of screens. Screens are grouped together based
on the expected utility of their Öxed prospects; the latter is calculated based on the parameter estimates reported by
Fehr-Duda and Epper (2012, Table 3). We estimate % A;0"25 , % A;25"50 , % A;50"75 , % A;75"100 , % A;100+ , where % A;L"H
is for screens with a Öxed prospect whose expected value is between L and H. For Part B, we proceed analogously.
We also estimate % C;sm a ll and % C;b ig for the two smaller and the two larger Öxed prospects of Part C, respectively,
and % D for the two Öxed prospects of the two screens of Part D we use.
    9
      We drop the two screens of Part D that involve only positive outcomes (designed by T&K as placebo tests for
loss aversion) so that Parts C and D primarily identify (.  ^ When we refer to ìall screens from Parts A-D,î we mean
all screens excluding these two.




                                                           15
completed all parts of the experiment, and most of them had haphazard response patterns.

   To derive a likelihood function, Örst recall that the experimental procedure constrained par-

ticipants to behave consistently: if a participant chooses Pqi over Pqf for some i > 1, then the

participant chooses Pqj over Pqf for all j < i. Hence the probability that the participant switches

from choosing the alternative when the alternative is Pqi to choosing the Öxed prospect when the

alternative is Pq(i+1) is


           Pr q;i;i+1   ' Pr (participant switches between Pqi and Pq(i+1) )
                             (                                                                 )
                               U (Pq(i+1) ) " U (Pqf )                U (Pqi ) " U (Pqf )
                        = Pr                           + ci+1 < "q <                      + ci
                                          0q                                   0q
                            (                          )     (                               )
                              U (Pqi ) " U (Pqf )              U (Pq(i+1) ) " U (Pqf )
                        = 7                       + ci " 7                             + ci+1 ;
                                       0q                               0q

where 7 ($) is the CDF of a standard normal random variable; the probability that the participant

always chooses the Öxed prospect is Pr q;";1 ' 1"7((U (Pq1 )"U (Pqf ))=0 q +c1 ); and the probability

that the participant always chooses the alternative over the Öxed prospect is Pr q;7;" ' 7((U (Pq7 ) "

U (Pqf ))=0 q + c7 ). We assume that "q is drawn i.i.d. for each screen q in the set of screens, Q, faced

by a participant.

   Thus, the likelihood function for any given participant p is:

                               Y       Y
                        Lp =                     (Pr q;i;i+1 )1fp switches between Pqi   and Pq;i+1 g
                                                                                                        ;
                               q2Q i=0;1;:::;7


where, for notational simplicity, we write Prq;0;1 for Prq;!;1 and Prq;7;8 for Prq;7;! . The likelihood

function for all the participants pooled together is 8p2P Lp , where P is the set of participants.


3.4    Robustness checks

   In addition to the baseline CPT model described above (with CRRA utility and the Prelec (1998)

probability weighting function), we estimated three additional models: (1) the CPT model with
                                                                                                                           1
CRRA utility but with T&Kís probability weighting function: !(p) = p% =(p% + (1 " p)% ) * ; (2) the

CPT model with the Prelec probability weighting function, but with CARA (a.k.a. ìexponentialî)
                                                                    +                                           "
                                                             1!e"*e x p o x                             1!e"*e x p o jxj
utility (Kˆbberling and Wakker 2005), u(x) =                   %+
                                                                              if x + 0, u("x) =            %"
                                                                                                                           if x < 0;
                                                                 exp o                                      exp o

and (3) the CPT model with the Prelec probability weighting function, but with expo-power utility

                                                             16
                                1"# e -p
                      1!e"*e -p x
(Saha 1993), u(x) =        %e -p           . The results presented below in Sections 5 and 6 are robust to

the use of these alternative models (see the Online Appendix for details).


3.5    IdentiÖcation With and Without the Pull Treatments

    Our Öve Pull treatments are designed to identify the e§ect of the compromise e§ect on measured

risk preferences. However, even without the Pull treatments, generic risk aversion experiments will

be able to identify the compromise e§ect parameters. To gain intuition for this fact, consider a MPL

experiment in which each screen features a di§erent level of risk aversion that elicits indi§erence at

the middle row of the MPL. Accordingly, measured risk aversion will vary across screens (unless the

researcher takes account of the compromise e§ect). Hence, the compromise e§ect will be identiÖed

as long as (i) the compromise-e§ect parameters are included in the model, and (ii) the level of

risk aversion that elicits indi§erence in the middle row varies across MPL screens. Because the

compromise e§ect parameters would be identiÖed even without within-subject variation in the Pull

treatment, our data could also be used to identify the compromise e§ects at the level of each

individual participant, but those estimates would be less precise than the representative agent

estimates on which we focus in this paper.



4     Hypotheses

    Having deÖned the model, we now articulate a number of hypotheses that we will test empirically

by estimating the model with the data from the experiment. Drawing on prior work (see the

Introduction for discussion), our starting point is the hypothesis that participants will be biased

toward switching close to the middle of the seven rows in the Multiple Price List.


Hypothesis 1: Estimates of ci will reveal a compromise e§ect. SpeciÖcally, c^i will be positive

in the top rows, close to zero in the middle rows, and negative in the bottom rows, decreasing

monotonically from the Örst to the last row.


    Note that a positive value of ci implies a bias in favor of choosing the alternative (which is in the

right-hand-side column of the MPL), and a negative value of ci implies a bias in favor of choosing




                                                       17
the Öxed prospects (which is in the left-hand-side column of the MPL). So Hypothesis 1 implies a

switch point that is biased toward the middle row of the MPL.

   Thus, the compromise e§ect implies that measured risk aversion in the gain domain, as assessed

in Part A, will be systematically increased across the range of treatments from Pull -2 to Pull 2

(in the model without the compromise e§ect). For instance, consider the two example screenshots

from the Introduction. The Örst screenshot illustrates the Pull -2 treatment. Since the intermediate

alternatives are shifted away from zero, the compromise e§ect induces participants to choose an

indi§erence point that is farther from zero, thereby implying a relatively low level of risk aversion. In

contrast, in the Pull 2 treatment, illustrated in the second screenshot, the intermediate alternatives

are shifted closer to zero. The compromise e§ect causes participants to choose an indi§erence point

that is closer to zero, thereby implying a relatively high level of risk aversion.

   The hypothesized e§ect of the Pull treatments on measured risk seeking in the loss domain is

analogous. Moving across the range of treatments from Pull -2 to Pull 2 is now hypothesized to

raise estimated risk seeking. For example, consider a Öxed prospect that has outcomes in the loss

domain. In the Pull -2 treatment, the intermediate alternatives are all negative and shifted away

from zero, coaxing participants to choose an indi§erence point that is farther from zero, thereby

implying a relatively low level of risk seeking. By contrast, in the Pull 2 treatment, the intermediate

alternatives are all negative and shifted relatively close to zero, coaxing participants to choose an

indi§erence point that is closer to zero, thereby implying a relatively high level of risk seeking.

   Similar considerations imply that moving across the range of treatments from Pull -2 to Pull 2

is predicted to reduce the level of estimated loss aversion.

   We thus hypothesize that the compromise e§ect a§ects estimates of risk aversion and loss aver-

sion in the traditional CPT model. In Section 3.2 above, we introduced a model that incorporates

parameters for the compromise e§ect. If that model is properly speciÖed, we would expect the bias

induced by the compromise e§ect to disappear and the estimates of risk aversion and loss aversion

to be similar across Pull treatments. In summary, we hypothesize:


Hypothesis 2.a: Estimates of relative risk aversion in the gain domain (!, ! + ) and relative risk

seeking in the loss domain (!, ! ! ) from our model with the compromise e§ect will not vary in Pull.


Hypothesis 2.b: Estimates of loss aversion (") from our model with the compromise e§ect will not

                                                   18
vary in Pull.


Hypothesis 3.a: Estimates of !, ! + , and ! ! from the model without the compromise e§ect will be

increasing in Pull.


Hypothesis 3.b: Estimates of " from the model without the compromise e§ect will be decreasing in

Pull.



5       Estimating the Compromise E§ect and Risk Preferences Jointly

    We begin by estimating our model with the compromise e§ect. We focus our attention on

the curvature parameter ! and the loss aversion parameter " because our ex ante hypotheses are

about these parameters. We do not interpret the results for the other parameters (-, ,, and the

0 q parameters) because we did not have ex ante hypotheses, but we report the estimates for all

parameters in the Online Appendix.

    Table 1 shows the estimates for our parameters of interest. The estimates of ! (obtained from

the data from all parts together), ! + (obtained from the data from Part A only), and ! ! (obtained

from the data from Part B only) di§er substantially from one another, ranging from !^ ! = "0:106

to !^ + = 0:448. The estimate of ! ! is signiÖcantly smaller than 0 at the 5% level, indicating

risk aversion in the loss domain, which is the opposite of what CPT predicts. The estimate of "

(obtained from the data from all parts together) is 1:311, consistent with some loss aversion, albeit

less than usually assumed. Except for the notably small estimate of ! ! , our parameter estimates

(including those for the probability weighting function parameters) are broadly in line with existing

estimates in the literature. We compare our estimates to the literature in Section 10.


                           <INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE>


    The sizeable di§erence between the estimates in Parts A and B suggests that the assumption

that !, -, and , are the same in the gain and loss domains is unsupported by the data. We

nonetheless maintain this assumption when estimating the model with the data from all parts of
                                                     ^ and as Wakker (2010) points out, assuming
the experiment because we are interested in studying ",




                                                 19
di§erent parameters in the gain and loss domains makes the loss aversion parameter more di¢cult

to interpret.10


5.1       Estimating the Compromise E§ect

       We now proceed to test Hypothesis 1, which predicts that the parameters for the compromise

e§ect ci will be positive in the top rows, close to zero in the middle rows, and negative in the

bottom rows, and will decrease from the Örst to the last row.

       The estimated ci ís are calculated from the estimates of 5 1 and 5 2 . Figure 2 shows the estimated

ci for each row i (the numerical values are listed in the Online Appendix). As can be seen, the

estimated ci ís decline from row 1 (where c1 is large and positive) to row 7 (where c7 is large and

negative), and c4 is always relatively small (in fact, it is not signiÖcantly di§erent from 0 at the

5% level when estimated with the data from Part A or Part B only). These results indicate that

participants tend to switch from choosing the alternative to choosing the Öxed prospect toward

the middle row. Furthermore, the estimates of the 5 1 and 5 2 parameters reported in Table 1

are highly jointly statistically distinguishable from zero: the p-value of the Wald test is less than

1 # 10!10 . These results strongly support Hypothesis 1 and are robust to restricting the data to

the incentivized Part A only. We note that the compromise e§ect is weaker when estimated with

the data from Part A versus the data from Part B. This may suggest that the compromise e§ect is

stronger in the loss domain; alternatively, participant fatigue and the lack of incentives in Part B

could have led to reduced participant attention and to a stronger compromise e§ect.
  10
    Wakker (2010, section 9.6) highlights two concerns when u(") takes the CRRA form and # + 6= # " . First, the
                                                                                !
ratio of disutility from a sure loss of x to utility from a sure gain of x, ",u   ("x)
                                                                              u+ (x)
                                                                                       , is not uniformly equal to ( but
instead depends on the value of x. Second, for any (, there exists a range of x values for which this ratio is actually
smaller than 1, which is the opposite of loss aversion. These problems make estimates of ( sensitive to exactly which
prospects are used in the experiment. As previously mentioned, in the Online Appendix we report estimates of a
robustness check where we assume CARA utility and di§erent risk aversion parameters in the gain and loss domains.




                                                          20
      FIGURE 2. Implied estimates of the parameters for the compromise e§ect ci as a function of the row
      i in which a choice appears. In the estimation, we parameterize the parameters for the compromise
      e§ect with the quadratic functional form ci = 5 0 + 5 1 $ i + 5 2 $ i2 , 47i=1 ci = 0, which is equivalent
      to ci = 5 1 $ (i " 4) + 5 2 $ (i2 " 20). Note that the conÖdence intervals are smaller around the middle
      rows because var(^   ci ) , (i " 4)2 var(^ 5 1 ) + (i2 " 20)2 var(^
                                                                        5 2 ) (assuming cov(^
                                                                                            51; 5
                                                                                                ^ 2 ) , 0).




5.2      Robustness of the Preference-Parameter Estimates from Joint Estimation

   To test Hypotheses 2a and 2b, we begin by estimating the model with the compromise e§ect

separately in the subsamples corresponding to each of the Öve Pull treatments. Figure 3 shows

estimates of !, ! + and ! ! , with 95% conÖdence intervals, for each subsample. Figure 4 shows

estimates of ".




                                                         21
  FIGURE 3. Estimates of ! , ! + , and ! ! by Pull treatment, from the model with the compromise e§ect.
  The negative estimates of ! ! for Part B reáect risk aversion in the loss domain, unlike what CPT
  predicts. (! is not estimated for Parts C and D only because these parts have few questions.)




       As can be seen, the estimates of !, ! + , ! ! , and " do not di§er substantially across Pull

treatments, consistent with Hypotheses 2a and 2b. To formally test for equality across treatments,

we estimate the model with all parameters speciÖed as linear functions of the Pull variable and of a

dummy that indicates if the participant was in the EV treatment. In other words, we substitute !

in the utility function in (1) by ! = ! 0 + >$1 $ P ull + >$2 $ EV , " by " = "0 + >41 $ P ull + >42 $ EV , and

do likewise for -, ,, and all the 0 q parameters, and we test whether the > parameters are equal to

zero.11
  11
    The statistical power to test the pairwise di§erences in our parameter estimates (for each discrete step in the
Pull treatment) is limited. Accordingly, we test Hypothesis 3.a and Hypothesis 3.b by estimating a linear model.
Figures 5 and 6 imply that a linear speciÖcation is a good approximation.




                                                        22
                        FIGURE 4. Estimates of " by Pull treatment from the
                        model with the compromise e§ect, for Parts A-D to-
                        gether. (" cannot be estimated for Part A only or Part
                        B only because the questions in these parts are all in the
                        gain or loss domains. We do not estimate " for Parts C
                        and D only because these parts have few questions.)



   Table 2 shows the results. The three estimates of >$1 are all close to zero, and none is statistically

distinguishable from zero (including the estimate from the incentivized Part A). We interpret these

estimates as providing more formal support for Hypothesis 2a. The estimate of >41 is signiÖcantly

di§erent from zero at the 10% level, and its sign is consistent with what one would expect from the

Pull manipulation, which suggests that our model with the compromise e§ect does not perfectly

control for this e§ect. As we will see below, however, this estimate of >41 is much smaller than the

one obtained from the model without the compromise e§ect, indicating that our model with the

compromise e§ect substantially reduces the bias due to this e§ect.

                            <INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE>

Taken together, we interpret the evidence as strongly supportive of Hypothesis 2a and also broadly

supportive of Hypothesis 2b. In other words, our model (2) yields robust estimates of the CPT pa-

rameters ! and ", both when estimated in the sample of all participants and within the subsamples

corresponding to each of the Öve Pull treatments.

                                                   23
6    Biases in Estimated Risk Preferences when the Compromise

     E§ect Is Omitted from the Model

    We now proceed to estimate the CPT model without the compromise e§ect, the version of the

model usually estimated by economists. As above, we focus our attention on ! and "; results for

all parameters are presented in the Online Appendix.

    Table 3 shows the estimates for selected parameters. The estimates of !, ! + and ! ! are all

smaller in magnitude than those from the model with the compromise e§ect (2), indicating less

curvature in the utility function. The estimate of ! ! is not signiÖcantly di§erent from 0 anymore,

consistent with a linear utility function in the loss domain. The estimate of " is not signiÖcantly

di§erent from its value when estimated in the model with the compromise e§ect.


                            <INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE>


The parameter estimates all fall within the range of existing estimates in the literature (except for
^ + , which falls slightly below the range).
,

    To test Hypotheses 3a and 3b, we proceed analogously as above and estimate the model without

the compromise e§ect separately in the subsamples corresponding to each of the Öve Pull treatments.

As can be seen from Figures 5 and 6, the estimates di§er substantially across Pull treatments. As
                                                                                 ^ is decreasing in Pull.
predicted by Hypotheses 3a and 3b, !^ , !^ + and !^ ! are increasing in Pull and "

Comparing Figures 5 and 6 to Figures 3 and 4, it is clear that failing to control for the compromise

e§ect when estimating the model separately for each treatment introduces a sizeable bias in the

estimates of ! and ".

    As can be seen in the right panel of Figure 5, the Pull treatment manipulation of the compromise

e§ect is strong enough to generate estimates of ! ! that are either signiÖcantly smaller than 0 (Pull

-2) or signiÖcantly larger than 0 (Pull 2). Furthermore, as can be seen from Figure 6, the Pull

treatment manipulation of the compromise e§ect causes estimates of " to vary from 1:059 (Pull

2) to 1:746 (Pull -2). The former estimate is not signiÖcantly di§erent from 1 at the 10% level,

suggesting that the compromise e§ect can create the appearance of no loss aversion.




                                                   24
  FIGURE 5. Estimates of ! , ! + , and ! ! by Pull treatment, from the model without the compromise
  e§ect. This Ögure is analogous to Figure 3, except that the estimated model does not control for the
  compromise e§ect.




   As above, we formally test the impact of the compromise e§ect by specifying all parameters as

linear functions of the Pull variable and of a dummy that indicates if the participant was in the
                                                    ^ $ is signiÖcant at the 1% level and positive
EV treatment. The results are presented in Table 4. > 1

in all three columns (including in the column corresponding to the incentivized Part A), providing

formal support for Hypothesis 3a. The implied di§erences between the estimates in the Pull -2

and the Pull 2 treatments are sizeable: for !^ , the implied di§erence is 0:168 (4 # 0:042), and for
                                                     ^ 4 is highly statistically signiÖcant and negative,
!^ ! , the corresponding Ögure is 0:252 (4 # 0:063). > 1

                                                             ^ in the Pull -2 and the Pull 2
thus supporting Hypothesis 3b. The implied di§erence between "

treatments is 0:588 (4 # 0:147).




                                                   25
                         FIGURE 6. Estimates of " by Pull treatment from the
                        model without the compromise e§ect, for Parts A-D to-
                        gether. This Ögure is analogous to Figure 4, except that
                        the estimated model does not control for the compromise
                        e§ect.



                           <INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE>


The evidence thus strongly supports Hypotheses 3a and 3b and suggests that many existing re-

sults based on experiments using the MPL elicitation method may be severely biased due to the

compromise e§ect.



7    How Large is the Compromise E§ect?

    Having demonstrated that the compromise e§ect can have a signiÖcant impact on choice in a

MPL setting, we now obtain a rough estimate of its importance relative to the prospectsí monetary

outcomes.

    To do so, we make an assumption that we show in the next paragraph is justiÖed empirically: the

magnitude of the compromise e§ect and of the preference shocks scales linearly with the expected

utilities of the prospects on a screen. Formally, we assume that there is a constant < > 0 such that




                                                  26
for all screens q,


(3)                                         0 q = < $ jU (Pqf )j ;


where the parameter 0 q (as deÖned in Section 3.2) regulates the relative importance of utility vs.

the other parameters for the compromise e§ect and shocks, and U (Pqf ) is the expected utility of the

Öxed prospect on screen q. Thus, for the prospects from Part A (which are all in the gain domain,

allowing us to ignore the absolute value sign), we can substitute < $ U (Pqf ) for 0 q in Equation (2)

of our model. It follows that a participant will prefer the alternative Pqi over the Öxed prospect

Pqf in row i of screen q if and only if


                                    U (Pqi ) " U (Pqf ) + < $ ci $ U (Pqf ) > 0 q "q

                            () U (Pqi ) " U ((1 + Bi ) $ Pqf ) > 0 q "q ,

                                1
where (1 + Bi ) = (1 " <ci ) 1"# . For the prospects from Part B, a similar equivalence holds, but
                            1
with (1 + Bi ) = (1 + <ci ) 1"# . Therefore, our assumption enables us to quantify the ináuence of a

compromise e§ect ci as the factor (1 + Bi ) by which the screenís Öxed prospect would have to be

multiplied to have the same e§ect on choice. Equivalently, Bi is the magnitude of the compromise

e§ect measured in terms of a fraction of monetary value of the screenís Öxed prospect (with a

negative value meaning that the compromise e§ect makes the Öxed prospect less likely to be chosen).

      We now assess our assumption in equation (3) empirically. Recall from Section 3.3 that, to

estimate our models, we group screens together that have similar expected values of their Öxed

prospects and estimate a common 0
                                ^ q for each group. DeÖning (and slightly abusing) some notation,
    ^ (Pq~f ) denote the expected utility of the Öxed prospect on screen q~ calculated using the model
let U
                                                                              ^q~2q [jU
parameters estimated from the speciÖcation with the compromise e§ect; and let E       ^ (Pq~f )j]

                                                ^ (Pq~f )ís across all the screens q~ in group q. (Because
denote the mean of the absolute values of these U
                                    ^ (Pq~f )ís, each U
the screens in a group have similar U                 ^ (Pq~f ) has roughly the same magnitude as the

group mean.) The empirical counterpart to equation (3) would be a multiplicative relationship

between 0       ^q~2q [jU
        ^ q and E       ^ (Pq~f )j] that is the same across di§erent groups q. Figure 7 illustrates this

relationship in our data. As can be seen, for the three sets of estimation results (Parts A-D together,



                                                     27
Part A, and Part B), 0
                     ^ q indeed appears to be reasonably well approximated as a multiplicative
               ^q~2q [jU
constant times E       ^ (Pq~f )j]. Moreover, the multiplicative constant <
                                                                          ^ is nearly the same across

the three sets of results, ranging from 0:32 to 0:36.12




FIGURE 7. Relationship between 0
                               ^ q and the expected utility of a screenís Öxed prospect. See text for details.



                        ^ for each of the three sets of results, Table 5 presents estimates of the
    Using the estimated <

strength of the compromise e§ect, ^Bi , for each row i on a screen (because this is meant to be an

approximation, we omit standard errors).


                                 <INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE>


Our estimates of the strength of the compromise e§ect in a screenís Örst and last rows (where their

impact is largest) range in magnitude from (17% to (23% of the monetary value of the screenís

Öxed prospect. We interpret such magnitudes as non-trivial.
  12
     In OLS regressions of %                     ^q~2q [jU
                           ^ q on a constant and E       ^ (Pq~f )j], the intercept is economically small in all cases. For
                 ^ reported here, we use a 0 intercept.
the estimates of *




                                                            28
8    Demographic Correlates of the CPT Model Parameters and of

     the Parameters that Capture the Compromise E§ect

    A large literature seeks to estimate the demographic correlates of economic preferences and

decision making (e.g., Beauchamp, Cesarini, and Johannesson 2017, Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro

2013, Booij, van Praag, and van de Kuilen 2010, Dohmen, Falk, Hu§man, and Sunde 2010). The

data we collected in our experiment, which include a number of demographic variables, allow us to

contribute to this literature by analyzing the demographic correlates of the four key parameters of

the CPT model (!, ", -, ,) and of the two model parameters that capture the compromise e§ect (5 1 ,

5 2 ). In our baseline demographic speciÖcation, we estimate our CPT model with the compromise

e§ect using data from Parts A-D together, with these six key model parameters speciÖed as linear

functions of a constant, age, sex, a dummy variable indicating whether one has a college degree,

SAT Math score, the log of oneís parentsí combined annual income, as well as dummy variables to

control for race. We also estimated several additional speciÖcations to verify the robustness of the

results from our baseline demographic speciÖcation. First, we estimated the baseline demographic

speciÖcation again, but using data from Part A only, and then using data from Part B only. Second,

we estimated a speciÖcation akin to the baseline demographic speciÖcation using data from Parts A-

D together, but with CARA (a.k.a. ìexponentialî) utility (Kˆbberling and Wakker 2005). Lastly,

we employed a two-step procedure in which we Örst estimated our baseline CPT model with the

compromise e§ect separately for each participant, and then regressed each estimated parameter of

interest on the demographic variables. To reduce the number of parameters and thereby improve

the frequency of convergence in the Örst step of that procedure, we assume that 0 q is identical

across all screens (for each experimental participant).

    Two main results stand out across the baseline and robustness speciÖcations. First, higher

SAT Math scores are associated with lower !ói.e., with lower risk aversion in the gain domain and

higher risk aversion (or, equivalently, lower risk seeking) in the loss domain. This result is consistent

with the existing literature on the association between cognitive ability and risk preferences (see

Dohmen, Falk, Hu§man, and Sunde 2018 for a review of the literature), although it has been argued

that this association is driven by the fact that measurement noise may be higher for individuals with

lower cognitive ability (Andersson, Holm, Tyran, and Wengstrˆm 2016). The second result that


                                                   29
stands out is that higher SAT Math scores are associated with higher loss aversion ("). This result,

although robust across our speciÖcations, is surprising given that previous research has found that

education is negatively associated with loss aversion (Booij, van Praag, and van de Kuilen 2010,

G‰chter, Johnson, Herrmann 2007, Hjorth and Fosgerau 2011). Aside from these two results, the

associations between the other covariates and parameters were not statistically distinguishable from

zero or were not robust across speciÖcations.

    The Online Appendix reports estimates of the baseline demographic speciÖcation and provides

additional details. We note that one limitation of this analysis is that our sample of experimental

participants was not selected to be representative of the population.



9    E§ect of Displaying the Gamblesí Expected Values on Esti-

     mated Risk Preferences

    Displaying the expected value may anchor the participants on the expected value (Tversky and

Kahneman, 1974) or simplify comprehension of the gamble (Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro, 2013),

thereby making observed preferences more risk neutral. We therefore hypothesize that (1) !^ + and
                                                      ^ will shift toward 1 in the EV treatment.
!^ ! will shift toward 0 in the EV treatment, and (2) "
                                                         ^ for the subsamples corresponding to the
    Online Appendix Figures 1-4 show estimates of !^ and "

two EV treatments, with 95% conÖdence intervals. Displaying the expected value does not appear
                                                                                            ^ $ and of
to a§ect estimated risk preferences or loss aversion. In addition, none of the estimates of > 2
^ 4 in Table 4 are statistically distinguishable from zero. Thus, like Lichtenstein, Slovic, and Zink
> 2

(1969) and Montgomery and Adelbratt (1982) but unlike Harrison and Rutstrˆm (2008), we do not
                                                                                       ^ toward
Önd support for the hypothesis that the EV treatment shifts !^ + and !^ ! toward 0 and "

1. A di§erence between our experiment and Harrison and Rutstrˆmís (2008) is that the prospects

in the latter are more complex, involving four possible outcomes. It is possible that participants

intuitively estimate the prospectsí expected values in our experiment but are not able to accurately

do so in Harrison and Rutstrˆmís experiment, and that providing expected value information is

therefore redundant in our experiment but not in theirs.




                                                 30
10      Conclusion

     In this paper, we estimate an econometric model that explicitly takes into account the compro-

mise e§ect and thus disentangles it from risk preference parameters. The resulting risk-preference

estimates are robust: the inferred risk parameters essentially do not change with exogenous ma-

nipulations of the compromise e§ect. Without parameters for the compromise e§ect, however,

we replicate the Önding from prior work that risk-preference estimates are sensitive to exogenous

manipulations of the compromise e§ect.

     How do our ìdebiasedî preference-parameter estimates (from Table 1) compare to those from the

literature? For risk aversion in the gain and loss domains, we estimate !^ + = 0:448 and !^ ! = "0:106,

respectively. Booij, van Praag, and van de Kuilenís (2010) Table 1 reviews existing experimental

estimates. Translated into the CRRA functional form we estimate, the range of existing parameter

estimates is !^ + 2 ["0:01; 0:78] in the gain domain and !^ ! 2 ["0:06; 0:39] in the loss domain. For
                           b = 1:311. Although T&K estimated " to be 2:25, the literature contains
loss aversion, we estimate "

a broad range of estimates: among the papers reviewed by Abdellaoui, Bleichrodt, and Paraschiv
                        ^ 2 [0:74; 8:27], and among those reviewed by Booij, van Praag, and van
(2007, Tables 1 and 5), "
                           ^ 2 [1:07; 2:61]. Finally, our estimates of the two-parameter Prelec
de Kuilen (2010, Table 1), "
                                                                                 b 2 [0:858; 1:471].
                                                          b 2 [0:564; 0:690] and ,
(1998) probability-weighting parameters are in the ranges -

Booij, van Praag, and van de Kuilenís (2010) Table 1 only lists three studies that estimated this

functional form, and they only did so for prospects in the gain domain. The ranges of estimates
                           ^ + 2 [1:08; 2:12]. Fox and Poldrackís (2014) Table A.3 also lists three
    ^ + 2 [0:53; 1:05] and ,
are -

studies that estimated the two-parameter Prelec (1998) functional form for prospects in the gain
                                                           ^ + 2 [1:00; 1:58]. Overall, then, our
                                    ^ + 2 [0:62; 1:15] and ,
domain. The ranges of estimates are -

parameter estimates are broadly in line with existing estimates in the literature, except that some

of our estimates of the probability weighting parameter , + and our estimate of risk aversion in

the loss domain ! ! fall below the range of estimates in the literatureóindeed, our estimate of ! !

indicates risk aversion in the loss domain, the opposite of CPTís prediction.

     As in T&K, our estimation of the prospect-theory parameters has assumed that the reference

point is the participantís status-quo wealth. Kˆszegi and Rabin (2006, 2007) have argued that

the assumption that the reference point is the participantís (possibly stochastic) expectation of


                                                  31
wealth provides a better explanation of risk-taking behavior in a variety of contexts. Could a

version of prospect theory in which the reference point reáects a participantís expectations explain

why the manipulations of the choice set ináuence the estimated preference parameters (when we

do not include parameters for the compromise e§ect)? This question poses a challenging research

program. Modeling the reference point as an expectation would not merely make the reference point

depend on the alternative options in the current choice problem but also on the sequence of choice

problems that have been faced already, as well as the experimental instructions. Existing work

provides little guidance on modeling these complex relationships, and many ad hoc assumptions

would be needed.13

       A limitation of our paper is that the compromise-e§ect parameter values we estimate are spe-

ciÖc to our experimental setting, and thus cannot be extrapolated to other settings (see related

points in Levitt and List 2007). For example, our experiment includes 64 MPLís, which may in-

duce fatigue among experimental participants, potentially explaining why the compromise e§ect

strengthens from Part A to Part B. However, the methodology we demonstrateójointly estimating

the compromise e§ect and preference parametersóis general and can be applied and extended in

at least three useful directions.

       First, the compromise-e§ect controls that we propose here can be used not only to improve

the robustness of estimates of risk preference parameters, but also of parameter estimates for any

other preferences elicited using MPLs, including time and other-regarding preferences. Second,

our method can be applied to other settings where the compromise e§ect may play a role, such

as Choi, Fisman, Gale, and Karivís (2007) graphical interface for eliciting preferences, Andreoni

and Sprengerís (2012) convex time budget procedure for eliciting time preferences, or consumer

choices in the kinds of settings that originally motivated the psychology and marketing research

on the compromise e§ect (Simonson 1989). Finally, the same econometric procedure we implement

hereóestimating a discrete-choice model that includes additional parameters that capture location

in the choice setócould also be applied to measure and control for other types of context e§ects,

such as a tendency to choose items that happen to come at the beginning of a list of alternatives

(e.g., as in election ballots; e.g., Koppell and Steen 2004).
  13
    Sprenger (2015) assumes that the Öxed prospect in each binary choice pins down a participantís reference point.
Because the Öxed prospect was held constant across our scale manipulations, this approach canít explain the e§ects
we Önd.


                                                        32
11      REFERENCES

Abdellaoui, Mohammed, Han Bleichrodt, and Corina Paraschiv. 2007. ìLoss Aversion

Under Prospect Theory: A Parameter-Free Measurement.î Management Science, 53(10): 1659ñ

1674.

Andersen, Ste§en, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and Elisabet E. Rutstrˆm. 2006.

ìElicitation Using Multiple Price List Formats.î Experimental Economics, 9(4): 383ñ405.

Andersen, Ste§en, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and Elisabet E. Rutstrˆm. 2008.

ìEliciting Risk and Time Preferences.î Econometrica, 76(3): 583ñ618.

Andersson, Ola, HÂkan J. Holm, Jean-Robert Tyran, and Erik Wengstrˆm. 2016. ìRisk

Aversion Relates to Cognitive Ability: Preferences or Noise?î Journal of the European Economic

Association, 14(5): 1129-1154.

Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. 2012. ìEstimating Time Preferences from Convex

Budgets.î American Economic Review, 102(7): 3333-3356.

Apesteguia, Jose, and Miguel A. Ballester. 2018. ìMonotone Stochastic Choice Models: The

Case of Risk and Time Preferences.î Journal of Political Economy, 126(1): 74-106.

Beauchamp, Jonathan P., David Cesarini, and Magnus Johannesson. 2017. ìThe Psycho-

metric and Empirical Properties of Measures of Risk Preferences.î Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,

54(3): 203-237.

Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shaprio. 2013. ìWho is ëBe-

havioralí ? Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences.î Journal of the European Economic

Association, 11(6): 1231-1255.

Birnbaum, Michael H. 1992. ìViolations of Monotonicity and Contextual E§ects in Choice-

Based Certainty Equivalents.î Psychological Science, 3(5): 310ñ314.

Booij, Adam S., Bernard M.S. van Praag, and Gijs van de Kuilen. 2010. ìA parametric

analysis of prospect theoryís functionals for the general population.î Theory and Decision, 68:

115ñ148.

Bruhin, Adrian, Helga Fehr-Duda, and Thomas Epper. 2010. ìRisk and Rationality:

Uncovering Heterogeneity in Probability Distortion.î Econometrica, 78(4): 1375ñ1412.

Choi, Syngjoo, Raymond Fisman, Douglas Gale, and Shachar Kariv. 2007. ìConsistency


                                               33
and Heterogeneity of Individual Behavior under Uncertainty.î American Economic Review, 97(5):

1921-1938.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Hu§man, and Uwe Sunde. 2010. ìAre Risk

Aversion and Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?î American Economic Review, 100(3), 1238-

60.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Hu§man, and Uwe Sunde. 2018. ìOn the Rela-

tionship between Cognitive Ability and Risk Preference.î Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(2):

115-34.

Fehr-Duda, Helga and Thomas Epper.             2012. ìProbability and Risk: Foundations and

Economic Implications of Probability-Dependent Risk Preferences.î Annual Review of Economics,

4:567-593.

Fox, Craig R., and Russell A. Poldrack. 2014. ìProspect Theory and the Brain.î In Neuroe-

conomics: Decision Making and the Brain (Second Edition), ed. P. W. Glimcher and Ernst Fehr,

533-567. Academic Press.

G‰chter, Simon, Eric J. Johnson, and Andreas Herrmann. 2007. ìIndividual-Level Loss

Aversion in Riskless and Risky Choices.î IZA Discussion Paper No. 2961.

Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, Elisabet E. Rutstrˆm, and Melonie B. Sullivan.

2005. ìEliciting Risk and Time Preferences Using Field Experiments: Some Methodological Issues.î

In Field experiments in economics (Research in Experimental Economics, Volume 10), ed. J.

Carpenter, G. Harrison, and J. List, 125ñ218. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and Elisabet E. Rutstrˆm. 2007. ìEstimating Risk

Attitudes in Denmark: a Field Experiment.î Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 109(2): 341ñ368.

Harrison, Glenn W., John A. List, and Charles Towe. 2007. ìNaturally Occurring Pref-

erences and Exogenous Laboratory Experiments: A Case Study of Risk Aversion.î Econometrica,

75(2): 433ñ458.

Harrison, Glenn W. and Elisabet E. Rutstrˆm. 2008. ìRisk Aversion in the Laboratory.î

In Risk Aversion in Experiments (Research in Experimental Economics, Volume 12), ed. J. Cox,

G. Harrison, 41ñ196. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Hey, John D., and Chris Orme. 1994. ìInvestigating Generalizations of Expected Utility

Theory Using Experimental Data.î Econometrica, 62(6): 1291-1326.

                                               34
Hjorth, Katrine, and Mogens Fosgerau. 2011. ìLoss Aversion and Individual Characteris-

tics.î Environmental and Resource Economics, 49(4): 573-596.

Holt, Charles A., and Susan K. Laury. 2002. ìRisk Aversion and Incentive E§ects.î American

Economic Review, 92(5); 1644ñ1655.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. ìProspect Theory: An Analysis of Decision

Under Risk.î Econometrica, 47(2): 263ñ291.

Kamenica, Emir. 2008. ìContextual Inference in Markets: On the Informational Content of

Product Lines.î American Economic Review, 98(5): 2127ñ2149.

Kˆbberling, Veronika, and Peter Wakker. 2005. ìAn index of loss aversion.î Journal of

Economic Theory, 122: 119-131.

Koppell, Jonathan G. S., and Jennifer A. Steen. 2004. ìThe E§ects of Ballot Position on

Election Outcomes.î Journal of Politics, 66(1): 267-281.

Kˆszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. ìA Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences.î

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1133-1165.

Kˆszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2007. ìReference-Dependent Risk Attitudes.î Amer-

ican Economic Review, 97(4): 1047-1073.

Levitt, Steven D., and John A. List. 2007. ìWhat do Laboratory Experiments Measuring

Social Preferences Reveal About the Real World?î Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2): 153-

174.

Lichtenstein, Sara, Paul Slovic, and Donald Zink. 1969. ìThe E§ect of Instruction in

Expected Value Optimality of Gambling Decisions.î Journal of Experimental Psychology, 79(2):

236ñ240.

Montgomery, Henry, and Thomas Adelbratt. 1982. ìGambling Decisions and Information

About Expected Value.î Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 29: 39ñ57.

Prelec, Drazen. 1998. ìThe Probability Weighting Function.î Econometrica, 66(3): 497ñ527.

Saha, Atanu. 1993. ìExpo-power utility: A ëáexibleíform for absolute and relative risk aversion.î

American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 75(4): 905-913.

Simonson, Itamar. 1989. ìChoice Based on Reasons: The Case of Attraction and Compromise

E§ects.î Journal of Consumer Research, 16(2): 158-174.

Slovic, Paul. 1995. ìThe Construction of Preference.î American Psychologist, 50(5): 364-371.

                                               35
Sprenger, Charles. 2015. ìAn Endowment E§ect for Risk: Experimental Tests of Stochastic

Reference Points.î Journal of Political Economy, 123(6): 1456-1499.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. ìJudgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and

Biases.î Science, 185(4157): 1124ñ1131.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1992. ìAdvances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative

Representation of Uncertainty.î Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 5(4): 297ñ323.

Wakker, Peter P. 2010. Prospect Theory: For Risk and Ambiguity. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, UK.




                                               36
 Table 1. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Model with the Compromise
                                      E§ect

                                            Parts A-D      Part A (Gain       Part B (Loss
                                             Together      Domain Only)       Domain Only)
                !, ! + , ! !              0.242***         0.448***           -0.106**
                                          (0.016)          (0.020)            (0.043)
                "                         1.311***
                                          (0.034)
                -,   -+ ,   -!            0.619***         0.564***           0.690***
                                          (0.015)          (0.015)            (0.022)
                      +     !
                ,, , , ,                  1.119***         0.858***           1.471***
                                          (0.025)          (0.033)            (0.061)
                51                        -0.091***        -0.134***          -0.144***
                                          (0.012)          (0.018)            (0.018)
                52                        -0.008***        0.002              -0.004*
                                          (0.001)          (0.002)            (0.002)
                Log-likelihood            -55,379          -23,915            -25,400
                Wald test for 5 1 ; 5 2   p < 1 # 10!10    p < 1 # 10!10      p < 1 # 10!10
                Parameters                19               10                 10
                Individuals               493              493                493
                Observations              30,566           13,804             13,804

     NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model without
clustering. The Wald test is for the joint signiÖcance of 5 1 and 5 2 .
* signiÖcant at 10% level; ** signiÖcant at 5% level; *** signiÖcant at 1% level. These are tests of the null
hypothesis that the coe¢cient is zero. However, with respect to all parameters (except 5 1 and 5 2 ) the
natural null hypothesis is not equality to 0. For instance, " is the loss aversion parameter, so the hypothesis
of local linearity is " = 1: We reject this restriction: the t-stat is (1:311 " 1)=0:034 = 9:15.




                                                      37
Table 2. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Parameterized Model with the
                                Compromise E§ect
                                Parts A-D  Part A (Gain Part B (Loss
                                 Together  Domain Only) Domain Only)
               +
           !, ! , ! !  !0     0.206***     0.423***      -0.118**
                                         (0.026)          (0.028)            (0.052)
                                >$1      0.008            0.011              -0.032
                                         (0.017)          (0.018)            (0.026)
                                >$2      0.058*           0.033              0.002
                                         (0.035)          (0.039)            (0.067)
               "                "0       1.271***
                                         (0.053)
                                >41      -0.053*
                                         (0.029)
                                >42      0.075
                                         (0.074)
               -,   -+ ,   -!   -0       0.556***         0.505***           0.617***
                                         (0.019)          (0.018)            (0.027)
               ,, , + , , !     ,0       1.190***         0.911***           1.524***
                                         (0.037)          (0.048)            (0.086)
               51                        -0.090***        -0.139***          -0.142***
                                         (0.012)          (0.018)            (0.018)
               52                        -0.008***        0.002              -0.005**
                                         (0.001)          (0.002)            (0.002)
               Log-likelihood            -55,225          -23,839            -25,343
               Wald test for 5 1 ; 5 2   p < 1 # 10!10    p < 1 # 10!10      p < 1 # 10!10
               Parameters                53               26                 26
               Individuals               493              493                493
               Observations              30,566           13,804             13,804

    NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model without
clustering. The Wald test is for the joint signiÖcance of 5 1 and 5 2 .
* signiÖcant at 10% level; ** signiÖcant at 5% level; *** signiÖcant at 1% level. These are tests of the null
hypothesis that the coe¢cient is zero.




                                                     38
 Table 3. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in Model Without the Compromise
                                      E§ect
                             Parts A-D Part A (Gain Part B (Loss
                              Together Domain Only) Domain Only)
                  +
              !, ! , ! !     0.203***  0.363***     -0.010
                             (0.012)   (0.014)       (0.022)
              "              1.337***
                                       (0.027)
                    -,   -+ ,   -!     0.574***      0.538***           0.615***
                                       (0.010)       (0.011)            (0.013)
                          +     !
                    ,, , , ,           1.123***      0.958***           1.296***
                                       (0.016)       (0.020)            (0.030)
                    Log-likelihood     -59,957       -25,604            -28,141
                    Parameters         17            8                  8
                    Individuals        493           493                493
                    Observations       30,566        13,804             13,804

    NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model without
clustering.
* signiÖcant at 10% level; ** signiÖcant at 5% level; *** signiÖcant at 1% level. These are tests of the null
hypothesis that the coe¢cient is zero.




                                                     39
Table 4. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Parameterized Model Without
                              the Compromise E§ect
                                Parts A-D Part A (Gain Part B (Loss
                                 Together Domain Only) Domain Only)
                +
            !, ! , ! !   !0     0.196***  0.353***      -0.003
                                (0.016)   (0.018)       (0.026)
                          $
                         >1     0.042***  0.041***      0.063***
                                          (0.009)          (0.012)         (0.012)
                                  >$2     0.001            0.003           -0.022
                                          (0.023)          (0.029)         (0.030)
                 "                "0      1.318***
                                          (0.040)
                                  >41     -0.147***
                                          (0.022)
                                  >42     0.086
                                          (0.059)
                 -,   -+ ,   -!   -0      0.535***         0.497***        0.577***
                                          (0.012)          (0.014)         (0.016)
                 ,, , + , , !     ,0      1.143***         0.980***        1.305***
                                          (0.022)          (0.028)         (0.037)
                 Log-likelihood           -59,427          -25,406         -27,852
                 Parameters               51               24              24
                 Individuals              493              493             493
                 Observations             30,566           13,804          13,804

    NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model without
clustering.
* signiÖcant at 10% level; ** signiÖcant at 5% level; *** signiÖcant at 1% level. These are tests of the null
hypothesis that the coe¢cient is zero.




                                                      40
       Table 5. Implied Impact of the Compromise E§ect Expressed as a
        Fraction of the Monetary Value of a Screenís Fixed Prospect (^Bi )
                       Parts A-D Together            Part A (Gain Part B (Loss
         Prospects from Part A Prospects from Part B Domain Only) Domain only)
Row   1          -0.18                    0.19           -0.20         0.17
Row   2          -0.13                    0.14           -0.14         0.12
Row   3          -0.08                    0.08           -0.07         0.06
Row   4          -0.01                    0.01           0.00          0.01
Row   5           0.06                    -0.06          0.07          -0.05
Row   6           0.14                    -0.13          0.14          -0.12
Row   7           0.23                    -0.21          0.22          -0.18

NOTE: As explained in the text, these Ögures are approximate.




                                              41
12    APPENDIX: Screenshots of the Experiment
    Screenshots of a randomly selected screen from each part of the experiment are shown below
for a participant in the Pull -1 and EV treatments. Each scenario appears on a separate screen in
the experiment.




                                               42
43
        ONLINE APPENDIX

                          for

Controlling for the Compromise Effect
Debiases Estimates of Risk Preference
              Parameters




                 Jonathan P. Beauchamp
                  University of Toronto

                     Daniel J. Benjamin
        University of Southern California and NBER

                    David I. Laibson
              Harvard University and NBER

                  Christopher F. Chabris
                 Geisinger Health System
Contents

1 Complete Set of Fixed Prospects and Alternatives for Each Pull Treatment
and Part of the Experiment .................................................................................................. 2

2 Algorithm to Determine the Second Through Sixth Alternatives for Each
Pull Treatment and Part of the Experiment ................................................................... 5

3       Summary Statistics of the Raw Data from the Experiment ............................... 6

4 Complete Results for the Estimations Summarized in Tables 1-4 of the
Paper ............................................................................................................................................ 9

5 Results of Robustness Check with CPT Model with T&K’s Probability
Weighting Function.............................................................................................................. 28

6       Results of Robustness Check with CPT Model with CARA Utility ................. 38

7       Results of Robustness Check with CPT Model with Expo-Power Utility .... 48

8 Numerical Estimates of the Parameters for the Compromise Effect ci as a
Function of the Row i in Which a Choice Appears ..................................................... 60

9 Additional Information on the Analysis of the Demographic Correlates of
the CPT Model and the Compromise Effect Parameters .......................................... 61

                    + -
10 Estimates of γ, γ , γ , and λ by EV Treatment in the Models with and
Without the Compromise Effect....................................................................................... 65

11 Stata Code to Estimate the Baseline CPT Model with the Compromise
Effect ......................................................................................................................................... 67

12 Original Instructions of the Experiment .............................................................. 70

13 References ...................................................................................................................... 77




                                                                        1
1 Complete Set of Fixed Prospects and
  Alternatives for Each Pull Treatment and Part
  of the Experiment
Below, we list the complete set of fixed prospects and alternative outcomes faced by the
participants in the experiment, for each Pull treatment. Online Appendix Table 1.1 lists
the fixed prospects and alternative outcomes for Part A (Part B is identical to Part A but
with all amounts multiplied by -1). Online Appendix Table 1.2 lists the fixed prospects
and the unfixed parts of the alternative prospects for Parts C and D.




                                            2
                                                                         Online Appendix Table 1.1: Fixed Prospects and Alternative Outcomes for Part A, by Pull Treatment
                                  #          1      2      3     4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11      12      13      14      15     16   17       18   19       20     21      22      23      24      25      26      27      28
                                 xl          0      0      0     0      0      0      0      0      0       0      0       0       0       0       0     50   50       50   50       50     50      50      50     100     100     100     100     100
                                 xh         50     50     50    100    100    100    100    100    200    200    200     200     200     400     400    100 100       100 150       150    150     150     150     200     200     200     200     200
                                P(x l )    0.90   0.50   0.10   0.95   0.75   0.50   0.25   0.05   0.99   0.90   0.50    0.10    0.01    0.99    0.01   0.90 0.50     0.10 0.95     0.75   0.50    0.25    0.05    0.95    0.75    0.50    0.25    0.05
                                P(x h)     0.10   0.50   0.90   0.05   0.25   0.50   0.75   0.95   0.01   0.10   0.50    0.90    0.99    0.01    0.99   0.10 0.50     0.90 0.05     0.25   0.50    0.75    0.95    0.05    0.25    0.50    0.75    0.95




    Fixed Prospects
                                 EUt       9.7    15.9   23.9   15.2   22.4   28.8   36.3   47.3   21.0   31.9   52.2    78.6    97.0    38.0   175.9   41.3 46.4     52.9 46.6     52.8   58.3    64.8    74.4    73.0    78.8    84.0    90.1    99.1
                                            0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.6    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     73.2   0.0    146.4   53.6   70.8   93.3   52.8   65.9    86.7   114.1   142.0   103.5   119.0   141.5   168.3   193.2
                                            0.5    1.2   1.6    0.7     1.7    2.3   2.9    3.8    0.7     2.1    4.7     6.3     77.4   1.3    154.7   53.7   71.0   93.4   53.0   66.6    87.6   114.7   142.2   103.7   119.4   142.1   168.7   193.3
                                            1.4    3.1   4.2    2.0     4.4    6.2   7.6    9.1    1.8     5.6   12.4    16.7     84.3   3.5    168.5   53.9   71.5   93.6   53.4   67.7    88.9   115.7   142.4   103.9   120.1   143.0   169.3   193.5
                                            2.8    6.3   8.5    4.0     9.0   12.7   15.5   17.9   3.6    11.3   25.3    34.0     95.7   7.2    191.5   54.2   72.2   93.8   54.0   69.6    91.2   117.4   142.8   104.2   121.4   144.5   170.4   193.7




                                 Pull 2
                                            5.2   11.7   15.7   7.4    16.5   23.4   28.6   32.6   6.6    20.9   46.8    62.7    114.8   13.2   229.6   54.7   73.5   94.3   54.9   72.7    95.0   120.1   143.5   104.8   123.4   147.0   172.2   194.2
                                            9.2   20.6   27.6   13.0   29.1   41.2   50.4   57.0   11.6   36.8   82.3    110.5   146.4   23.3   292.9   55.6   75.6   95.0   56.5   77.9   101.3   124.7   144.7   105.7   126.7   151.2   175.3   195.0
                                           15.8   35.4   47.4   22.4   50.0   70.7   86.6   97.5   20.0   63.2   141.4   189.7   199.0   40.0   398.0   57.0   79.1   96.2   59.2   86.6   111.8   132.3   146.6   107.2   132.3   158.1   180.3   196.2
                                            0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.6    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     73.2   0.0    146.4   53.6   70.8   93.3   52.8   65.9    86.7   114.1   142.0   103.5   119.0   141.5   168.3   193.2
                                            1.3    2.9   3.9    1.9     4.2    5.9   7.2    8.6    1.7     5.3   11.7    15.8     83.7   3.3    167.3   53.9   71.4   93.6   53.4   67.6    88.8   115.6   142.4   103.8   120.1   142.9   169.3   193.5
                                            3.0    6.7   9.0    4.2     9.5   13.4   16.4   18.9   3.8    12.0   26.7    35.9     97.0   7.6    194.0   54.2   72.3   93.9   54.0   69.8    91.5   117.5   142.9   104.2   121.5   144.6   170.5   193.8
                                            5.1   11.5   15.4   7.3    16.2   22.9   28.1   32.0   6.5    20.5   45.9    61.6    114.0   13.0   228.1   54.7   73.4   94.2   54.9   72.6    94.9   120.0   143.5   104.7   123.3   146.9   172.2   194.2




                                 Pull 1
                                            7.9   17.6   23.6   11.1   24.9   35.2   43.1   48.8   9.9    31.5   70.3    94.4    135.8   19.9   271.5   55.3   74.9   94.7   56.0   76.2    99.2   123.1   144.3   105.4   125.6   149.8   174.2   194.7
                                           11.4   25.4   34.1   16.1   35.9   50.8   62.2   70.2   14.4   45.4   101.6   136.3   163.5   28.7   327.1   56.0   76.7   95.4   57.4   80.8   104.7   127.2   145.3   106.2   128.5   153.4   176.9   195.4
                                           15.8   35.4   47.4   22.4   50.0   70.7   86.6   97.5   20.0   63.2   141.4   189.7   199.0   40.0   398.0   57.0   79.1   96.2   59.2   86.6   111.8   132.3   146.6   107.2   132.3   158.1   180.3   196.2
                                            0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.6    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     73.2   0.0    146.4   53.6   70.8   93.3   52.8   65.9    86.7   114.1   142.0   103.5   119.0   141.5   168.3   193.2




3
                                            2.6    5.9   7.9    3.7     8.3   11.8   14.4   16.7   3.3    10.5   23.6    31.6     94.2   6.7    188.3   54.2   72.1   93.8   53.9   69.3    90.9   117.1   142.8   104.2   121.2   144.3   170.3   193.7
                                            5.3   11.8   15.8   7.5    16.7   23.6   28.9   32.9   6.7    21.1   47.1    63.2    115.1   13.3   230.3   54.7   73.5   94.3   54.9   72.8    95.1   120.2   143.6   104.8   123.4   147.0   172.3   194.2
                                            7.9   17.7   23.7   11.2   25.0   35.4   43.3   49.0   10.0   31.6   70.7    94.9    136.1   20.0   272.2   55.3   74.9   94.8   56.0   76.2    99.3   123.2   144.3   105.4   125.6   149.8   174.3   194.7




                                 Pull 0
                                           10.5   23.6   31.6   14.9   33.3   47.1   57.7   65.2   13.3   42.2   94.3    126.5   157.1   26.7   314.1   55.9   76.3   95.2   57.1   79.7   103.4   126.2   145.1   106.0   127.8   152.6   176.3   195.2
                                           13.2   29.5   39.5   18.6   41.7   58.9   72.2   81.3   16.7   52.7   117.9   158.1   178.0   33.3   356.1   56.4   77.7   95.7   58.1   83.1   107.6   129.3   145.9   106.6   130.1   155.3   178.3   195.7
                                           15.8   35.4   47.4   22.4   50.0   70.7   86.6   97.5   20.0   63.2   141.4   189.7   199.0   40.0   398.0   57.0   79.1   96.2   59.2   86.6   111.8   132.3   146.6   107.2   132.3   158.1   180.3   196.2
                                            0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.6    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     73.2   0.0    146.4   53.6   70.8   93.3   52.8   65.9    86.7   114.1   142.0   103.5   119.0   141.5   168.3   193.2




    Alternative Sure Outcomes
                                            4.5   10.0   13.4   6.3    14.1   19.9   24.4   27.9   5.6    17.8   39.9    53.5    108.7   11.3   217.3   54.6   73.1   94.1   54.6   71.7    93.8   119.2   143.3   104.6   122.7   146.2   171.6   194.1
                                            7.9   17.8   23.8   11.2   25.1   35.5   43.5   49.3   10.1   31.8   71.1    95.4    136.4   20.1   272.9   55.3   74.9   94.8   56.0   76.3    99.3   123.2   144.3   105.4   125.7   149.9   174.3   194.7
                                           10.7   23.9   32.0   15.1   33.8   47.8   58.5   66.0   13.5   42.7   95.5    128.2   158.2   27.0   316.4   55.9   76.4   95.3   57.1   79.9   103.7   126.4   145.1   106.0   128.0   152.7   176.4   195.2




                                 Pull -1
                                           12.8   28.7   38.5   18.1   40.5   57.3   70.2   79.1   16.2   51.3   114.7   153.9   175.2   32.4   350.4   56.4   77.5   95.6   58.0   82.7   107.1   128.8   145.8   106.5   129.8   155.0   178.0   195.6
                                           14.5   32.4   43.5   20.5   45.8   64.8   79.4   89.4   18.3   58.0   129.7   174.0   188.6   36.7   377.1   56.7   78.4   95.9   58.6   84.9   109.7   130.8   146.2   106.9   131.2   156.7   179.3   196.0
                                           15.8   35.4   47.4   22.4   50.0   70.7   86.6   97.5   20.0   63.2   141.4   189.7   199.0   40.0   398.0   57.0   79.1   96.2   59.2   86.6   111.8   132.3   146.6   107.2   132.3   158.1   180.3   196.2
                                            0.0    0.0   0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0    0.6    0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     73.2   0.0    146.4   53.6   70.8   93.3   52.8   65.9    86.7   114.1   142.0   103.5   119.0   141.5   168.3   193.2
                                            6.6   14.8   19.8   9.3    20.9   29.5   36.2   41.1   8.4    26.4   59.1    79.3    125.8   16.7   251.5   55.0   74.2   94.5   55.5   74.5    97.2   121.7   143.9   105.1   124.5   148.4   173.3   194.5
                                           10.6   23.7   31.8   15.0   33.5   47.3   58.0   65.4   13.4   42.3   94.7    127.0   157.4   26.8   314.8   55.9   76.3   95.2   57.1   79.8   103.5   126.3   145.1   106.0   127.9   152.6   176.3   195.2
                                           13.0   29.0   38.9   18.4   41.0   58.0   71.1   80.1   16.4   51.9   116.1   155.8   176.5   32.8   352.9   56.4   77.6   95.7   58.0   82.9   107.3   129.0   145.8   106.6   129.9   155.1   178.1   195.7




                                 Pull -2
                                           14.4   32.2   43.3   20.4   45.6   64.5   79.0   88.9   18.2   57.7   129.0   173.1   187.9   36.5   375.9   56.7   78.3   95.9   58.6   84.8   109.6   130.7   146.2   106.9   131.1   156.7   179.2   195.9
                                           15.3   34.2   45.9   21.6   48.3   68.4   83.7   94.3   19.3   61.2   136.7   183.5   194.8   38.7   389.7   56.9   78.8   96.1   59.0   85.9   111.0   131.7   146.5   107.1   131.8   157.6   179.9   196.1
                                           15.8   35.4   47.4   22.4   50.0   70.7   86.6   97.5   20.0   63.2   141.4   189.7   199.0   40.0   398.0   57.0   79.1   96.2   59.2   86.6   111.8   132.3   146.6   107.2   132.3   158.1   180.3   196.2
    NOTES: Part A consists of 28 problems. Each problem appears on a separate screen and involves choices between a fixed prospect (xl, P(xl); xh , P(xh )) and seven alternative sure outcomes. The different Pull
    treatments vary the second through sixth alternative sure outcomes presented with each fixed prospect on each screen. The 28 prospects and alternatives in Part B are identical to those in Part A but with all dollar
    amounts multiplied by -1.
    t
      EU refers to the expected utility of the fixed prospects, calculated with the parameter estimates reported by Fehr-Duda and Epper (2012, Table 3) for their representative sample. (In the estimation of the CPT model
    (with or without compromise effects), one σq is estimated for each group of screens and the screens are grouped together based on the expected value of their fïxed prospects.)
 Online Appendix Table 1.2: Fixed Prospects and Unfixed Parts of the
      Alternative Prospects for Parts C and D, by Pull Treatment
                          Problem #           1     2      3      4     5      6      7     8
Prospects                      x1             0     0      0      0     -20   -50    50    100
  Fixed



                               x2             0     0      0      0     50    150    120   300
                               y1             -25   -50   -100   -150   -50   -125   20    25
                                               0     0     0      0     50    150    120   300
                                               2     5    10      15    53    157    123   307
                                               7    13    26      40    58    170    128   320
                                    Pull 2



                                              13    27    54      81    66    190    136   340
                                              25    50    99     149    80    224    150   374
                                              44    87    175    262    102   281    172   431
                                              75    150   300    450    140   375    210   525
                                               0     0     0      0     50    150    120   300
                                               6    12    25      37    57    169    127   319
                                              14    28    57      85    67    193    137   343
                                    Pull 1




                                              24    49    97     146    79    223    149   373
                                              37    75    149    224    95    262    165   412
                                              54    108   215    323    115   312    185   462
                                              75    150   300    450    140   375    210   525
  Alternative Prospects




                                               0     0     0      0     50    150    120   300
                                              13    25    50      75    65    188    135   338
                                              25    50    100    150    80    225    150   375
                                    Pull 0




                                              38    75    150    225    95    263    165   413
                          y2




                                              50    100   200    300    110   300    180   450
                                              63    125   250    375    125   338    195   488
                                              75    150   300    450    140   375    210   525
                                               0     0     0      0     50    150    120   300
                                              21    42    85     127    75    213    145   363
                                              38    75    151    226    95    263    165   413
                                    Pull -1




                                              51    101   203    304    111   302    181   452
                                              61    122   243    365    123   332    193   482
                                              69    138   275    413    133   356    203   506
                                              75    150   300    450    140   375    210   525
                                               0     0     0      0     50    150    120   300
                                              31    63    125    188    88    244    158   394
                                              50    100   201    301    110   301    180   451
                                    Pull -2




                                              62    123   246    369    124   335    194   485
                                              68    137   274    410    132   355    202   505
                                              73    145   290    435    137   368    207   518
                                              75    150   300    450    140   375    210   525

NOTES: Part C consists of Problems 1-4; Part D consists of Problems 5-8. Each problem appears
on a separate screen and involves choices between a fixed prospect (x1 , 0.50; x2 , 0.50) and seven
alternative prospects (y1 , 0.50; y2 , 0.50). For each problem, y1 is fixed and y2 is unfixed. The
different Pull treatments vary the unfixed part ( y2 ) of the second through sixth alternative
prospects on each screen.




                                                                 4
2 Algorithm to Determine the Second Through
  Sixth Alternatives for Each Pull Treatment and
 2Part  of theToExperiment
    Algorithm    Determine the Second through Sixth Alternatives
       for each Pull Treatment and Part of the Experiment
      As described in the paper, the Pull 1 and Pull 2 treatments are designed to resemble T&Kís
  experiment, in which the second through sixth alternatives are ìlogarithmically spaced between
  the extreme outcomes of the prospectî (T&K, p. 305). Conversely, in the Pull -1 and Pull -2
  treatments, the alternatives are more densely concentrated at the monetary amounts farther from
  zero. Pull 2 and Pull -2 are more skewed than Pull 1 and Pull -1.

      We use the following algorithm to determine the second through sixth alternative outcomes for
  screen q in Pull 1 and Pull 2 for Part A (in the gain domain):
      ! Label the alternative outcomes for screen q, in decreasing monetary amounts, xq1 , xq2 ,...,xq7
  and deÖne !q " xq1 # xq7 .
      ! Recall that (as described in the paper) xq1 and xq7 (the Örst and seventh alternatives of
  screen q) are identical across treatments and correspond to the screenís Öxed prospectís certainty
  equivalents for CRRA expected-utility-maximizers with CRRA parameters # = #1 and # = 0:99.
      ! For Pull 1, let k = 0:3 and solve (1 + a)6 k!q = (1 + k)!q for a. Then, let zi = (1 + a)(7!i) k!q ,
  i = 1; :::; 7. These seven zi points form a log scale from k!q to (1 + k)!q .
      ! We then ìshiftî the log scale formed by these zi points so that the scale starts at xq7 and ends
  at xq1 : xqi = zi + (xq7 # k!q ), i = 2; :::; 6, and round to the nearest dime.
      ! The algorithm for Pull 2 is identical, except that we let k = 0:05.

      In Pull -1 and Pull -2, the spacing between xqi and xq(i+1) is equal to the spacing between
  xq(7!i) and xq(7!i+1) (i = 1; :::; 6) in Pull 1 and Pull 2, respectively.

     The amounts for Part B are identical to the amounts for Part A, multiplied by -1.

      For Parts C and D, we use the same algorithm to determine the parts of the second through
  sixth alternatives that are not Öxed. (Recall that the alternatives in Parts C and D are risky
  prospects with two possible realizations, and that one of these two realizations is Öxed across the
  seven alternatives and the other varies across alternativesñi.e. it is not Öxed.)




                                                      3
                                                  5
3 Summary Statistics of the Raw Data from the
  Experiment
Online Appendix Figures 3.1-3.4 show the percentage of choices where the safe option
was chosen, by Pull and EV treatments, separately for Parts A, B, C, and D of the
experiment. (For Part D, Online Appendix Figure 3.4 shows the percentage of choices
where the option involving the smallest possible loss was selected.) The figures also
show p values for t-tests of the equality of the percentages of safe choices across the two
EV treatments within each Pull treatment. To compute the percentages, each row of the
MPL was counted as a choice, and data from the 28 participants whose data were
excluded from the estimation data for the main analyses in the main text (see Section 3.3
of the main text) were excluded here too. The figure captions provide additional details.

Although these figures may give readers a sense of the underlying data we collected in
our experiment, caution is warranted when interpreting them because the different Pull
treatments involve different sets of choices, and the raw data are thus not directly
comparable across treatments. For example, consider Online Appendix Figure 3.1, which
shows the percentages of safe choices in Part A. The percentages are lower in the Pull 2
treatment and higher in the Pull -2 treatment. Recall that the alternative prospects in the
Pull 2 treatment involve amounts that are closer to zero, and the alternative prospects in
the Pull -2 treatment involve amounts that are further away from zero. In the absence of a
compromise effect, a participant with a given certainty equivalent for a gamble on a
given screen will thus select the safe option less frequently in the Pull 2 treatment than in
the Pull -2 treatment. The existence of a compromise effect would partially mitigate this
tendency but would not fully counter it. Because of this, Online Appendix Figure 3.1
shows that the percentage of safe choices decreases in Pull, even though theoretical
considerations suggest (see Section 4 of the main text), and our empirical results confirm,
that estimates of risk aversion (i.e., !, ! " , ! # ) increase in Pull.




                                             6
Online Appendix Figure 3.1. Percentage of choices where the safe option was chosen in Part A,
by Pull and EV treatments. (In Part A, the safe options are the alternative prospects; each row of
the MPL is counted as a choice.) The p values at the top of the bars are for t-tests of the equality
of the percentages of safe choices across the two EV treatments within each Pull treatment.




Online Appendix Figure 3.2. Percentage of choices where the safe option was chosen in Part B,
by Pull and EV treatments. (In Part B, the safe options are the alternative prospects; each row of
the MPL is counted as a choice.) The p values at the top of the bars are for t-tests of the equality
of the percentages of safe choices across the two EV treatments within each Pull treatment.




                                                 7
Online Appendix Figure 3.3. Percentage of choices where the safe option was chosen in Part C,
by Pull and EV treatments. (In Part C, we define the safe option in a row as selecting “Don’t take
the gamble”; each row of the MPL is counted as a choice.) The p values at the top of the bars are
for t-tests of the equality of the percentages of safe choices across the two EV treatments within
each Pull treatment.




Online Appendix Figure 3.4. Percentage of choices where the option involving the smaller
possible loss was chosen in Part D, by Pull and EV treatments. (All choices in Part D involve two
gambles, gamble 1 and gamble 2, each of which involves a 50% chance of a loss; the possible
loss in gamble 1 is always smaller than that in gamble 2; thus, the figure shows the percentage of
choices where gamble 1 was selected; each row of the MPL is counted as a choice.) The p values
at the top of the bars are for t-tests of the equality of the percentages of safe choices across the
two EV treatments within each Pull treatment.


                                                 8
4 Complete Results for the Estimations
  Summarized in Tables 1-4 of the Paper




                   9
4.1 Complete Results for Table 1 in the Paper: ML Estimates
    of All Parameters in the Model with the Compromise
    Effect

4.1.1 Parts A-D Together
                                                                   Number of obs         =         30566
                                                                   Wald chi2(0)          =             .
Log pseudolikelihood = -55378.806                                  Prob > chi2           =             .

                                                  (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        |                           Robust
                        |           Coef.         Std. Err.                  z P>|z|  [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma                   |
             _cons |           .2417204           .0160087              15.10  0.000   .210344    .2730969
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha                 |
             _cons |           .6193999           .0151086              41.00  0.000  .5897876    .6490122
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta                |
             _cons |           1.118809           .0245974              45.48  0.000  1.070599    1.167019
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
lambda                  |
             _cons |           1.311381             .034214             38.33  0.000  1.244323    1.378439
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1                     |
             _cons |           6.946555           .3952036              17.58  0.000   6.17197    7.721139
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2                     |
             _cons |            11.9386           .7371196              16.20  0.000  10.49387    13.38333
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3                     |
             _cons |           14.78461           1.152642              12.83  0.000  12.52548    17.04375
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4                     |
             _cons |           24.60433           1.958008              12.57  0.000   20.7667    28.44196
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5                     |
             _cons |           50.82841           5.950401                8.54 0.000  39.16584    62.49098
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1                     |
             _cons |           12.75788           .8051541              15.85  0.000   11.1798    14.33595
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2                     |
             _cons |           18.61553           1.335685              13.94  0.000  15.99763    21.23342
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3                     |
             _cons |           19.94524           1.513185              13.18  0.000  16.97945    22.91103
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4                     |
             _cons |           26.32082           2.728525                9.65 0.000  20.97301    31.66864
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5                     |
             _cons |            38.0273           4.955181                7.67 0.000  28.31533    47.73928
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC1                     |
             _cons |            7.88043           .5498168              14.33  0.000  6.802809    8.958052
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC2                     |
             _cons |            19.3701           1.596884              12.13  0.000  16.24026    22.49993
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sD                      |
             _cons |           12.24018           1.141905              10.72  0.000  10.00209    14.47827
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi1                       |
             _cons | -.0907861                    .0119494              -7.60  0.000 -.1142064   -.0673657
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi2                       |
             _cons | -.0075387                        .00137            -5.50  0.000 -.0102238   -.0048537
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                                   10
4.1.2 Part A (Gain Domain Only)
                                            Number of obs   =         13804
                                                  Wald chi2(0)    =           .
Log pseudolikelihood = -23915.434                 Prob > chi2     =           .

                            (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |             Robust
               |      Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |     .4475485 .0195434    22.90   0.000     .4092441    .4858529
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |     .5640233 .0146757    38.43   0.000     .5352594    .5927871
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |     .8581722 .0325624    26.35   0.000     .7943512    .9219933
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1            |
       _cons |     3.884443 .1827219    21.26   0.000     3.526315    4.242572
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2            |
       _cons |     5.745609  .326979    17.57   0.000     5.104742    6.386476
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3            |
       _cons |     6.100672 .4205729    14.51   0.000     5.276364    6.924979
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4            |
       _cons |     9.034794 .6918451    13.06   0.000     7.678803    10.39079
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5            |
       _cons |     15.36957 1.827406     8.41   0.000     11.78792    18.95122
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi1              |
       _cons | -.1344342    .0176732    -7.61   0.000    -.1690732   -.0997953
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi2              |
       _cons |     .0016748 .0019178     0.87   0.383    -.0020841    .0054337
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 11
4.1.3 Part B (Loss Domain Only)

                                                  Number of obs   =      13804
                                                  Wald chi2(0)    =          .
Log pseudolikelihood =   -25399.65                Prob > chi2     =          .

                            (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |             Robust
               |      Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons | -.1056974    .0431253    -2.45   0.014    -.1902214   -.0211734
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |     .6897954 .0220424    31.29   0.000     .6465931    .7329978
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |      1.47058 .0611999    24.03   0.000      1.35063    1.590529
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1            |
       _cons |     26.54978 3.935111     6.75   0.000     18.83711    34.26246
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2            |
       _cons |     48.94547 8.469511     5.78   0.000     32.34554    65.54541
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3            |
       _cons |     66.25618 13.01421     5.09   0.000     40.74879    91.76357
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4            |
       _cons |     107.4424 23.30718     4.61   0.000      61.7612    153.1237
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5            |
       _cons |     217.0596 56.99872     3.81   0.000     105.3442    328.7751
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi1              |
       _cons |     -.144331  .018166    -7.95   0.000    -.1799357   -.1087262
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi2              |
       _cons | -.0043143    .0022595    -1.91   0.056    -.0087428    .0001143
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 12
4.2 Complete Results for Table 2 in the Paper: ML Estimates
    of All Parameters in the Parameterized Model with the
    Compromise Effect

4.2.1 Parts A-D Together
                                                    Number of obs    =      30566
                                                    Wald chi2(0)     =          .
Log pseudolikelihood = -55224.557                   Prob > chi2      =          .

                                (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |                 Robust
               |          Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |          .206111 .0256492     8.04   0.000     .1558395    .2563824
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |         .5557754 .0185143    30.02   0.000     .5194881    .5920627
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |         1.189692  .037368    31.84   0.000     1.116453    1.262932
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
lambda         |
       _cons |         1.270673 .0533319    23.83   0.000     1.166145    1.375202
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0083344 .0172273     0.48   0.629    -.0254305    .0420994
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0576824 .0350184     1.65   0.100    -.0109523    .1263172
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_alpha         |
       _cons | -.0174391        .0092667    -1.88   0.060    -.0356014    .0007233
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_alpha         |
       _cons |         .1302331 .0284477     4.58   0.000     .0744766    .1859896
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_beta        |
       _cons | -.0004308        .0219806    -0.02   0.984    -.0435121    .0426504
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_beta        |
       _cons | -.1321397        .0476646    -2.77   0.006    -.2255607   -.0387187
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_l       |
       _cons | -.0531334        .0293479    -1.81   0.070    -.1106541    .0043874
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_l       |
       _cons |         .0749102 .0741481     1.01   0.312    -.0704173    .2202377
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1            |
       _cons |         8.471337 .7346861    11.53   0.000     7.031379    9.911295
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2            |
       _cons |         13.99402 1.328479    10.53   0.000     11.39024    16.59779
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3            |
       _cons |          15.8456 1.954131     8.11   0.000     12.01557    19.67562
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4            |
       _cons |         29.64206 3.712833     7.98   0.000     22.36504    36.91908
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5            |
       _cons |         66.62124 11.41515     5.84   0.000     44.24796    88.99452
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1            |
       _cons |         14.62046 1.472035     9.93   0.000     11.73532    17.50559
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2            |
       _cons |         21.02752 2.417808     8.70   0.000      16.2887    25.76634
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3            |
       _cons |         24.01024 3.085625     7.78   0.000     17.96252    30.05795
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4            |
       _cons |          29.3427   4.5028     6.52   0.000     20.51737    38.16802




                                                    13
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5           |
       _cons |     46.349   8.681106     5.34   0.000     29.33435    63.36366
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC1           |
       _cons |   8.091364   .9009637     8.98   0.000     6.325508     9.85722
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC2           |
       _cons |   20.51948   2.878159     7.13   0.000      14.8784    26.16057
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sD            |
       _cons |   16.03147   2.278884     7.03   0.000     11.56494    20.49801
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA1    |
       _cons |   .0787081   .3413576     0.23   0.818    -.5903405    .7477566
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA1    |
       _cons | -2.757494    .8594604    -3.21   0.001    -4.442005   -1.072982
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA2    |
       _cons |   .0824369   .7700597     0.11   0.915    -1.426852    1.591726
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA2    |
       _cons | -3.545769    1.657203    -2.14   0.032    -6.793827   -.2977101
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA3    |
       _cons |   .2790316   1.095298     0.25   0.799    -1.867712    2.425776
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA3    |
       _cons | -1.995147    2.573782    -0.78   0.438    -7.039667    3.049372
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA4    |
       _cons |   -3.35317   2.193181    -1.53   0.126    -7.651726    .9453867
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA4    |
       _cons | -6.249444    4.151368    -1.51   0.132    -14.38598    1.887088
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA5    |
       _cons | -6.356309    6.008805    -1.06   0.290    -18.13335    5.420733
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA5    |
       _cons | -21.68732    12.76104    -1.70   0.089    -46.69849    3.323855
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB1    |
       _cons | -.3858308     .747751    -0.52   0.606    -1.851396    1.079734
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB1    |
       _cons | -3.229005    1.798479    -1.80   0.073     -6.75396    .2959493
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB2    |
       _cons | -.8176172    1.426382    -0.57   0.567    -3.613275    1.978041
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB2    |
       _cons |    -4.1457   2.926864    -1.42   0.157    -9.882248    1.590848
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB3    |
       _cons | -1.020451    1.586598    -0.64   0.520    -4.130126    2.089223
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB3    |
       _cons | -6.994841    3.584155    -1.95   0.051    -14.01966    .0299745
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB4    |
       _cons | -2.661792    2.884826    -0.92   0.356    -8.315947    2.992364
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB4    |
       _cons | -4.413494    5.222461    -0.85   0.398    -14.64933    5.822341
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB5    |
       _cons |    -8.1278   4.800149    -1.69   0.090    -17.53592     1.28032
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB5    |
       _cons | -7.753461    9.176378    -0.84   0.398    -25.73883    10.23191
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sC1    |
       _cons | -.5049022    .4824912    -1.05   0.295    -1.450567    .4407631
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sC1    |
       _cons |    -.21316   1.213742    -0.18   0.861    -2.592051    2.165731
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sC2    |
       _cons |   -1.76451   1.556722    -1.13   0.257     -4.81563    1.286609




                                                 14
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sC2     |
        _cons | -1.913247   3.618202    -0.53   0.597    -9.004794    5.178299
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sD      |
        _cons | -1.814308   1.001584    -1.81   0.070    -3.777376      .14876
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sD      |
        _cons | -5.404312   2.380116    -2.27   0.023    -10.06925   -.7393695
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi1            |
        _cons | -.0896071   .0122324    -7.33   0.000    -.1135822    -.065632
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi2            |
        _cons | -.0076155   .0013797    -5.52   0.000    -.0103198   -.0049113
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 15
4.2.2 Part A (Gain Domain Only)

                                                                   Number of obs       =   13804
                                                    Wald chi2(0)       =           .
Log pseudolikelihood = -23838.856                   Prob > chi2        =           .

                                (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |                 Robust
               |          Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |         .4234537 .0278263    15.22   0.000     .3689151    .4779922
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |         .5051478 .0183603    27.51   0.000     .4691622    .5411334
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |         .9105968 .0478594    19.03   0.000     .8167942    1.004399
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0110312 .0178499     0.62   0.537    -.0239539    .0460163
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0334443 .0391302     0.85   0.393    -.0432496    .1101381
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_alpha         |
       _cons | -.0150514        .0090778    -1.66   0.097    -.0328434    .0027407
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_alpha         |
       _cons |         .1242067 .0276327     4.49   0.000     .0700477    .1783657
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_beta        |
       _cons |         -.004172 .0267502    -0.16   0.876    -.0566015    .0482574
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_beta        |
       _cons |         -.095354 .0633599    -1.50   0.132    -.2195372    .0288292
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1            |
       _cons |         4.496528 .2830979    15.88   0.000     3.941666     5.05139
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2            |
       _cons |         6.404707 .4869965    13.15   0.000     5.450211    7.359202
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3            |
       _cons |         6.242768 .5770657    10.82   0.000      5.11174    7.373796
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4            |
       _cons |         10.20512  1.10953     9.20   0.000      8.03048    12.37976
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5            |
       _cons |         18.74995 3.110022     6.03   0.000     12.65442    24.84548
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA1     |
       _cons |         .0212634 .1603163     0.13   0.894    -.2929508    .3354776
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA1     |
       _cons | -1.149381        .3552096    -3.24   0.001    -1.845579   -.4531833
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA2     |
       _cons |         .0265432  .318068     0.08   0.933    -.5968587    .6499451
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA2     |
       _cons | -1.144326        .6541053    -1.75   0.080    -2.426349    .1376964
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA3     |
       _cons |         .2628053 .3820786     0.69   0.492     -.486055    1.011665
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA3     |
       _cons | -.3724247        .8463344    -0.44   0.660     -2.03121     1.28636
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA4     |
       _cons | -.9776202        .7639582    -1.28   0.201    -2.474951    .5197105
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA4     |
       _cons | -1.321611        1.373165    -0.96   0.336    -4.012966    1.369743
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA5     |
       _cons | -1.934792        1.857262    -1.04   0.298    -5.574958    1.705374




                                                    16
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA5    |
       _cons | -4.312429    3.602988    -1.20   0.231    -11.37416    2.749297
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi1            |
       _cons | -.1387867    .0178033    -7.80   0.000    -.1736807   -.1038928
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi2            |
       _cons |   .0023069   .0018789     1.23   0.220    -.0013756    .0059895
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 17
4.2.3 Part B (Loss Domain Only)
                                                    Number of obs    =      13804
                                                    Wald chi2(0)     =          .
Log pseudolikelihood = -25343.262                   Prob > chi2      =          .

                                (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |                 Robust
               |          Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons | -.1182055        .0515039    -2.30   0.022    -.2191512   -.0172598
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |         .6167516 .0270155    22.83   0.000     .5638022    .6697009
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |         1.524137 .0864916    17.62   0.000     1.354616    1.693657
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_gamma           |
       _cons | -.0323206         .026049    -1.24   0.215    -.0833758    .0187345
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0021699 .0666094     0.03   0.974    -.1283821    .1327218
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_alpha         |
       _cons |         -.015365 .0138902    -1.11   0.269    -.0425892    .0118593
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_alpha         |
       _cons |         .1562935  .041995     3.72   0.000     .0739848    .2386022
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_beta        |
       _cons |         .0416922 .0419585     0.99   0.320     -.040545    .1239294
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_beta        |
       _cons | -.0899068        .1142436    -0.79   0.431    -.3138202    .1340066
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1            |
       _cons |         30.30175 5.372766     5.64   0.000     19.77132    40.83218
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2            |
       _cons |         54.05663 11.22242     4.82   0.000     32.06108    76.05217
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3            |
       _cons |         77.57128 18.36838     4.22   0.000     41.56992    113.5726
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4            |
       _cons |         114.6108  29.8461     3.84   0.000     56.11348     173.108
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5            |
       _cons |         245.3845 78.64632     3.12   0.002      91.2406    399.5285
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB1     |
       _cons |          3.35427 2.574001     1.30   0.193     -1.69068    8.399219
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB1     |
       _cons | -4.428698        6.519832    -0.68   0.497    -17.20733    8.349938
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB2     |
       _cons |         8.864135 6.508522     1.36   0.173    -3.892334     21.6206
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB2     |
       _cons |         -2.77284 13.97422    -0.20   0.843    -30.16182    24.61614
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB3     |
       _cons |         10.54686 9.041151     1.17   0.243    -7.173474    28.26719
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB3     |
       _cons | -12.92712        20.86169    -0.62   0.535    -53.81528    27.96105
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB4     |
       _cons |         16.18807 17.86578     0.91   0.365    -18.82821    51.20435
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB4     |
       _cons |         1.286831 41.29134     0.03   0.975    -79.64271    82.21637
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB5     |
       _cons |          13.1091 39.94809     0.33   0.743    -65.18772    91.40592
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB5     |
       _cons | -5.218528        102.6074    -0.05   0.959    -206.3253    195.8882




                                                    18
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi1           |
       _cons | -.1416346    .0175073    -8.09   0.000    -.1759483    -.107321
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
pi2           |
       _cons | -.0048271    .0022178    -2.18   0.030    -.0091739   -.0004803
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 19
4.3 Complete Results for Table 3 in the Paper: ML Estimates
    of All Parameters in the Model Without the Compromise
    Effect

4.3.1 Parts A-D Together
   Number of obs   =      30566
                                                  Wald chi2(0)    =          .
Log pseudolikelihood = -59956.628                 Prob > chi2     =          .

                            (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |             Robust
               |    Coef.   Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |   .2032792   .0118117    17.21   0.000     .1801287    .2264296
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |   .5742118   .0099229    57.87   0.000     .5547632    .5936604
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |   1.123419    .016066    69.93   0.000      1.09193    1.154908
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
lambda         |
       _cons |   1.336537    .027142    49.24   0.000     1.283339    1.389734
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1            |
       _cons |   5.708549    .239734    23.81   0.000     5.238679    6.178419
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2            |
       _cons |    9.63376   .4560246    21.13   0.000     8.739968    10.52755
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3            |
       _cons |   10.28831   .6149238    16.73   0.000     9.083077    11.49353
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4            |
       _cons |   16.67114   1.062706    15.69   0.000     14.58827      18.754
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5            |
       _cons |   40.83873   3.415513    11.96   0.000     34.14445    47.53302
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1            |
       _cons |   9.962969   .5151478    19.34   0.000     8.953298    10.97264
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2            |
       _cons |    14.3498   .8522449    16.84   0.000     12.67943    16.02017
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3            |
       _cons |   13.56155   .8975655    15.11   0.000     11.80235    15.32075
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4            |
       _cons |   18.37978   1.542214    11.92   0.000     15.35709    21.40246
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5            |
       _cons |   35.11393   3.572159     9.83   0.000     28.11263    42.11524
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC1            |
       _cons |   6.672262   .3618274    18.44   0.000     5.963093    7.381431
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC2            |
       _cons |   17.22871   1.122964    15.34   0.000     15.02774    19.42968
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sD             |
       _cons |   9.602215   .6499856    14.77   0.000     8.328267    10.87616
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 20
4.3.2 Part A (Gain Domain Only)
                                                  Number of obs   =      13804
                                                  Wald chi2(0)    =          .
Log pseudolikelihood = -25604.111                 Prob > chi2     =          .

                            (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |             Robust
               |    Coef.   Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |   .3626102   .0138369    26.21   0.000     .3354904      .38973
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |   .5384385   .0109185    49.31   0.000     .5170386    .5598384
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |   .9583001   .0197127    48.61   0.000     .9196639    .9969363
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1            |
       _cons |   3.818816   .1399444    27.29   0.000      3.54453    4.093102
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2            |
       _cons |   5.622384   .2526493    22.25   0.000       5.1272    6.117567
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3            |
       _cons |   5.233887   .3046054    17.18   0.000     4.636871    5.830902
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4            |
       _cons |   7.676197   .4847189    15.84   0.000     6.726165    8.626228
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5            |
       _cons |   16.47294   1.412336    11.66   0.000     13.70481    19.24107
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 21
4.3.3 Part B (Loss Domain Only)

                                               Number of obs   =       13804
                                                  Wald chi2(0)     =           .
Log pseudolikelihood = -28140.868                 Prob > chi2      =           .

                            (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |             Robust
               |    Coef.   Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |   -.009619    .021813    -0.44   0.659    -.0523716    .0331337
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |   .6153074   .0130953    46.99   0.000      .589641    .6409737
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |   1.296382   .0301646    42.98   0.000      1.23726    1.355503
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1            |
       _cons |   12.89018    .973089    13.25   0.000     10.98297     14.7974
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2            |
       _cons |   22.02498   1.999303    11.02   0.000     18.10642    25.94354
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3            |
       _cons |    24.2498   2.615078     9.27   0.000     19.12434    29.37526
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4            |
       _cons |   38.28514   4.688734     8.17   0.000     29.09539    47.47489
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5            |
       _cons |   90.63866   13.18273     6.88   0.000     64.80098    116.4763
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 22
4.4 Complete Results for Table 4 in the Paper: ML Estimates
    of All Parameters in the Parameterized Model Without the
    Compromise Effect

4.4.1 Parts A-D Together
Number of obs   =       30566
                                                    Wald chi2(0)     =          .
Log pseudolikelihood = -59426.702                   Prob > chi2      =          .

                                (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |                 Robust
               |          Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |         .1962763 .0159212    12.33   0.000     .1650714    .2274813
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |         .5353259 .0123991    43.17   0.000     .5110242    .5596277
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |         1.143144 .0219723    52.03   0.000     1.100079    1.186209
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
lambda         |
       _cons |         1.317612 .0396838    33.20   0.000     1.239834    1.395391
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0415339 .0089828     4.62   0.000      .023928    .0591398
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0008474 .0233336     0.04   0.971    -.0448856    .0465805
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_alpha         |
       _cons | -.0352166        .0062937    -5.60   0.000    -.0475521   -.0228811
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_alpha         |
       _cons |         .0886372 .0185971     4.77   0.000     .0521876    .1250869
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_beta        |
       _cons |           .02773 .0100495     2.76   0.006     .0080333    .0474268
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_beta        |
       _cons | -.0405865        .0276623    -1.47   0.142    -.0948035    .0136306
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_l       |
       _cons | -.1465308        .0217653    -6.73   0.000    -.1891899   -.1038716
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_l       |
       _cons |         .0856586  .058742     1.46   0.145    -.0294736    .2007907
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1            |
       _cons |         6.202134 .3622788    17.12   0.000     5.492081    6.912187
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2            |
       _cons |         10.20917 .6587717    15.50   0.000     8.918006    11.50034
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3            |
       _cons |         10.37908 .8519371    12.18   0.000     8.709315    12.04885
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4            |
       _cons |         18.00332 1.480613    12.16   0.000     15.10137    20.90527
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5            |
       _cons |         44.42177 4.854223     9.15   0.000     34.90767    53.93588
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1            |
       _cons |         10.66456 .7235959    14.74   0.000     9.246338    12.08278
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2            |
       _cons |         15.45323 1.193821    12.94   0.000     13.11338    17.79307
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3            |
       _cons |          14.8943 1.267181    11.75   0.000     12.41067    17.37793




                                                    23
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4           |
       _cons |   19.47978   2.045269     9.52   0.000     15.47113    23.48844
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5           |
       _cons |   39.81084   4.923973     8.09   0.000     30.16004    49.46165
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC1           |
       _cons |   6.942697   .5228935    13.28   0.000     5.917845    7.967549
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sC2           |
       _cons |    18.2909   1.636653    11.18   0.000     15.08312    21.49868
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sD            |
       _cons |    11.0663   .9256105    11.96   0.000     9.252138    12.88046
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA1    |
       _cons | -.3837757     .165735    -2.32   0.021    -.7086103   -.0589412
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA1    |
       _cons | -1.023599    .4515057    -2.27   0.023    -1.908534   -.1386645
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA2    |
       _cons |   -1.05196   .3478069    -3.02   0.002    -1.733649   -.3702714
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA2    |
       _cons | -.8517713     .882325    -0.97   0.334    -2.581096    .8775539
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA3    |
       _cons | -1.162615    .4383028    -2.65   0.008    -2.021672    -.303557
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA3    |
       _cons | -.1026005    1.145723    -0.09   0.929    -2.348177    2.142976
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA4    |
       _cons |   -3.27874   .8584398    -3.82   0.000    -4.961251   -1.596229
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA4    |
       _cons | -.6770411    1.895494    -0.36   0.721    -4.392141    3.038059
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA5    |
       _cons | -8.270104    2.730715    -3.03   0.002    -13.62221   -2.918001
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA5    |
       _cons | -2.279285    5.984907    -0.38   0.703    -14.00949    9.450918
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB1    |
       _cons | -1.921642    .3686271    -5.21   0.000    -2.644137   -1.199146
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB1    |
       _cons | -.4233126    .8821363    -0.48   0.631    -2.152268    1.305643
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB2    |
       _cons | -3.230316    .6095607    -5.30   0.000    -4.425033   -2.035599
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB2    |
       _cons | -.4855926     1.32408    -0.37   0.714    -3.080741    2.109556
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB3    |
       _cons | -3.529583    .6733545    -5.24   0.000    -4.849334   -2.209832
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB3    |
       _cons | -.7983987    1.497648    -0.53   0.594    -3.733734    2.136937
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB4    |
       _cons | -5.021189    1.159367    -4.33   0.000    -7.293506   -2.748872
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB4    |
       _cons |   .6409199   2.176438     0.29   0.768    -3.624821    4.906661
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB5    |
       _cons | -12.37504    2.595848    -4.77   0.000    -17.46281   -7.287273
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB5    |
       _cons |   1.847428   4.616137     0.40   0.689    -7.200034    10.89489
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sC1    |
       _cons | -1.409292    .2647771    -5.32   0.000    -1.928246   -.8903385
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sC1    |
       _cons |   .1640563   .6275231     0.26   0.794    -1.065866    1.393979




                                                 24
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sC2     |
        _cons | -4.479169   .8319998    -5.38   0.000    -6.109859   -2.848479
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sC2     |
        _cons |  .2207494   1.770406     0.12   0.901    -3.249184    3.690682
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sD      |
        _cons | -2.736951   .5005148    -5.47   0.000    -3.717942    -1.75596
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sD      |
        _cons | -.8269326   1.058469    -0.78   0.435    -2.901493    1.247628
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                 25
4.4.2 Part A (Gain Domain Only)
                                                   Number of obs    =       13804
                                                    Wald chi2(0)        =           .
Log pseudolikelihood = -25405.825                   Prob > chi2         =           .

                                (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |                 Robust
               |          Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons |          .353284 .0182659    19.34   0.000     .3174835    .3890845
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |          .497086 .0139917    35.53   0.000     .4696627    .5245093
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |         .9801244  .027654    35.44   0.000     .9259235    1.034325
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0405741 .0120417     3.37   0.001     .0169728    .0641755
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_gamma           |
       _cons |         .0025484  .028743     0.09   0.929    -.0537868    .0588837
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_alpha         |
       _cons | -.0305431        .0070018    -4.36   0.000    -.0442663   -.0168198
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_alpha         |
       _cons |         .0930661 .0210508     4.42   0.000     .0518073    .1343249
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_beta        |
       _cons |         .0053596 .0154684     0.35   0.729    -.0249578    .0356771
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_beta        |
       _cons | -.0445406         .038949    -1.14   0.253    -.1208792    .0317981
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA1            |
       _cons |         4.148472 .2173676    19.09   0.000     3.722439    4.574505
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA2            |
       _cons |         5.968931 .3746306    15.93   0.000     5.234669    6.703194
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA3            |
       _cons |         5.309521  .433876    12.24   0.000     4.459139    6.159902
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA4            |
       _cons |         8.322197 .7192379    11.57   0.000     6.912516    9.731877
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sA5            |
       _cons |         18.08268 2.036236     8.88   0.000     14.09173    22.07363
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA1     |
       _cons | -.2270423        .1240069    -1.83   0.067    -.4700913    .0160067
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA1     |
       _cons | -.6813952        .3070209    -2.22   0.026    -1.283145   -.0796452
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA2     |
       _cons | -.5242444         .238329    -2.20   0.028    -.9913607   -.0571282
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA2     |
       _cons | -.5413533        .5415599    -1.00   0.317    -1.602791    .5200845
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA3     |
       _cons | -.5326923        .2629498    -2.03   0.043    -1.048064   -.0173202
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA3     |
       _cons | -.1230266        .6450056    -0.19   0.849    -1.387214    1.141161
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA4     |
       _cons | -1.405904        .4909182    -2.86   0.004    -2.368086   -.4437217
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA4     |
       _cons | -.3779393        .9823201    -0.38   0.700    -2.303251    1.547373
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sA5     |
       _cons | -3.254219        1.354181    -2.40   0.016    -5.908365   -.6000737
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sA5     |
       _cons | -1.032615        2.713097    -0.38   0.703    -6.350188    4.284959
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                    26
4.4.3 Part B (Loss Domain Only)
                                                    Number of obs    =      13804
                                                    Wald chi2(0)     =          .
Log pseudolikelihood = -27851.955                   Prob > chi2      =          .

                                (Std. Err. adjusted for 493 clusters in subjectId)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               |                 Robust
               |          Coef. Std. Err.      z    P>|z|     [95% Conf. Interval]
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
gamma          |
       _cons | -.0031566        .0260451    -0.12   0.904    -.0542041    .0478909
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
alpha        |
       _cons |         .5772309  .016438    35.12   0.000      .545013    .6094489
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
beta       |
       _cons |          1.30456 .0371034    35.16   0.000     1.231839    1.377282
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_gamma           |
       _cons |          .063236 .0116521     5.43   0.000     .0403983    .0860737
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_gamma           |
       _cons | -.0219581        .0303238    -0.72   0.469    -.0813916    .0374754
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_alpha         |
       _cons | -.0425013        .0082642    -5.14   0.000    -.0586988   -.0263039
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_alpha         |
       _cons |         .0889148 .0248289     3.58   0.000      .040251    .1375785
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_beta        |
       _cons |         .0392595 .0147204     2.67   0.008      .010408     .068111
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_beta        |
       _cons | -.0233409        .0398406    -0.59   0.558    -.1014271    .0547452
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB1            |
       _cons |         13.53282 1.195238    11.32   0.000     11.19019    15.87544
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB2            |
       _cons |         22.99171 2.437006     9.43   0.000     18.21527    27.76816
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB3            |
       _cons |         25.49915 3.128879     8.15   0.000     19.36666    31.63164
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB4            |
       _cons |         39.57846 5.502788     7.19   0.000     28.79319    50.36372
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
sB5            |
       _cons |         100.1441 16.38849     6.11   0.000     68.02324    132.2649
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB1     |
       _cons | -2.036972        .4820761    -4.23   0.000    -2.981824    -1.09212
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB1     |
       _cons | -.5454671        1.147932    -0.48   0.635    -2.795372    1.704438
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB2     |
       _cons | -4.321136        .9942535    -4.35   0.000    -6.269837   -2.372435
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB2     |
       _cons | -.3476178        2.106143    -0.17   0.869    -4.475582    3.780347
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB3     |
       _cons | -5.536534        1.292043    -4.29   0.000    -8.068892   -3.004175
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB3     |
       _cons | -.7679326        2.732935    -0.28   0.779    -6.124387    4.588522
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB4     |
       _cons | -10.11871        2.497848    -4.05   0.000     -15.0144   -5.223022
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB4     |
       _cons |         2.072809 4.528289     0.46   0.647    -6.802474    10.94809
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi1_sB5     |
       _cons | -32.18525        7.360669    -4.37   0.000     -46.6119    -17.7586
-------------+----------------------------------------------------------------
phi2_sB5     |
       _cons |         7.573371  11.6346     0.65   0.515    -15.23002    30.37677
------------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                    27
5 Results of Robustness Check with CPT Model
  with T&K’s Probability Weighting Function
As a robustness check, we estimated the CPT model with T&K’s probability weighting
function ( $(&) = &) /(&) + (1 − &)) )./) ) instead of the Prelec (1998) probability
weighting function. As in the baseline model, utility /(∙) is assumed to take the CRRA
                                       1 234
form (a.k.a. “power utility”), / ∙ =           .
                                       .#5


Online Appendix Figures 7.1-7.5 and Online Appendix Tables 7.1-7.4 below are
analogous to Figures 2-6 and Tables 1-4 in the main text, respectively, except that the
results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with T&K’s probability weighting
function.




                                                   28
Online Appendix Figure 5.1. Implied estimates of the parameters for the compromise
effect ci as a function of the row i in which a choice appears. This figure is analogous to
Figure 2 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT
model with T&K’s probability weighting function.




                                            29
Online Appendix Figure 5.2. Estimates of !, ! " and ! # by Pull treatment, from the
model with the compromise effect. This figure is analogous to Figure 3 in the main text,
except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with T&K’s
probability weighting function.




                                          30
Online Appendix Figure 5.3. Estimates of 6 by Pull treatment from the model with the
compromise effect, for Parts A-D together. This figure is analogous to Figure 4 in the
main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with T&K’s
probability weighting function.




                                          31
Online Appendix Figure 5.4. Estimates of !, ! " and ! # by Pull treatment, from the
model without the compromise effect. This figure is analogous to Figure 5 in the main
text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with T&K’s
probability weighting function.




                                         32
Online Appendix Figure 5.5. Estimates of 6 by Pull treatment from the model without
the compromise effect, for Parts A-D together. This figure is analogous to Figure 6 in the
main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with T&K’s
probability weighting function.




                                           33
Online Appendix Table 5.1. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Model with
the Compromise Effect

                                     Parts A-D          Part A (Gain       Part B (Loss
                                     Together           Domain Only)       Domain Only)
                   !, ! " , ! #      0.267***           0.298***           0.202***
                                     (0. 011)           (0. 014)           (0. 018)
                        6            1.292***
                                     (0.034)
                   8, 8 " , 8 #      0.645***           0.617***           0.689***
                                     (0.011)            (0.011)            (0.019)
                       9.            -0.089***          -0.102***          -0.084***
                                     (0.012)            (0.017)            (.017)
                       9:            -0.008***          -0. 003            -0.011***
                                     (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.002)
             Log-likelihood          -55,357            -24,018            -25,537
             Wald test for 9. , 9:    & < 1×10#.??        & < 1×10#@A       & < 1×10#.::
             Parameters              18                 9                  9
             Individuals             493                493                493
             Observations            30,566             13,804             13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. The Wald test is for the joint significance of 9. and 9: . This table is analogous to
Table 1 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with
T&K’s probability weighting function.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                  34
Online Appendix Table 5.2. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the
Parameterized Model with the Compromise Effect

                                           Parts A-D       Part A (Gain      Part B (Loss
                                           Together        Domain Only)      Domain Only)
                  !, ! " , ! #       !A    0.247***        0.283***          0.185***
                                           (0.018)         (0.021)           (0.025)
                                      5
                                     B.    0.003           0.004             0.006
                                           (0.009)         (0.010)           (0.014)
                                      5
                                     B:    0.027           .0196             0.018
                                           (0.024)         (0.028)           (0.034)
                       6             6A    1.24***
                                           (0.049)
                                     B.C   -0.048*
                                           (0.025)
                                     B:C   0.094
                                           (0.069)
                  8, 8 " , 8 #             0.597***        0.577***          0.630***
                                           (0.014)         (.014)            (0.021)
                      9.                   -0.088***       -0.105***         -0.078***
                                           (0.012)         (0.017)           (0.017)
                      9:                   -0.008***       -0.002            -0.012***
                                           (0.001)         (0.002)           (0.002)
             Log-likelihood                -55,203         -23,942           -25,476
             Wald test for 9. , 9:          & < 1×10#.D?    & < 1×10#@?       & < 1×10#..:
             Parameters                    50              23                23
             Individuals                   493             493               493
             Observations                  30,566          13,804            13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. The Wald test is for the joint significance of 9. and 9: . This table is analogous to
Table 2 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with
T&K’s probability weighting function.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                   35
Online Appendix Table 5.3. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Model
Without the Compromise Effect

                                    Parts A-D         Part A (Gain      Part B (Loss
                                    Together          Domain Only)      Domain Only)
                   !, ! " , ! #     0.219***          0.260***          0.144***
                                    (0.008)           (0.011)           (0.012)
                        6           1.32***
                                    (0.027)
                  8, 8 " , 8 #      0.615***          0.599***          0.631***
                                    (0.007)           (0.008)           (0.010)
            Log-likelihood          -59,862           -25,681           -28,223
            Parameters              16                7                 7
            Individuals             493               493               493
            Observations            30,566            13,804            13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. This table is analogous to Table 3 in the main text, except that the results were
obtained by estimating the CPT model with T&K’s probability weighting function.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                36
Online Appendix Table 5.4. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the
Parameterized Model Without the Compromise Effect

                                       Parts A-D        Part A (Gain   Part B (Loss
                                       Together         Domain Only)   Domain Only)
                 !, ! " , ! #     !A   0.206***         0.247***       0.137***
                                       (0.012)          (0.015)        (0.017)
                                   5
                                 B.    0.044***         0.041***       0.061***
                                       (0.006)          (0.007)        (0.009)
                                   5
                                 B:    0.009            0.010          -0.003
                                       (0.018)          (0.021)        (0.025)
                      6           6A   1.31***
                                       (0.040)
                                 B.C   -0.144***
                                       (0.021)
                                 B:C   0.080
                                       (0.057)
                 8, 8 " , 8 #          0.587***         0.571***       0.605***
                                       (0.009)          (0.010)        (0.012)
            Log-likelihood             -59,334          -25,485        -27,937
            Parameters                 48               21             21
            Individuals                493              493            493
            Observations               30,566           13,804         13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. This table is analogous to Table 4 in the main text, except that the results were
obtained by estimating the CPT model with T&K’s probability weighting function.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                   37
6 Results of Robustness Check with CPT Model
  with CARA Utility
As a robustness check, we estimated the CPT model with CARA (a.k.a. “exponential”)
                                                         +                                 −
                                                  .#F 38GE&H I                      .#F 38GE&H |I|
utility (Köbberling and Wakker 2005), / E =                      if E ≥ 0, / −E =                    if
                                                     8+
                                                      GE&H                              8−
                                                                                         GE&H

E < 0, instead of with CRRA utility. As in the baseline model, we used the Prelec (1998)
probability weighting function.

For this robustness check with CARA utility, unlike for the baseline CPT model with
CRRA utility, we did not impose the assumption that the parameters for the coefficient of
(absolute) risk aversion in the gain and in the loss domains are equal to one another (i.e.,
                             "       #
we did not assume that 8F1LM      = 8F1LM ). As Wakker (2010, section 9.6) and Köbberling
and Wakker (2005) point out, with CRRA utility, for any 6 there exists a range of E
values for which the ratio of disutility from a sure loss of E to utility from a sure gain of
   #CN3 (#1)
E, O         , is smaller than 1, which is the opposite of loss aversion. This issue does not
    N (1)
arise with CARA utility, which makes the interpretation of 6 in the CPT model with
                       "         #
CARA utility with 8F1LM     ≠ 8F1LM  less problematic. (A second issue that arises with both
CRRA and CARA utility when assuming different risk aversion parameters in the gain
and loss domains is that the ratio of disutility from a sure loss of E to utility from a sure
          #CN3 (#1)
gain of E, O        , is not uniformly equal to 6; this issue also arises with the CPT model
            N (1)
with CARA utility, thus making the estimates of 6 we report below in this section more
difficult to interpret.)

Online Appendix Figures 8.1-8.5 and Online Appendix Tables 8.1-8.4 below are
analogous to Figures 2-6 and Tables 1-4 in the main text, respectively, except that the
results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA utility.




                                             38
Online Appendix Figure 6.1. Implied estimates of the parameters for the compromise
effect ci as a function of the row i in which a choice appears. This figure is analogous to
Figure 2 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT
model with CARA utility.




                                            39
                                              "         #
Online Appendix Figure 6.2. Estimates of 8F1LM    and 8F1LM by Pull treatment, from the
model with the compromise effect. This figure is analogous to Figure 3 in the main text,
except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA utility.
We omit the estimates for Pull Treatment 1 in the bottom two panels (Part A only and
Part B only) because the MLE algorithm did not converge for these.




                                          40
Online Appendix Figure 6.3. Estimates of 6 by Pull treatment from the model with the
compromise effect, for Parts A-D together. This figure is analogous to Figure 4 in the
main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA
utility.




                                         41
                                             "         #
Online Appendix Figure 6.4. Estimates of 8F1LM    and 8F1LM by Pull treatment, from the
model without the compromise effect. This figure is analogous to Figure 5 in the main
text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA
utility.




                                          42
Online Appendix Figure 6.5. Estimates of 6 by Pull treatment from the model without
the compromise effect, for Parts A-D together. This figure is analogous to Figure 6 in the
main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA
utility.




                                           43
Online Appendix Table 6.1. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Model with
the Compromise Effect

                                     Parts A-D          Part A (Gain       Part B (Loss
                                     Together           Domain Only)       Domain Only)
                      "
                     8F1LM           0.0034***          0.0054***
                                     (0.0002)           (0.0007)
                      #
                     8F1LM           -0.0008*                              -0.0065***
                                     (0.0004)                              (0.0008)
                        6            0.992***
                                     (0.040)
                   8, 8 " , 8 #      0.638***           0.592***           0.694***
                                     (0.016)            (0.016)            (0.019)
                   Q, Q " , Q #      1.331***           1.184***           1.72***
                                     (0.027)            (0.036)            (0.074)
                       9.            -0.105***          -0.084***          -0.160***
                                     (.012)             (0.018)            (0.018)
                       9:            -0.007***          -0.006***          -0.002
                                     (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.002)
             Log-likelihood          -55,410            -24,321            -25,294
             Wald test for 9. , 9:    & < 1×10#.R.       & < 1×10#SR        & < 1×10#.:T
             Parameters              20                 10                 10
             Individuals             493                493                493
             Observations            30,566             13,804             13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. The Wald test is for the joint significance of 9. and 9: . This table is analogous to
Table 1 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with
CARA utility.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                  44
Online Appendix Table 6.2. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the
Parameterized Model with the Compromise Effect

                                           Parts A-D        Part A (Gain     Part B (Loss
                                           Together         Domain Only)     Domain Only)
                 "                "
                8F1LM            8F1LM,A   0.0034***        0.0067***
                                           (0.0004)         (0.0012)
                                   O
                                  )UIVW
                                 B.        0.0001           -0.0010
                                           (0.0002)         (0.0006)
                                   O
                                  )UIVW
                                 B:        -0.0001          -0.0014
                                           (0.0006)         (0.0014)
                 #                #
                8F1LM            8F1LM,A   -0.0003                           -0.0059***
                                           (0.0006)                          (0.0010)
                                   3
                                  )UIVW
                                 B.        0.0006**                          0.0006
                                           (0.0003)                          (0.0004)
                                   3
                                  )UIVW
                                 B:        -0.0009                           -0.0009
                                           (0.0008)                          (0.0010)
                   6               6A      0.973***
                                           (0.056)
                                   B.C     -0.015
                                           (0.027)
                                   B:C     0.037
                                           (0.081)
             8A , 8A" , 8A#                0.572***         0.533***         0.626***
                                           (0.020)          (0.021)          (0.025)
             QA , QA" , QA#                1.35***          1.150***         1.74***
                                           (0.040)          (0.057)          (0.103)
                  9.                       -0.102***        -0.094***        -0.155***
                                           (0.012)          (0.018)          (0.018)
                  9:                       -0.007***        -0.005***        -0.003
                                           (0.001)          (0.002)          (0.002)
         Log-likelihood                    -55,246          -24,234
         Wald test for 9. , 9:              & < 1×10#.?T     & < 1×10#.AR     & < 1×10#.:.
         Parameters                        56               26               26
         Individuals                       493              493              493
         Observations                      30,566           13,804           13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. The Wald test is for the joint significance of 9. and 9: . This table is analogous to
Table 2 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with
CARA utility.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                       45
Online Appendix Table 6.3. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Model
Without the Compromise Effect

                                    Parts A-D         Part A (Gain      Part B (Loss
                                    Together          Domain Only)      Domain Only)
                     "
                    8F1LM           0.0021***         0.0023***
                                    (0.0002)          (0.0003)
                     #
                    8F1LM           -0.0013***                          -0.0045***
                                    (0.0003)                            (0.0004)
                       6            1.098***
                                    (0.032)
                  8, 8 " , 8 #      0.587***          .554***           0.632***
                                    (0.010)           (0.011)           (0.012)
                  Q, Q " , Q #      1.309***          1.260***          1.503***
                                    (0.017)           (0.023)           (0.036)
            Log-likelihood          -60,099           -26,197           -27,953
            Parameters              18                8                 8
            Individuals             493               493               493
            Observations            30,566            13,804            13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. This table is analogous to Table 3 in the main text, except that the results were
obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA utility.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                 46
Online Appendix Table 6.4. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the
Parameterized Model Without the Compromise Effect

                                           Parts A-D   Part A (Gain     Part B (Loss
                                           Together    Domain Only)     Domain Only)
                    "             "
                   8F1LM         8F1LM,A   0.0023***   0.0031***
                                           (0.0003)    (0.0004)
                                   O
                                  )UIVW
                                 B.        0.0008***   0.0010***
                                           (0.0001)    (0.0003)
                                   O
                                  )UIVW
                                 B:        -0.0001     -0.0012*
                                           (0.0004)    (0.0006)
                    #             #
                   8F1LM         8F1LM,A   -0.0006*                     -0.0036***
                                           (0.0004)                     (0.0005)
                                   3
                                  )UIVW
                                 B.        0.0009***                    0.0011***
                                           (0.0002)                     (0.0002)
                                   3
                                  )UIVW
                                 B:        -0.0008*                     -0.0009
                                           (0.0005)                     (0.0006)
                      6            6A      1.115***
                                           (0.042)
                                   B.C     -0.141***
                                           (0.021)
                                   B:C     0.021
                                           (0.059)
                8A , 8A" , 8A#             0.547***    0.514***         0.590***
                                           (0.013)     (0.015)          (0.016)
                QA , QA" , QA#             1.312***    1.245***         1.49***
                                           (0.024)     (0.033)          (0.047)
            Log-likelihood                 -59,571     -26,003          -27,712
            Parameters                     54          24               24
            Individuals                    493         493              493
            Observations                   30,566      13,804           13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. This table is analogous to Table 4 in the main text, except that the results were
obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA utility.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                 47
7 Results of Robustness Check with CPT Model
  with Expo-Power Utility
As a robustness check, we estimated the CPT model with expo-power utility (Saha 1993),
                      23!G−&
        .#F 38G−& I
/ E =                          , instead of with CRRA utility. As in the baseline model, we used
              8G−&

the Prelec (1998) probability weighting function.

Online Appendix Figures 9.1-9.9 and Online Appendix Tables 9.1-9.4 below are
analogous to Figures 2-6 and Tables 1-4 in the main text, respectively, except that the
results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility.

It is difficult to interpret the effects of the Pull treatment on the parameters of expo-power
utility because both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion. To see this, note that the Arrow-
                                                   #NXX (1)1
Pratt coefficient of relative risk aversion is                 = !G−& + 8G−& 1 − !G−& E .#!G−& , which
                                                    NX (1)
depends on both !F#L and 8F#L . As a result, !F#L and 8F#L may move together across Pull
treatments in complicated ways, and there is no clear theoretical relationship
between !G−& , 8F#L and Pull treatment. For that reason, in Online Appendix Figures 9.2-
9.4 and 9.6-9.8, we report estimates of the coefficient of relative risk aversion with E =
10 , 50 , and 200 by Pull treatment (instead of estimates of !F#L and 8F#L by Pull
treatment). Also, in Online Appendix Tables 7.2 and 7.4, we only report the results of
parameterized model for Parts A-D together, since it is only meaningful to interpret the
effect of the Pull treatment on the parameter 6 (and we can only estimate 6 using data
from Parts A-D together).




                                                   48
Online Appendix Figure 7.1. Implied estimates of the parameters for the compromise
effect ci as a function of the row i in which a choice appears. This figure is analogous to
Figure 2 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT
model with expo-power utility.




                                            49
Online Appendix Figure 7.2. Estimates of the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk
aversion (with x = 10) by Pull treatment, from the model with the compromise effect.
This figure is analogous to Figure 3 in the main text, except that the results were obtained
by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility. We report the Arrow-Pratt
coefficient of relative risk aversion instead of the estimates of !F#L and 8F#L because
both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion and may move together in complicated ways
across Pull treatments.




Online Appendix Figure 7.3. Estimates of the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk
aversion (with x = 50) by Pull treatment, from the model with the compromise effect.
This figure is analogous to Figure 3 in the main text, except that the results were obtained
by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility. We report the Arrow-Pratt
coefficient of relative risk aversion instead of the estimates of !F#L and 8F#L because
both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion and may move together in complicated ways
across Pull treatments.



                                            50
Online Appendix Figure 7.4. Estimates of the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk
aversion (with x = 200) by Pull treatment, from the model with the compromise effect.
This figure is analogous to Figure 3 in the main text, except that the results were obtained
by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility. We report the Arrow-Pratt
coefficient of relative risk aversion instead of the estimates of !F#L and 8F#L because
both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion and may move together in complicated ways
across Pull treatments.




                                            51
Online Appendix Figure 7.5. Estimates of 6 by Pull treatment from the model with the
compromise effect, for Parts A-D together. This figure is analogous to Figure 4 in the
main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with CARA
utility.




                                         52
Online Appendix Figure 7.6. Estimates of the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk
aversion (with x = 10) by Pull treatment, from the model without the compromise effect.
This figure is analogous to Figure 5 in the main text, except that the results were obtained
by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility. We report the Arrow-Pratt
coefficient of relative risk aversion instead of the estimates of !F#L and 8F#L because
both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion and may move together in complicated ways
across Pull treatments.




Online Appendix Figure 7.7. Estimates of the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk
aversion (with x = 50) by Pull treatment, from the model without the compromise effect.
This figure is analogous to Figure 5 in the main text, except that the results were obtained
by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility. We report the Arrow-Pratt
coefficient of relative risk aversion instead of the estimates of !F#L and 8F#L because
both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion and may move together in complicated ways
across Pull treatments.




                                            53
Online Appendix Figure 7.8. Estimates of the Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk
aversion (with x = 200) by Pull treatment, from the model without the compromise effect.
This figure is analogous to Figure 5 in the main text, except that the results were obtained
by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility. We report the Arrow-Pratt
coefficient of relative risk aversion instead of the estimates of !F#L and 8F#L because
both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion and may move together in complicated ways
across Pull treatments.




                                            54
Online Appendix Figure 7.9. Estimates of 6 by Pull treatment from the model without
the compromise effect, for Parts A-D together. This figure is analogous to Figure 6 in the
main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with expo-
power utility.




                                           55
Online Appendix Table 7.1. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Model with
                            the Compromise Effect

                                     Parts A-D          Part A (Gain       Part B (Loss
                                     Together           Domain Only)       Domain Only)
                        "      #
                !F#L , !F#L , !F#L   0.219***           0.427***           0.677***
                                     (0.020)            (0.020)            (0.044)
                       "      #
               8F#L , 8F#L , 8F#L    0.0025**           0.0116**           -0.9687***
                                     (0.0010)           (0.0054)           (0.3114)
                        6            1.288***
                                     (0.034)
                   8, 8 " , 8 #      0.622***           0.566***           0.679***
                                     (0.015)            (0.015)            (0.018)
                   Q, Q " , Q #      1.112***           0.837***           1.67***
                                     (0.025)            (0.037)            (0.075)
                       9.            -0.091***          -0.137***          -0.136***
                                     (0.012)            (0.018)            (0.019)
                       9:            -0.008***          0.002              -0.005**
                                     (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.002)
             Log-likelihood          -55,374            -23,912            -25,264
             Wald test for 9. , 9:    & < 1×10#.?T       & < 1×10#[S        & < 1×10#.:D
             Parameters              20                 11                 11
             Individuals             493                493                493
             Observations            30,566             13,804             13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. The Wald test is for the joint significance of 9. and 9: . This table is analogous to
Table 1 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with expo-
power utility.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                  56
Online Appendix Table 7.2. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the
Parameterized Model with the Compromise Effect

                                                                Parts A-D
                                                                Together
                                        !F#L,A                  0.175***
                                                                (0.029)
                                        8F#L,A                  0.0032***
                                                                (0.0010)
                                           6              6A    1.234***
                                                                (0.049)
                                                          B.C   -0.066**
                                                                (0.026)
                                                          B:C   0.105
                                                                (0.069)
                                          8A                    0.559***
                                                                (0.019)
                                          QA                    1.168***
                                                                (0.037)
                                          9.                    -0.089***
                                                                (0.012)
                                          9:                    -0.008***
                                                                (0.001)
                                  Log-likelihood                -55,210
                                  Wald test for 9. , 9:          & < 1×10#.D@
                                  Parameters                    56
                                  Individuals                   493
                                  Observations                  30,566

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. The Wald test is for the joint significance of 9. and 9: . This table is analogous to
Table 2 in the main text, except that the results were obtained by estimating the CPT model with expo-
power utility. Both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk aversion and may move together across Pull treatments
in complicated ways, and as a result only estimates related to 6 are meaningful in the parameterized
model with expo-power utility. We thus only report the results for Parts A-D together.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                   57
Online Appendix Table 7.3. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Model
Without the Compromise Effect


                                    Parts A-D         Part A (Gain      Part B (Loss
                                    Together          Domain Only)      Domain Only)
                       "      #
               !F#L , !F#L , !F#L   0.244***          0.415***          0.331***
                                    (0.016)           (0.017)           (0.103)
                       "      #
               8F#L , 8F#L , 8F#L   -0.0046***        -0.0210***        -0.0616
                                    (0.0015)          (0.0059)          (0.0512)
                        6           1.375***
                                    (0.030)
                  8, 8 " , 8 #      0.574***          0.538***          0.637***
                                    (0.010)           (0.011)           (0.012)
                   Q, Q " , Q #     1.133***          0.992***          1.476***
                                    (0.016)           (0.022)           (0.051)
            Log-likelihood          -59,933           -25,580           -27,840
            Parameters              18                9                 9
            Individuals             493               493               493
            Observations            30,566            13,804            13,804

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. This table is analogous to Table 3 in the main text, except that the results were
obtained by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                 58
Online Appendix Table 7.4. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the
Parameterized Model Without the Compromise Effect

                                                                Parts A-D
                                                                Together
                                         !F#L,A                 0.213***
                                                                (0.033)
                                         8F#L,A                 -0.0014
                                                                (0.0032)
                                            6            6A     1.33***
                                                                (0.045)
                                                         B.C    -0.154***
                                                                (0.021)
                                                         B:C    0.112*
                                                                (0.061)
                                           8A                   0.535***
                                                                (0.012)
                                           QA                   1.149***
                                                                (0.022)
                                    Log-likelihood              -59,414
                                    Parameters                  54
                                    Individuals                 493
                                    Observations                30,566



NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. This table is analogous to Table 4 in the main text, except that the results were
obtained by estimating the CPT model with expo-power utility. Both !F#L and 8F#L capture risk
aversion and may move together across Pull treatments in complicated ways, and as a result only
estimates related to 6 are meaningful in the parameterized model with expo-power utility. We thus
only report the results for Parts A-D together.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                                  59
8 Numerical Estimates of the Parameters for the
  Compromise Effect ci as a Function of the Row
  i in Which a Choice Appears
Online Appendix Table 8.1 shows the numerical estimates of the parameters for the
compromise effect \] . These results are also shown graphically in Figure 2 of the paper.

Online Appendix Table 8.1. Estimates of the Parameters for the Compromise Effect
^_ in the Model with the Compromise Effect, as a Function of the Row i in Which a
Choice Appears




NOTE: The estimates of \] were obtained by transforming the estimates of 9. and 9: from Table 1 of
the paper, as described in the main text.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.




                                               60
9 Additional Information on the Analysis of the
  Demographic Correlates of the CPT Model and
  the Compromise Effect Parameters
As mentioned in Section 8 of the main text, we analyzed the demographic correlates of
the four key parameters of the CPT model (!, 6, 8, Q) and of the two model parameters
that capture the compromise effect (9. , 9: ). Also as mentioned in Section 8 of the main
text, in our baseline demographic specification, we estimate our CPT model with the
compromise effect using data from Parts A-D together, with these six key model
parameters specified as linear functions of a constant, age, sex, a dummy variable
indicating whether one has a college degree, SAT Math score, the log of one’s parents’
combined annual income, as well as dummy variables to control for race. In other words,
we substitute ! in the utility function in equation (1) of the main text by:
                        5            5          5                  5
           ! = !A + B`ab cdG + Bebf gGE + Bhijjbab \HkkGdG + Blmn opq_sctℎ
                  5                                  Ü
               +Bvwh. log (&c|G}tck_~}\HG) + ÄÅÇÉÑÖ áàâäã_åçã_çéèäê,
where áàâäã_åçã_çéèäê includes the dummy variables that control for race as well as
dummy variables that indicate missing observations for each variable that has missing
observations. We also substituted 6 , 8 , Q , 9. , and 9: with analogous parametrized
equations.

In addition, we estimated several specifications to verify the robustness of the results
from our baseline demographic specification. First, we estimated the baseline
demographic specification again, but using data from Part A only, and then using data
from Part B only. Second, we estimated a specification akin to the baseline demographic
specification using data from Parts A-D together, but with CARA (a.k.a. “exponential”)
utility (Köbberling and Wakker 2005) (instead of CRRA, a.k.a. “power”, utility). As in
Online Appendix Section 6, we did not impose the assumption that the parameters for the
                                                                                    "
coefficient of (absolute) risk aversion in the gain and in the loss domains (i.e., 8bfëi and
  #
8bfëi , as well as the corresponding parameterized equations) are equal to one another in
this specification with CARA utility. Lastly, we employed a two-step procedure in which
we first estimated our baseline CPT model with the compromise effect separately for
each participant, and then regressed each estimated parameter of interest on the
demographic variables (and on the variables included in áàâäã_åçã_çéèäê ). One
limitation of this two-step analysis is that, to ensure that the MLE algorithm converged
for sufficiently many participants, we had to reduce the number of parameters in the
model by assuming that íì is identical across all screens.1

We dropped from this analysis data from approximately three dozens of participants who
had not provided their age, sex, and/or their highest level of education (unless they

1
  With this assumption, the MLE algorithm still failed to converge for 40 participants; we further dropped
from the regression analysis in the second step 35 participants for whom the estimates of the parameter íì
were particularly large; this left 408 participants for the regression analysis, vs. 458 participants whose data
were used in the other demographic specifications (as discussed below).


                                                      61
indicated they were still currently studying). As in all the other analyses reported in the
paper, we also dropped from this analysis data from the 28 participants for whom the
MLE algorithm does not converge when the CPT model is estimated separately for each
participant (in the model without the compromise effect, using data from Parts A-D
together, and assuming that íì is identical across all screens). This left 458 participants
whose data were included in this analysis.

The dummy variables that control for race comprise a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if
one’s self-reported ethnicity is “Asian”, as well as another dummy variable that is equal
to 1 if one’s self-reported ethnicity is “African-American”, “Hispanic”, “Native
American”, or “Other”. Most participants for whom these dummies are both equal to 0
reported that their ethnicity is “Caucasian”, but a few of these participants did not report
their ethnicity.

The dummy variable indicating whether one has a college degree was defined based on
responses to the question “what is the highest level of education you have completed?”,
with the five possible response categories “Additional education beyond college”,
“Completed college”, “Some college”, “Completed high school or GED”, “Some high
school”. Participants who responded “Additional education beyond college” or
“Completed college” were coded as having completed college. Only participants who
were not fulltime students were asked this education question, so many observations are
missing for our college dummy variable. Instead of dropping the corresponding
participants from this analysis, we coded the college dummy as a constant (“-9”) for these
participants, and included in the parameterized equations for the parameters of interest
another dummy variable indicating whether each participant has missing data for the
college variable.

Many participants also had missing data for the SAT Math and the log parental income
variables. We similarly coded these variables as constants for these participants and
included, in the parameterized equations for the parameters of interest, dummy variables
indicating whether each participant has missing data for these variables.

Only respondents who reported being full-time students were asked their parents’
combined annual income. The log parental income variable was constructed from
responses to the question “If you are a full-time student, what is your best guess of your
parents’ combined annual income?”, with possible response categories “Under $20,000”,
“Between $20,000 and $39,999”, “Between $40,000 and $59,999”, “Between $60,000
and $79,999”, “Between $80,000 and $99,999”, and “Over $100,000”. We replaced these
responses with the midpoint of each interval (e.g., we coded parental income for
participants who responded “Between $20,000 and $39,999” as $30,000); for the
participants who responded “Under $20,000” and “Over $100,000”, we replaced these
responses with “$15,000” and “125,000”, respectively. Then, we took the logarithm of
the resulting variable.

Online Appendix Table 9.1 shows summary statistics for these variables.




                                            62
Online Appendix Table 9.1. Summary Statistics for the Demographic Covariates

                              N            Mean              SD             Min              Max
    Age                      458            27.0            10.9             18                67
    Female                   458            0.62            0.49              0                 1
    College                  190            0.65            0.48              0                 1
    SAT Math                 328            670             111             200               800
    Parental income          237           81,139          40,371          15,000           125,000
    Asian                    458            0.24            0.43              0                 1
    Other race               458            0.14            0.35              0                 1

NOTE: Additional details on the variables can be found in the text. “Other race” is a dummy variable
that is equal to 1 if one reported that one’s ethnicity is “African-American”, “Hispanic”, “Native
American”, or “Other”.


Online Appendix Table 9.2 reports the estimates of the parameters of interest in the
baseline demographic specification.

Online Appendix Table 9.2. ML Estimates of Selected Parameters in the Baseline
Demographic Specification

                         !             6               8               Q               9.                9:
  Age                  0.0008        -0.0052         0.0027         -0.0004         0.0031**           -0.0002
                      (0.0009)      (0.0039)        (0.0024)        (0.0027)        (0.0013)          (0.0002)
  Female               0.017         0.090            0.024          -0.016           0.023            -0.003
                      (0.013)       (0.058)          (0.029)         (0.031)         (0.026)           (0.003)
  College              0.000         -0.029           -0.062          0.030          -0.003            -0.003
                      (0.023)       (0.097)          (0.054)         (0.067)         (0.040)           (0.004)

  SAT Math        -0.00036***      0.00127***        0.00013         0.00014        -0.00025**        0.00003*
                    (0.00009)       (0.00029)       (0.00021)       (0.00026)        (0.00011)        (0.00002)

  log(parental         -0.002        -0.038           0.031           0.013          -0.024             0.000
  income)             (0.012)       (0.064)          (0.028)         (0.037)         (0.030)           (0.003)

  Log-                -50,659
  likelihood
  Parameters            79
  Individuals          458
  Observations        28,396

NOTE: Standard errors are clustered by participant. The log-likelihood statistic is for the model
without clustering. All estimates were obtained from one MLE. The estimates in each column indicate
the effects of selected demographic covariates on the parameter at the top of the column.
* significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level.


The estimates from the robustness specifications are available upon request. (We note
that the MLE algorithm for the robustness specification that is identical to the baseline
demographic specification but only uses data from Part A failed to converge; however,


                                                    63
after 2,000 iterations, the estimates were consistent with those from the baseline and
other robustness specifications.)

As mentioned in the main text, two results stand out across the baseline and robustness
specifications. First, higher SAT Math scores are associated with lower !—i.e., with
lower risk aversion in the gain domain and higher risk aversion (or, equivalently, lower
risk seeking) in the loss domain. Second, higher SAT Math scores are associated with
higher loss aversion (6). As discussed in the main text, the first result is consistent with
the existing literature, while the second is not. The parameter estimates in Online
Appendix Table 9.2 imply that a 100-point increase in the SAT Math score is associated
with a 0.036-unit increase in the coefficient of relative risk aversion (!), and a 0.127-unit
increase in the loss aversion parameter (6); by comparison our estimates of ! and 6 in
our baseline CPT model with the compromise effect are 0.242 and 1.311, respectively
(from Table 1 of the main text).

While SAT scores are significantly associated with 9. and marginally significantly
associated with 9: , when considering the compromise effect parameters \] (where ~
denotes the row of the alternative prospect on the screen, ~ = 1,2, … ,7), these two effects
cancel out. To see, recall that \] = π. ~ − 4 + π: (~ : − 20). It follows that
             ò\]      ô\] ôπ.       ô\] ôπ:               †2                 †°
                   =              +           = ~ − 4 Bùûü   + ~ : − 20 Bùûü     .
            òopq ôπ. ôSAT ôπ: ôSAT
                                                   ¢£            †2         †°       ¢£
Thus, in the first and last (i.e., seventh) rows, 2 = −3Bùûü         − 19Bùûü   , and ° =
                                                   ¢ùûü                              ¢ùûü
   †          †                                                                       †
3Bùûü
   2
      + 29Bùûü°
                . Across both the baseline and the robustness specifications, Bùûü
                                                                                2
                                                                                   ≈
      †°
10×Bùûü , and so the effects of SAT Math scores on 9. and 9: effectively cancel out
when considering the net effect of SAT Math scores on the compromise effect.




                                             64
10 Estimates of γ, γ+, γ-, and λ by EV Treatment
  in the Models with and Without the
  Compromise Effect




Online Appendix Figure 10.1. Estimates of γ, γ⁺, and γ⁻ by EV treatment, from the model with the
compromise effect. The negative estimates of γ⁻ for Part B reflect risk aversion in the loss domain,
unlike what CPT predicts. (γ is not estimated for Parts C and D only because these parts have few
questions.)




Online Appendix Figure 10.2. Estimates of λ by EV treatment, from the model with the compromise
effect, for Parts A-D together. (λ cannot be estimated for Part A only or Part B only because the
questions in these parts are all in the gain or loss domains, and is not estimated for Parts C and D only
because these parts have few questions.)



                                                  65
Online Appendix Figure 10.3. Estimates of γ, γ⁺, and γ⁻ by EV treatment, from the model without
the compromise effect. This figure is analogous to Online Appendix Figure 10.1, except that the
estimated model does not control for the compromise effect.




Online Appendix Figure 10.4. Estimates of λ by EV treatment, from the model without the
compromise effect, for Parts A-D together. This figure is analogous to Online Appendix Figure 10.2,
except that the estimated model does not control for the compromise effect.




                                               66
11 Stata Code to Estimate the Baseline CPT
  Model with the Compromise Effect
We include below the Stata code used to estimate the baseline CPT model (with CRRA
utility and the Prelec (1998) probability weighting function) with the compromise effect,
using the data from Parts A-D and from all treatments together. The variable names in the
code match the notation used in the main text.

Upon publication of the paper, we will post online the Stata code to estimate the other
baseline CPT specifications that use the data from Parts A-D together (including
specifications without the compromise effect, specifications that estimate the model for
each treatment separately, and specifications with parameterized models). We will also
post online the analogous specifications used for the three main sets of robustness checks
which we describe in Section 3.4 of the main text. In addition, we will post online the de-
identified choice data we collected in the experiment. (To ensure the privacy of the
participants is not compromised, we will not post the data from the brief post-experiment
questionnaire.)


Stata code:
********************************************************************************************************************
*
* This .do file estimates the parameters of the following specification:
*       - Baseline model:
*               + constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility
*               + Prelec probability weights
*       - Includes controls for the compromise effect
*       - The model is estimated using data from all Parts (Parts A, B, C, & D) together
*
********************************************************************************************************************


* Preliminaries

clear all
set more off, permanently
set memory 600m
set matsize 1000
set trace off

* INPUT FILE REQUIRED: "Controlling for the Compromise Effect -- Choice data.dta"
* The input file must be located in the following working directory
cd "/User/Directory"


cap log close
log using "1a_CRRA_allParts_CompEffect.txt", text replace

timer clear 1
timer on 1


use "Controlling for the Compromise Effect -- Choice data.dta", clear

keep if notAnOutlier == 1

* Drop the questions designed by K&T to be placebo tests for loss aversion
drop if (gamble_index == 3 | gamble_index == 1) & part == "D"


******************************************************************
* Define the program

capture program drop myLogLikFcn
program myLogLikFcn

args lnf gamma alpha beta lambda      sA1 sA2 sA3 sA4 sA5    sB1 sB2 sB3 sB4 sB5   sC1 sC2 sD   pi1 pi2

tempvar weight_Xqf_high weight_Xqf_low weight_Xqi_high weight_Xqi_low weight_XqiPlus1_high weight_XqiPlus1_low ///




                                                            67
util_Xqf_high util_Xqf_low util_Xqi_high util_Xqi_low util_XqiPlus1_high util_XqiPlus1_low ///
c_i c_iPlus1 sigma ///
U_Pqf U_Pqi U_PqiPlus1


* Prelec weighting function w(`X') = exp( -`beta' * (-ln( `X' ))^`alpha' )
foreach X in Xqf_high Xqf_low Xqi_high Xqi_low XqiPlus1_high XqiPlus1_low {
        qui generate double `weight_`X'' = exp( -`beta' * (-ln( prob_`X' ))^`alpha' ) if prob_`X' != 0
        qui replace `weight_`X'' = 0 if prob_`X' == 0
}

* Constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function u(`X') = `X'^(1-`gamma')/(1-`gamma')
foreach X in Xqf_high Xqf_low Xqi_high Xqi_low XqiPlus1_high XqiPlus1_low {
        qui generate double `util_`X'' = abs(`X')^(1-`gamma')/(1-`gamma')
}

* Compromise effect for rows i and i+1
qui generate double `c_i' = ((-4*`pi1' - 20*`pi2') + `pi1' * row_i + `pi2' * row_i^2)
qui generate double `c_iPlus1' = ((-4*`pi1' - 20*`pi2') + `pi1' * row_iPlus1 + `pi2' * row_iPlus1^2)


* Sigma parameter for each group of screens
qui generate double `sigma' = (`sA1'*qA1 + `sA2'*qA2 + `sA3'*qA3 + `sA4'*qA4 + `sA5'*qA5) if part == "A"
qui replace `sigma' = (`sB1'*qB1 + `sB2'*qB2 + `sB3'*qB3 + `sB4'*qB4 + `sB5'*qB5) if part == "B"
qui replace `sigma' = (`sC1' *qC1 + `sC2' *qC2) if part == "C"
qui replace `sigma' = (`sD' * qD ) if part == "D"


* Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT) Value of the fixed prospect U(.)
qui generate double `U_Pqf' = ( `weight_Xqf_high' * `util_Xqf_high' + (1-`weight_Xqf_high') * `util_Xqf_low' ) ///
                              if ( Xqf_low >=0 & Xqf_high >= 0 )
                qui replace `U_Pqf' = ( -`weight_Xqf_low' * `lambda' * `util_Xqf_low'      -   (1-`weight_Xqf_low') *
`lambda' * `util_Xqf_high' ) ///
                                                 if ( Xqf_low <=0 & Xqf_high <= 0 )
                qui replace `U_Pqf' = (       `weight_Xqf_high' * `util_Xqf_high' - `weight_Xqf_low' * `lambda' *
`util_Xqf_low' ) ///
                                                         if ( Xqf_high > 0 & Xqf_low < 0 )

* CPT Value of the alternative prospect U(.) for choice i
qui generate double `U_Pqi' = ( `weight_Xqi_high' * `util_Xqi_high' + (1-`weight_Xqi_high') * `util_Xqi_low' ) ///
                              if ( Xqi_low >= 0 & Xqi_high >=0 )
                qui replace `U_Pqi' = ( -`weight_Xqi_low' * `lambda' * `util_Xqi_low' - (1-`weight_Xqi_low') * `lambda'
* `util_Xqi_high' ) ///
                                                 if ( Xqi_low <=0 & Xqi_high <= 0 )
                qui replace `U_Pqi' = (       `weight_Xqi_high' * `util_Xqi_high' - `weight_Xqi_low' * `lambda' *
`util_Xqi_low' ) ///
                                                         if ( Xqi_high > 0 & Xqi_low < 0 )

* CPT Value of the alternative prospect U(.) for choice i+1
qui generate double `U_PqiPlus1' = ( `weight_XqiPlus1_high' * `util_XqiPlus1_high'      +   (1-`weight_XqiPlus1_high') *
`util_XqiPlus1_low' ) ///
                              if ( XqiPlus1_low >= 0 & XqiPlus1_high >= 0 )
                qui replace `U_PqiPlus1' = ( -`weight_XqiPlus1_low' * `lambda' * `util_XqiPlus1_low'            -    (1-
`weight_XqiPlus1_low') * `lambda' * `util_XqiPlus1_high' ) ///
                                                 if ( XqiPlus1_low <=0 & XqiPlus1_high <=0 )
                qui replace `U_PqiPlus1' = (   `weight_XqiPlus1_high' * `util_XqiPlus1_high' - `weight_XqiPlus1_low' *
`lambda' * `util_XqiPlus1_low' ) ///
                                                         if ( XqiPlus1_high > 0 & XqiPlus1_low < 0 )


* The Log Likelihood function
quietly replace `lnf' = ln( ///
                                              normal( ( `U_Pqi' - `U_Pqf' ) / `sigma' + `c_i' ) ///
                                              - normal( (`U_PqiPlus1' - `U_Pqf') / `sigma' + `c_iPlus1' ) ///
                                              )

quietly replace `lnf' = ln( ///
                                              1 - normal( (`U_PqiPlus1' - `U_Pqf') / `sigma' + `c_iPlus1' ) ///
                                              ) if Xqi_high == 99999

quietly replace `lnf' = ln( ///
                                              normal( (`U_Pqi' - `U_Pqf') / `sigma' + `c_i' ) ///
                                              ) if XqiPlus1_low == -99999

* The log likelihood function needs to be defined slightly differently when the alternative prospects are increasing
from (a) to (g).
* We subtract the compromise effect here because theoretically, c_iPlus1 > c_i when the alternative prospects are
increasing.

quietly replace `lnf' = ln( ///
                                              normal( ( `U_PqiPlus1' - `U_Pqf' ) / `sigma' - `c_iPlus1' ) ///
                                              - normal( (`U_Pqi' - `U_Pqf') / `sigma' - `c_i' ) ///
                                              ) if increasing == 1

quietly replace `lnf' = ln( ///
                                              1 - normal( (`U_Pqi' - `U_Pqf') / `sigma' - `c_i' ) ///
                                              ) if XqiPlus1_high == 99999 & increasing == 1

quietly replace `lnf' = ln( ///
                                              normal( (`U_PqiPlus1' - `U_Pqf') / `sigma' - `c_iPlus1' ) ///
                                              ) if Xqi_low == -99999 & increasing == 1



end




                                                          68
**************************************************
* Estimate the model

ml model lf myLogLikFcn /gamma /alpha /beta /lambda /sA1 /sA2 /sA3 /sA4 /sA5            /sB1 /sB2 /sB3 /sB4 /sB5   /sC1 /sC2
/sD   /pi1 /pi2, technique(nr) vce(cluster subjectNo)


* Initial values from 2a_CRRA_allParts.do
* Set the initial values for pi1 and pi2 equal to 0
* We use these initial values to ensure that the MLE algorithm converges
ml init .2032829 .5742116 1.123415 1.336532       5.708492 9.633632 10.28813 16.67078      40.8376          9.962839 14.34956
13.56126 18.37935 35.11294         6.672186 17.22844     9.602023     0 0, copy


capture noisily ml maximize, difficult showtolerance trace gradient iterate(500)
* capture noisily ml maximize, difficult showtolerance trace gradient iterate(500) coeflegend


******************************************************************
* Wald test for the joint significance of pi1, pi2
* W = Theta^' * ( R(Theta^) * Var^(Theta^) * R'(Theta^) )^-1 * Theta^
* Here, Theta = [pi1, pi2] and R(Theta) = Identity(2)

scalar FirstPiMatrixElement = 18
scalar noPiParameters = 2

mat b = e(b)
mat V = e(V)
mat Theta = b[1,FirstPiMatrixElement...]'
mat RTheta = I(noPiParameters)
mat VarTheta = V[FirstPiMatrixElement...,FirstPiMatrixElement...]
mat WaldStat = Theta' * inv( RTheta * VarTheta * RTheta' ) * Theta
scalar WaldStatScalar = WaldStat[1,1]
scalar pValue = chi2tail(noPiParameters,WaldStatScalar)


scalar list WaldStatScalar

scalar list pValue


******************************************************************
* Computing the implied estimates of the parameters for the compromise effect c_i
* as a function of the row i in which a choise appears.

cap drop _all
set obs 7

gen    row = _n
gen    rowContextEffect = .
gen    rowContextEffectSD = .
gen    rowContextEffectCIlow = .
gen    rowContextEffectCIhigh = .

forval row = 1/7 {

        * If "_b[/pi1]" and "_b[/pi2]" do not retrieve the MLE estimates, re-run ml maximize using the coeflegend option
(see line 159 above)
        * Then use the proper notation to retrieve the MLE estimates below
        nlcom (-4*_b[/pi1] - 20*_b[/pi2]) + _b[/pi1] * `row' + _b[/pi2] * `row'^2
        *****
        mat bTemp = r(b)
        mat VTemp = r(V)

          replace   row = `row' if row == `row'
          replace   rowContextEffect = bTemp[1,1] if row == `row'
          replace   rowContextEffectSD = sqrt( VTemp[1,1] ) if row == `row'
          replace   rowContextEffectCIlow = rowContextEffect - 1.96 * sqrt( VTemp[1,1] ) if row == `row'
          replace   rowContextEffectCIhigh = rowContextEffect + 1.96 * sqrt( VTemp[1,1] ) if row == `row'
}

list


******************************************************************


timer off 1
timer list 1



cap log close


* End of do file




                                                              69
12 Original Instructions of the Experiment
                                                                                                                               2016-10-19, 11:36 AM




 Informed Consent
 Please consider this information carefully before deciding whether to participate in this research.

 Purpose of the research:
 The purpose of this study is to examine individual decision-making in an experimental context.

 What you will do in this research:
 You will sit in front of a computer and be shown a series of questions regarding different monetary scenarios.
 Your task is simply to indicate which outcome you prefer. If you complete the study, you will have a chance
 to earn an additional payment (as described below under "Compensation").

 Time required:
 Participation will take approximately 30 to 45 minutes to complete.

 Risks:
 There are no anticipated risks associated with participating in this study. The effects of participating should
 be comparable to those you would experience from viewing a computer monitor for 30 to 45 minutes and
 using a mouse or keyboard.

 Benefits:
 At the end of the study, we will provide an explanation of the study and of our hypotheses. We will describe
 the potential implications of the results of the study both if our hypotheses are supported and if they are
 disconfirmed. If you wish, you can send an email message to Jonathan Beauchamp
 (jpbeauch@fas.harvard.edu) or to Brendan Price (priceb@nber.org) and we will send you a copy of any
 manuscripts based on the research (or summaries of our results).

 Compensation:
 You will receive a participation fee of $15 for completing the study. If you withdraw from the study without
 completing it, your participation fee will be decreased as follows:

         You will receive $15 if you finish all four parts (A, B, C, and D).
         You will receive only $11 if you finish only Parts A, B, and C.
         You will receive only $9 if you finish only Parts A and B.
         You will receive only $7 if you finish only Part A.

file:///Users/Jonathan/Dropbox/Framing%20and%20risk/Drafts/2016_Re…ppendix%20-%20for%20ReStud/Experiment%20Instructions/consent.html    Page 1 of 3




                                                                       70
                                                                                                                               2016-10-19, 11:36 AM



         You will receive only $5 if you finish none of the four parts of the study.

 If you finish all four parts of the study, you will also have have a chance to earn an additional amount of
 money. At the end of the study, the computer will randomly choose a number from 1 to 6. If it chooses a 6 (a
 one in six chance), one question from the first part of the study will be selected at random and you may
 receive an additional payment of no more than $400 on the basis of your answer to that question. Depending
 on your choices, you may be paid in the form of a monetary gamble giving you a chance of gaining some
 amount of money and a chance of gaining no additional money.

 Although some questions will concern possible monetary losses, you will not lose any money as a result of
 participating in this study.

 If you do not finish all four parts, you will not have an opportunity to earn an additional amount of money.

 You will be paid by check. In order to receive your payment, you must have listed your current mailing
 address on your CLER profile so we can mail you your check. Your check will be put in the mail no later than
 Friday, April 16.

 Confidentiality:
 Any information that is obtained in connection with this study and that can be identified with you will remain
 confidential. Your identity will not be stored with your data, and we will not collect your IP address. Your
 responses will be assigned a code number, and the list connecting your name with this number will be kept in
 a locked room and will be destroyed once all the data have been collected and analyzed. The data will be kept
 anonymously for future analysis.

 Participation and withdrawal:
 Your participation in this study is completely voluntary, and you may withdraw at any time by leaving the
 study website (no questions will be asked). If you choose to be in this study, you may subsequently withdraw
 from it at any time. If you withdraw during the course of the study, your participation fee will be determined
 as described above under "Compensation."

 Contact:
 If you have questions about this research, please contact Jonathan Beauchamp (jpbeauch@fas.harvard.edu) or
 Brendan Price (priceb@nber.org). You may also contact the faculty member supervising this work: David
 Laibson (dlaibson@harvard.edu).

 Whom to contact about your rights in this research, for questions,
 concerns, suggestions, or complaints that are not being addressed by
                                                                                                                                 2016-10-19, 11:36 AM
 the researcher, or research-related harm:
 Jane Calhoun, Harvard University Committee on the Use of Human Subjects in Research, 1414 Mass Ave.,
 2nd Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138. Phone: 617-495-5459. E-mail: jcalhoun@fas.harvard.edu
file:///Users/Jonathan/Dropbox/Framing%20and%20risk/Drafts/2016_Re…ppendix%20-%20for%20ReStud/Experiment%20Instructions/consent.html    Page 2 of 3



 Agreement:
 The nature and purpose of this research have been sufficiently explained and I agree to participate in this
 study. I understand that I am free to withdraw at any time without incurring any penalty.




                                                                        71
                                                                                                                                  2016-10-19, 11:37 AM




 Part A: Instructions
 In this part, you will make choices about 28 monetary scenarios. For example, a scenario might be:

 A gamble gives you a 50% chance of gaining $150 and a 50% chance of gaining $50 instead.

 After each scenario is presented, you will be asked to indicate if you would prefer to take the gamble or to
 gain a fixed amount of money for sure. For example, you might be asked:

 Would you rather...

     Take the gamble OR              Gain $80.50

 If this were an actual question, you would answer it by clicking on one of the two circles. You will be asked a
 series of such questions for each scenario. You will not be able to change your answers once you have
 submitted them.

 At the end of the experiment, the computer will randomly choose a number from 1 to 6. If it chooses 6 (a one
 in six chance), one question will be selected at random and you will be paid on the basis of your answer for
 that question. For example, if 6 were chosen and the above example question were picked, then depending on
 which circle you clicked, you would be paid either $80.50 or the result of taking the gamble. (The result of
 taking the gamble would be determined randomly by the computer in accordance with the indicated percent
 chances.) We know some of the money amounts are large; however, if a large amount is selected to be paid,
 we will pay you that amount of money.

 Because the computer might choose 6, and because each of the following decision-making questions has a
 chance of being selected, you should answer each question as though that question determined your payment.
 It also helps us in our research if you answer all the questions as truthfully as you can.

 There are no right or wrong answers here. Which choice you make is a matter of personal preference. Please
 pay careful attention to the amounts in each question and answer according to your own preferences.




file:///Users/Jonathan/Dropbox/Framing%20and%20risk/Drafts/2016_ReS…-%20for%20ReStud/Experiment%20Instructions/instructions_part_A.html     Page 1 of 1




                                                                         72
                                                                                                                                  2016-10-19, 11:37 AM




 Part B: Instructions
 In this part, you will again make choices about 28 monetary scenarios. For example, a scenario might be:

 A gamble gives you a 75% chance of losing $40 and a 25% chance of losing $20 instead.

 After each scenario is presented, you will be asked to indicate if you would prefer to take the gamble or to
 lose a fixed amount of money for sure. For example, you might be asked:

 Would you rather...

     Take the gamble OR              Lose $30.70

 If this were an actual question, you would answer it by clicking on one of the two circles. You will be asked a
 series of such questions for each scenario. You will not be able to change your answers once you have
 submitted them.

 The questions in this part are hypothetical only -- although they concern possible monetary losses, you will
 not be paid or have to pay any money to us for your answers in this part. Nonetheless, we ask you to answer
 all the questions as truthfully as you can, as if they were associated with real monetary outcomes.

 There are no right and wrong answers here. Which choice you make is a matter of personal preference. Please
 pay careful attention to the amounts in each question and answer according to your own preferences.




file:///Users/Jonathan/Dropbox/Framing%20and%20risk/Drafts/2016_ReS…-%20for%20ReStud/Experiment%20Instructions/instructions_part_B.html     Page 1 of 1




                                                                        73
                                                                                                                                  2016-10-19, 11:37 AM




 Part C: Instructions
 In this part, you will make choices about four monetary scenarios. Each scenario will describe a gamble
 giving you a 50% chance of losing some amount of money and a 50% chance of instead gaining some
 amount of money that changes from question to question. For example, a scenario might begin:

 A gamble gives you a 50% chance of losing $80 and ...

 A question might then complete the scenario with:

 ... a 50% chance of gaining $120.50 instead.

 For each question, you will be asked to indicate whether you would prefer to take the gamble or not to take
 the gamble:

 Would you rather ...

     Take the gamble OR              Not take the gamble

 If this were an actual question, you would answer it by clicking on one of the two circles. You will be asked a
 series of such questions for each scenario. You will not be able to change your answers once you have
 submitted them.

 The questions in this task are hypothetical only -- although they concern possible monetary losses, you will
 not be paid or have to pay any money to us for your answers in this part. Nonetheless, we ask you to answer
 all the questions as truthfully as you can, as if they were associated with real monetary outcomes.

 There are no right and wrong answers here. Which choice you make is a matter of personal preference. Please
 pay careful attention to the amounts in each question and answer according to your own preferences.




file:///Users/Jonathan/Dropbox/Framing%20and%20risk/Drafts/2016_ReS…-%20for%20ReStud/Experiment%20Instructions/instructions_part_C.html     Page 1 of 1




                                                                        74
                                                                                                                                  2016-10-19, 11:38 AM




 Part D: Instructions
 In this part, you will make choices about four monetary scenarios. Within each scenario, "gamble 1" will stay
 the same but "gamble 2" will change from question to question. For example, the scenario might begin:

 Gamble 1 gives you a 50% chance of losing $60 and a 50% chance of gaining $200 instead.

 A description of Gamble 2 might begin:

 Gamble 2 gives you a 50% chance of losing $100 and ...

 A question might then complete the description of Gamble 2 with:

 ... a 50% chance of gaining $300.10 instead.

 For each question, you will be asked to indicate whether you would prefer to take Gamble 1 or to take
 Gamble 2, as completed by the question:

 Would you rather ...

     Take gamble 1 OR              Take gamble 2

 If this were an actual question, you would answer it by clicking on one of the two circles. You will be asked a
 series of such questions for each scenario. You will not be able to change your answers once you have
 submitted them.

 The questions in this task are hypothetical only -- you will not be paid or have to pay any money to us for
 your answers. Nonetheless, we ask you to answer all the questions as truthfully as you can, as if they were
 associated with real monetary outcomes.

 There are no right and wrong answers here. Which choice you make is a matter of personal preference. Please
 pay careful attention to the amounts in each question and answer according to your own preferences.




file:///Users/Jonathan/Dropbox/Framing%20and%20risk/Drafts/2016_ReS…-%20for%20ReStud/Experiment%20Instructions/instructions_part_D.html     Page 1 of 1




                                                                         75
                                                                                                                                2016-10-19, 11:37 AM




 Debrief
 This experiment was conducted to explore people's attitudes towards gains and losses. Prior research suggests
 that people dislike financial risks and are more sensitive to potential losses than to potential gains. Economic
 theory provides methods of measuring risk and loss attitudes on the basis of choices about monetary gambles.
 However, decisions in laboratory experiments are often influenced by seemingly irrelevant factors. A main
 purpose of our study is to determine whether people's willingness to take monetary gambles is affected by the
 wording and ordering of the questions we ask.

 This concludes your participation in our study. Thank you for participating! We will mail your payment to the
 mailing address listed on your CLER profile. We will put your check in the mail no later than Friday, April
 16. Please contact the study administrator at laibson.study@gmail.com if you have any questions.




file:///Users/Jonathan/Dropbox/Framing%20and%20risk/Drafts/2016_Re…Appendix%20-%20for%20ReStud/Experiment%20Instructions/debrief.html     Page 1 of 1




                                                                       76
13 References
See the main text’s References section (all works cited in this Online Appendix are also
cited in the main text).




                                           77
