                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION AND PRECAUTIONARY POLICIES

                                           Joshua Aizenman

                                         Working Paper 21793
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21793


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
International Coordination and Precautionary Policies
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 21793
December 2015
JEL No. F36,F41,F42

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper highlights the rare conditions leading to international cooperation, and the reasons why
eliciting this cooperation may be beneficial in preventing adverse tail shocks from spiraling into global
depressions. In normal times, deeper macro cooperation among countries is associated with welfare
gains akin to Harberger’s second-order magnitude triangle, making the odds of cooperation low. When
bad tail events induce imminent and correlated threats of destabilizing financial markets, the perceived
losses have a first-order magnitude of terminating the total Marshalian surpluses. The apprehension
of these losses in times of peril may elicit rare and beneficial macro cooperation. We close the paper
by overviewing the obstacles preventing cooperation, and the proliferation of precautionary policies
of emerging market economies as a second-best outcome of limited cooperation.


Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu
1. Introduction

         The Global Financial Crisis (GFC) has renewed the debate on the benefits and limitations
of international coordination of macro policies. This paper takes stock of the GFC lessons
regarding the usefulness and limitations of international macro cooperation in perilous times.
The history of international cooperation during the GFC resembles a glass that is half full
according to some or mostly empty to others. Remarkably, the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank (Fed)
fostered international cooperation by an unprecedented expansion of swap lines from December
2007.1 Yet, in January 30, 2014, Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India noted




1
    “In response to mounting pressures in bank funding markets, the FOMC announced in
December 2007 that it had authorized dollar liquidity swap lines with the European Central Bank
and the Swiss National Bank to provide liquidity in U.S. dollars to overseas markets, and
subsequently authorized dollar liquidity swap lines with each of the following central banks: the
Reserve Bank of Australia, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Bank of Canada, Danmarks
Nationalbank, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of
Korea, the Banco de Mexico, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Norges Bank, the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank. Those arrangements
terminated on February 1, 2010.     In May 2010, the FOMC announced that in response to the
re-emergence of strains in short-term U.S. dollar funding markets it had authorized dollar
liquidity swap lines with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank,
the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank. In October 2013, the Federal Reserve and these
central banks announced that their existing temporary liquidity swap arrangements--including the
dollar liquidity swap lines--would be converted to standing arrangements that will remain in
place until further notice.” from The Boards of Governors Policy Overview, Dollar Liquidity
Swap Lines http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_liquidityswaps.htm (accessed
November 25, 2015)




                                                 2
that “international monetary cooperation has broken down… The U.S. should worry about the
effects of its policies on the rest of the world.”
        The complex history of limited global cooperation was evaluated by Eichengreen (2014),
who conclude that successful cooperation is most likely when it centers on technical issues,
when cooperation is institutionalized, when it is concerned with preserving an existing set of
policies and behaviors, and when it occurs in the context of broad reciprocity among nations.
Frankel (2015) provided a synopsis of the history of international economic cooperation from the
Great Depression, analyzing episodes in which countries behaved cooperatively or non-
cooperatively in international fiscal and monetary games. Frankel concluded that perceptions of
the signs of spillovers and directions of coordination vary widely and inhibit cooperation.
Furthermore, the existence of different models and domestic interest groups is as important as
the difference between cooperative and non-cooperative equilibria. Complaints about
foreigners’ actions and calls for cooperation may obscure the need to settle disagreements
domestically.

        A central policy lesson of these insightful papers is that international cooperation is rare,
and occurs mostly in exceptional circumstances. Hence, countries may invest more in
precautionary strategies and putting their house in order in anticipation of trouble. In this paper I
highlight the rare conditions leading to international cooperation, and the reasons why eliciting
such cooperation may be needed to preventing adverse tail shocks from spiraling into global
depressions. Section 3 presents an overview of the obstacles preventing cooperation, including
status quo biases and costly stakeholder wars of attrition that aim to minimize their share of
adjustment costs. Section 4 focuses on policy implications, linking the discussion to
precautionary policies of emerging markets economies (EMs) as the second-best outcome of
limited cooperation.




                                                     3
2. Circumstances leading to greater international cooperation
          The rarity of international cooperation suggest that in “normal times,” in the absence of
bad tail events, the costs of deeper international cooperation fall short of the benefits. This
concept is in line with the presumption that the gains from cooperation have the size of
Harberger’s triangle, about 0.5% - 1% GDP points.2 Such gains may not be worth the possible
income redistribution effects, which may be of even larger magnitude than efficiency gains from
cooperation.




                Figure 1: Harberger’s triangle versus total Marshalian surpluse


          In contrast, clearly adverse tail events that may induce the immanent collapse of financial
markets would bring massive losses. Collapsing financial markets may terminate the entire
Marshalian surpluses associated with normal operations, triggering global financial contagion in
domestic and global networks, and generating costs of double-digit GDP points. Thereby, in
normal times, the cooperative solution is associated with welfare gains akin to Harberger’s
second-order magnitude triangle, and as such the odds of cooperation are low. In circumstances
of bad tail events inducing imminent and correlated threats of destabilization in most countries,
the perceived losses have a first-order magnitude of terminating the total Marshalian suplus.3
This imminent threat may promote international cooperation.



2
    See Harberger (1954, 1959) for discussions on the second order costs of distortions. See
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) for a model where the benefits from monetary policy coordination
that might arise in a two-country world are small and may be swamped by the gains from
pursuing stabilization policies within the individual countries.

3
    Tobin (1977)’s view on this issue is clear:“It takes the heap of Harberger triangles to fill an
Okun Gap.”

                                                    4
       The first year of the GFC illustrates that exceptional circumstances may lead to beneficial
cooperation. The FED swap lines that were activated during the quarters leading to the GFC is a
prime example of bad tail events inducing global cooperation. The pre-crisis dynamics led to a
huge dollar-funding gap with the potential of leading to the collapse of a large share of the global
banking system and thereby wiping the surpluses associated with the liquidity and credit services
of financial intermediation. The magnitude of the dollar-funding gap in 2007 and 2008 was
unprecedented. According to BIS (2009) report,


“If we assume that these banks’ liabilities to money market funds (roughly $1 trillion, Baba et al
(2009)) are also short-term liabilities, then the estimate of their US dollar funding gap in mid-
2007 would be $2.0–2.2 trillion. Were all liabilities to non-banks treated as short-term funding,
the upper-bound estimate would be $6.5 trillion…
On 13 October 2008, the swap lines between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, the
ECB and the Swiss National Bank became unlimited to accommodate any quantity of US dollar
funding demanded. The swap lines provided these central banks with ammunition beyond their
existing foreign exchange reserves (Obstfeld et al (2009)), which in mid-2007 amounted to $294
billion for the euro area, Switzerland and the United Kingdom combined, an order of magnitude
smaller than our lower-bound estimate of the US dollar funding gap.
In providing US dollars on a global scale, the Federal Reserve effectively engaged in
international lending of last resort. The swap network can be understood as a mechanism by
which the Federal Reserve extends loans, collateralised by foreign currencies, to other central
banks, which in turn make these funds available through US dollar auctions in their respective
jurisdictions. This made US dollar liquidity accessible to commercial banks around the world,
including those that have no US subsidiaries or insufficient eligible collateral to borrow directly
from the Federal Reserve System.
The quantities of US dollars actually allotted through US dollar auctions in Europe provide an
indication of European banks’ US dollar funding shortfall at any point in time (Figure 8). Most
of the Federal Reserve’s international provision of US dollars was indeed channeled through
central banks in Europe, consistent with the finding that the funding pressures were particularly
acute among European banks. Once the swap lines became unlimited, the share provided through
the Eurosystem, the Bank of England and the Swiss National Bank combined was 81% (15
October 2008), and it has remained in the range of 50–60% since December 2008.”


McGuire and von Peter, 2009, “The US dollar shortage in global banking and the international
policy response” BIS WP 291.




                                                 5
          The benefits of swap lines may be modeled using a version of the Diamond and Digivid
(1983) paper in which the lender of last resort may prevent the first-order costs of a financial
panic on the order of magnitude of those observed during the Great Depression.4 The cost-
benefit analysis of international cooperation is illustrated in Figure 2 in which a deeper
international cooperation effort is measured to the right along the X axis and the marginal cost of
eliciting deeper cooperation is measured vertically along the solid MC curve. The marginal
benefit in the aftermath of a bad tail event is traced by the dotted MB [Financial Crisis] curve,
resulting in cooperation level CO and inducing first-order benefits traced in the large shaded
triangle below the MB [Financial Crisis] curve and above the MC line. In contrast, in normal
times, the marginal benefits associated with eliciting cooperation is traced by the broken MB [No
Crisis] curve, located below the MC curve, too small to elicit cooperation.5


               MB and MC of eliciting cooperation




                                                              MC
                                 MB [No Crisis]         MB [Financial Crisis]
                                                   CO        Cooperation level


Figure 2: Eliciting cooperation during a financial crisis, CO, leads to first-order welfare gain




4
    The Appendix of Aizenman and Pasricha (2010) outlined such a model, where in circumstances
of unanticipated deleveraging, swap-lines may prevent or mitigate costly liquidation, allowing
investment projects to reach maturity and providing positive option value to both the source and
the recipient countries.
5
    The gross benefits of cooperation in normal times are small, traced by the small triangle below
the MB [No Crisis] curve, smaller than the gross cost of eliciting the needed cooperation.


                                                  6
         This example suggests that a key benefit of ex ante international cooperation may be
reducing the probability of bad tail events, as well as the balance-sheet exposure to such events.6
This mission may be a top priority for international financial institutions (IFIs) and central banks
(CBs). The benefits of such ex-ante cooperation include setting swap lines and establishing
contingent credit lines and setting leverage rules reducing the amplitude of credit cycles.
Achieving this cooperation cannot be taken for granted—ex ante cooperation have to deal with
complex moral hazard and agency problems. Furthermore, the benefits of such cooperation are
easily overlooked as the counter-factual; that is, identifying all the tail events that were prevented
is hard to measure.


3.     Obstacles Preventing Cooperation
         The obstacles preventing cooperation may be hard to overcome. Status quo bias may
reduce macro-economic cooperation, both domestically and internationally (see Samuelson and
Zeckhauser, 1988). This is the case if policy makers and agencies take the view that If it ain’t
clearly broken from my perspective, don’t fix it. In terms of Figure 2, this would correspond to
adding a significant fixed cost to the decision to elicit cooperation. This fixed cost may reflect
the concern that changing the status quo might trigger political costs, inducing the decision
maker to delay action and thus gamble on resurrection. New policies may raise income
distribution concerns, triggering a war of attrition among key stake-holders aimed at shifting the
costs to others and delaying cooperation.7 One expects that greater income inequality and
polarization may intensify the incidence of wars of attrition that delay adjustment. This notion is
in line with Rodrik (1999), who found that countries that experienced the sharpest drops in
growth after 1975 were divided societies (as measured by indicators of inequality, ethnic
fragmentation, and the like) with weak institutions of conflict management (measured by
indicators of the quality of governmental institutions, rule of law, democratic rights, and social
safety nets).




6
    See Rajan (2005) seminal paper for concerns about the growing exposure to tail risks.
7
    See Alesina and Drazen (1991) for a model of delayed stabilization, and Padovano and Venturi
(2001) for a confirmation of this model in Italian government coalitions and fiscal performance.

                                                  7
       To illustrate, the interpretation by Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) of the gains from
competitive devaluation during the Great Depression is an example of a non-cooperative
outcome that leads over time toward an aftereffect akin to a coordinated global monetary
expansion. The delay in achieving this cooperative outcome may reflect the resistance of
domestic powerful groups (e.g., “rentiers”), engaging in a war of attrition against interest rate
cuts and monetary expansions. Similarly, it may be easier to achieve large fiscal and current
account adjustments—frequently needed to stabilize developing countries—in places with lesser
polarization. An example to this is South Korea, which improved its current account by about
13% GDP points in the two years following the East-Asian crisis. Although this adjustment was
feasible in South Korea, it was not in Euro-periphery countries in recent years nor in most
developing countries. Status quo bias may also explain CBs’ unwillingness to increase inflation-
targeting from 2% to 4% in times of global peril, as was advocated by Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia,
and Mauro 2010.
       Principle-agent, moral hazards, and political constraints matter, as they restrict the
feasibility of ex-ante cooperative arrangements, and ex-post stabilization efforts. The provision
of swap lines by the U.S. Fed during the GFC is a prime example of international cooperation
inducing first-order effects. However, the Fed only extended these swap lines to 4 EMs. The
selectivity of these swap lines reflected the imminent cost to U.S. financial institutions of
possible defaults by Mexican and Korean counterparties. Exposure of U.S. banks to EMs turned
out to be the most important selection criterion for the swap-lines provided by the Fed to the
selected four EMs (see Aizenman and Pasricha, 2010). This selectivity probably reflected the
FED’s concern that its future independence would be constrained by over-extending swap lines
to emerging markets with history of sovereign defaults. China does not face such constraints,
and is supplying swap lines to large groups of developing countries, including Argentina and
other countries with a history of defaults.




                                                  8
4. Precautionary Policies
       Developing countries and EMs are more vulnerable to adverse tail events. Limited
financial depth, inability to borrow in their own currency, less developed institutions and
possible history of defaults imply greater vulnerability. The scarcity of global cooperation at
times of peril suggests that EMs would benefit from building precautionary buffers during
tranquil times, such as international reserves (IR) and sovereign wealth funds (SWF). The
precautionary logic of hoarding international reserves can be outlined in models inspired by
Diamond and Digvid (1983) and Calvo (1998), in which international reserves may reduce the
costs associated with sudden stops and capital flight crises (see Aizenman and Lee, 2007).
However, relying mainly on international reserves may miss the benefits associated with policies
aimed at controlling a country’s balance-sheet exposures, e.g., reducing its short-term external
borrowing (Rodrik, 2006).
       The limitations of reserves in preventing a financial panic were vividly illustrated during
the GFC by South Korea. Less than a decade after the East Asian Crisis, Korea’s international
reserves/GDP in 2005 seemed to be more than adequate using conventional yardsticks – IR that
exceeded short-term debt and allowed financing several quarters of imports. Following the
sizable increase in Korea’s external debt after 2005, the sense of IR abundance in South Korea
evaporated. The Korean external short-term debt/GDP ratio increased from 7.5% in 2004 to 20%
in 2008 while the overall external debt/GDP increased during that period from 23% to 50%,
without a significant change in the IR/GDP ratio. The onset of the global liquidity crisis in 2008
and the ensuing deleveraging vividly illustrated South Korea’s fragile balance-sheet. During the
first stage of the crisis, South Korea’s reserves dropped by $60 billion in half a year, a decline of
about 25%. International reserves were key to the bailout package that the Korean government
unveiled in the second half of 2008. The center-piece of the package was a $100 billion three-
year government guarantee for Korean banks’ foreign debt. This sum was more than sufficient to
cover the banks’ foreign debt maturation by June 2009, estimated by the Korean Ministry of
Strategy and Finance to be approximately $80 billion.
       However, Park (2009) noted that despite the large hoarding of international reserves used
to finance the bailout package, market concerns were not abated: “Similar guarantees had failed
to allay fears of financial meltdown at the beginning of the Asian crisis in 1997 and they failed
again. As in 1997, the market reactions were indifferent. Only when Korea secured a swap line


                                                  9
amounting to $30 billion from the Fed on October 30 the foreign exchange market settled down
somewhat, but not very long… Only when it was made clear that the Fed would renew the swap
agreement, foreign investors’ confidence in the Korean economy improved and stability in the
foreign exchange market returned toward the end of the first quarter of 2009.”
         A possible lesson articulated by Professor Hyun-Song Shin [serving in 2009-2010 as the
chief economic advisor to President Lee Myung-bak] are policies inducing the private sector to
internalize the social costs of external hard-currency borrowing, possibly by relying on Pigovian
taxes.8 These considerations are reflected in the proliferation of Marco-prudential policies after
the GFC,9 and exemplified by the policies adopted by South Korea in 2010. Bruno and Shin
(2014) credited these policies with the decrease of the sensitivity of capital flows into South
Korea to global conditions in the period following the introduction of macro-prudential policies.
The deeper proliferation of SWFs, serving as a second line of defense by augmenting
international reserves with other foreign assets, implies that EMs may also strive towards deeper
cooperation between their CBs, SWFs and national Treasuries. The pioneering papers of
Frankel, 2011, and Frankel et al., 2013, show that this can be done, with Chile as a prime
example.
         Greater exchange rate flexibility is another margin of safety, mitigating the moral hazard
game between the private sector (ignoring exchange rate risk) and the CB (which is expected to
bail out systemic balance sheet exposure). Indeed, EMs took these lessons to heart after the
financial crises of the 1990s. These precautionary policies were tested by the GFC, with mixed
outcomes, leading Rey (2013) to doubt the usefulness of exchange rate flexibility. Specially,
Rey concluded that a potent global financial cycle exists in gross capital flows, credit creation
and asset prices, all of which have tight connections with fluctuations in uncertainty and risk
aversion. The global financial cycle is closely related to the VIX, and particularly related to the
role of monetary policy in the center country. Accordingly, this potent cycle invalidates
Mundell’s trilemma and leads to a new “irreconcilable duo” dilemma, in which independent
monetary policies are possible if and only if the capital account is managed, directly or indirectly
via macro-prudential policies.


8
    See Olivier and Korinek (2010), Aizenman (2011) and Korinek and Sandri (2014).
9
    See Borio (2003) and Blanchard, Dell'Ariccia, and Mauro (2013).

                                                 10
       Chances are, however, that claims of the Trilemma’s death and the futility of flexible
exchange rate regimes are exaggerated. An alternative take is that Mundell’s trilemma morphed
into a quadrilemma, wherein financial stability is a fourth dimension of a desirable macro
outcome. For most financial variables, the strength of the links with the center economies have
been the dominant factor over the last two decades, while the movements of the policy interest
rate have also appeared sensitive to global financial shocks around the emerging market crises of
the late 1990s and since the global financial crisis of 2008. While certain macroeconomic and
institutional variables are important, the arrangement of open macro policies such as the
exchange rate regime and financial openness are also found to have a direct influence on
sensitivity to the center economies (Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito, 2015).
       An economy that pursues greater exchange rate stability and financial openness faces a
stronger link with the center economies through policy interest rates and real effective exchange
rate (REER) movements. Exchange market pressure (EMP) in peripheral economies is sensitive
to the movements of the center economies’ REER and EMP during and after the GFC. Open
macro policy arrangements, especially exchange rate regimes, also have indirect effects on the
strength of financial linkages by interaction with other macroeconomic conditions. Thus,
trilemma policy arrangements, including exchange rate flexibility, continue to affect the
sensitivity of developing countries to policy changes and shocks in the center economies. In this
context, the quality of institutions matters; that is, countries that constrain their balance-sheet
exposure keep benefiting from exchange rate flexibility. Countries with better institutions may
use marco-prudential policies and capital controls more effectively with exchange rate flexibility
(Aizenman and Mahir, 2015).
       Similarly, Ghosh, Ostry, and Qureshi (2015) found that macroeconomic and financial
vulnerabilities are significantly greater under less flexible exchange rate regimes—including
hard pegs—as compared with floats. Although not especially susceptible to banking or currency
crises, hard pegs are significantly more prone to growth collapses, suggesting that the security of
the hard end of the prescription is largely illusory. Blanchard, Ostry, Ghosh, and Chamon (2015)
outline a mechanism in which greater against-the-wind intervention by the central bank to
prevent currency overvaluation reduces a crisis likelihood, while greater intervention to defend
an overvalued currency raises a crisis likelihood. In this context, disaggregation matters. For a
given policy interest rate, bond inflows lead to currency appreciation and are contractionary,


                                                  11
while non-bond inflows lead to an appreciation as well as a decrease in the cost of borrowing,
and thus may be expansionary. These observations led the authors to conclude that monetary
policy and foreign exchange intervention can, in principle, offset the effect of inflows on both
exchange rates and the rate of return to non-bonds without a need for capital controls. Blanchard,
Adler, and de Carvalho (2015) show empirical results that are broadly supportive of the
abovementioned interpretation. While bond inflows have a negative effect on economic activity,
non-bond inflows have a significant and positive effect. Non-bond inflows (excluding foreign
direct investment, FDI) have a strong positive effect on credit, much stronger than bond flows.
FDI inflows, while increasing output, have a negative impact on credit, perhaps because some of
the intermediation that would have taken place through banks is replaced by FDI financing.
       Latin American countries (LATAMs) may provide useful lessons. The GFC increased
LATAMs’ exposure to larger and more volatile financial flows, and to adverse shocks that
followed the GFC. Starting in 2014, these shocks include LATAMs’ collapsing terms of trade
due to the drop in commodity prices. However, most of the LATAMs have so far retained their
resilience, wherein managed exchange rate flexibility and greater coordination between domestic
institutions has helped. Chances are that the flexibility of the exchange rate of Mexico and other
LATAMs has so far prevented a balance of payment cum banking crises, akin to the one
observed during the 1990s (the 1994-5 Tequila crisis in Mexico, and the Russia and Brazilian
crises of 1998-9). Exchange rate flexibility has also contributed in increasing financial stability
in countries that have managed their balance-sheet exposure efficiently.
       Exchange rate flexibility has other side benefits such as reducing the exposure of
countries to destabilizing dynamics of the type experienced by Spain and other exposed
Eurozone countries in 2010-2012. Specifically, the fixed exchange rate associated with being a
euro member restrains Spain’s ability to quickly improve its competitiveness by means of a
nominal exchange rate adjustment, thus exposing the country to destabilizing rises in its
sovereign spreads, as was highlighted by the contrast between Spain and the U.K. analyzed by de
Grauwe and Ji, 2013. They pointed out that bond markets in a monetary union are more fragile
and susceptible to self-fulfilling liquidity crises, as countries in a monetary union like the
Eurozone are unable to rely on monetary policy to stabilize the economy, and to provide an
effective lender of last resort support for the domestic banking system.



                                                  12
            A similar illustration of the gains from exchange rate flexibility is the contrast between
Poland [flexible exchange rate country, EU member], Germany and Spain [Eurozone countries].
Chart 3 shows the remarkable resilience of Poland, managing overall a steady and positive real
GDP growth rate under flexible exchange rate during the 2000s, experiencing a much milder
exposure to the global financial crisis and the Eurozone crisis than did Germany and Spain.10 In
the same vain, LATAMs, Russia and other commodity countries buffered the adverse
commodity shocks of 2014-2015 via exchange-rate depreciations and spending some of their
international reserves. These actions facilitated an easier adjustment in countries with limited
balance-sheet exposure, but posed a challenge to countries with greater exposure.

                                Real GDP growth rate, 1998-2014
     8.00

     6.00

     4.00

     2.00

     0.00

 -2.00

 -4.00

 -6.00

                                       Germany        Poland         Spain


                               Figure 3, Real GDP growth rate, 1998-2014,
       Poland [solid curve], Germany [dashed curve], Spain [dotted curve]. Data source: FRED



10
     The GDP/Capital growth rate decline during the GFC [2006 to 2008] was about 4% in Poland,
half of the decline experienced by Germany and Spain. Remarkably, the public debt/GDP of
Poland increased mildly from 45% in 2007 to 57% in 2013, while that of Spain almost tripled
during that period, rising from 37% to 94%. The Zloty/Euro rate depreciated by 44% during the
GFC [rising from 3.21 zloty/euro in 6/30/2008 to 4.64 zloty/euro in 2/1/2009], mitigating the
recessionary impact of the crisis.

                                                     13
          However, a flexible exchange rate is not a magic remedy: among n flexible exchange rate
currencies, only n – 1 are independent at most. Size matters even under flexible exchange rate
regimes. The weakening gains from exchange rate flexibility highlighted by Rey (2013) may be
the outcome of the events leading to the GFC; in which financial instability in the U.S. was
transmitted globally due to global balance-sheet exposure, as the U.S. global share in finance
vastly exceeded its global GDP share.11 These factors, however, do not negate the usefulness of
managed exchange rate flexibility in dealing with terms of trade shocks, domestic disturbances,
and other shocks. Indeed, the lesson of the 1990s has been that emerging markets converged to
the middle ground of Mundell’s trilemma: controlled exchange rage flexibility and limited
financial integration, retaining monetary independence, as shown in Figures 4 and 5.




                 Figure 4, Emerging Markets Trilemma Configuration, 1970-201412




11
     Approximately two thirds of global corporate bonds outstanding are issued in U.S. $.
Similarly, the global share of U.S. government Bonds in international reserves has hovered
around 60% in recent decades, more than twice the global GDP share of the U.S.
12
     Figures 4 and 5 plot indexes for the trilemma policies, Monetary Independence, Exchange
Rate Stability and Financial Integration, normalize in the 0 to 1 range. Figure 5 adds a fourth
dimension, International Reserves/GDP, associated with prudential buffers. For further details,
see http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/trilemma_indexes.htm.


                                                 14
                   Figure 5: Emerging Markets changing policy configurations,
                           1970s, 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, and 2011-2014




5. Conclusion
       The scarcity of global cooperation validates the need for countries to put their house in
order. This recommendation does not negate the key importance of global cooperation in the
aftermath of bad tail events—i.e., shocks that may induce a global depression. A key role of IFIs
and CBs remains facilitating deeper ex-ante international cooperation aimed at reducing the
probability of such tail events. Time will continue to test the viability of such cooperation.
       The evolution of emerging markets in past decades may reflect the learning process
induced by the sudden stop crises that have followed their financial openings of the 1990s
(Aizenman and Pinto, 2013). Emerging market economies have moved over time from fixed
exchange rate and closed financial systems during the Bretton Woods system to controlled
exchange rage flexibility and limited financial integration, retaining monetary independence.
This configuration, properly buffered by precautionary policies (hoarding international reserves
and controlling external borrowing) may be Emerging Market Economies’ second-best response
to the limited efficacy of international coordination.




                                                 15
                                          References

Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee. (2007) "International reserves: precautionary versus
       mercantilist views, theory and evidence." Open Economies Review 18.2: 191-214.
Aizenman, Joshua and Gurnain Pasricha. (2010) "Selective swap arrangements and the global
       financial crisis: Analysis and interpretation," International Review of Economics &
       Finance, Elsevier, vol. 19(3), pages 353-365, June.
Aizenman, Joshua, Mahir Binici. (2015) “Exchange Market Pressure in OECD and Emerging
       Economies: Domestic vs. External Factors and Capital Flows in the Old and New
       Normal”, forthcoming, Journal of International Money and Finance.
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie Chinn, and Hiro Ito. (2015) " Monetary Policy Spillovers and the
       Trilemma in the New Normal: Periphery Country Sensitivity to Core Country
       Conditions,” forthcoming, Journal of International Money and Finance.
Aizenman, Joshua. (2011) "Hoarding international reserves versus a Pigovian tax-cum-subsidy
       scheme: Reflections on the deleveraging crisis of 2008–2009, and a cost benefit
       analysis." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 35.9: 1502-1513.
Alesina, Alberto, and Allan Drazen. (1991) "Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?"American
       Economic Review 81.5: 1170-1188.
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, (2010). "Rethinking
       macroeconomic policy." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42.s1: 199-215.
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, (2013). Rethinking macro policy
       II: getting granular. International Monetary Fund.
Blanchard, O., J. Ostry, A.R. Ghosh, and M. Chamon (2015), “Are Capital Inflows Expansionary
       or Contractionary? Theory, Policy Implications, and Some Evidence”, CEPR Discussion
       Paper 10909.
Blanchard, O., G. Adler, and I. de Carvalho Filho (2015), “Can Foreign Exchange Intervention
       Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from Global Capital Flow Shocks?”, NBER Working
       Paper 21427.
Borio, Claudio. (2003) "Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and
       regulation?" CESifo Economic Studies 49.2: 181-215.
Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. (2014) "Assessing Macroprudential Policies: Case of
       South Korea." The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116.1 (2014): 128-157.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1998) “"Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of
       sudden stops." Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1), 35-54.
Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza. (1996), “Mexico’s Balance-of-Payments Crisis: A
       Chronicle of a Death Foretold,” Journal of International Economics 41, pp.235-264.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Dybvig, Philip H. (1983). “Bank runs, liquidity and deposit
       insurance.” Journal of Political Economy, 91, 401−419.
De Grauwe, Paul, and Yuemei Ji. (2013) "Self-fulfilling crises in the Eurozone: An empirical
       test." Journal of International Money and Finance 34: 15-36.
Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. (1985) “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the
       1930s,” Journal of Economy History 49, pp.924-946.
Eichengreen, Barry. (2014) “International Policy Coordination: The Long View," in Robert
       Feenstra and Alan Taylor (eds.), Globalization in an Age of Crisis, University of Chicago
       Press, 2014.



                                              16
Frankel, Jeffrey. (2011) "A Solution to Fiscal Procyclicality: the Structural Budget Institutions
       Pioneered by Chile," Journal Economía Chilena (The Chilean Economy), Central Bank of
       Chile, vol. 14(2), pages 39-78, August.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Vegh, Carlos A. and Vuletin, Guillermo (2013) "On graduation from
       fiscal procyclicality," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 100(1), pages
       32-47.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. (2015) “International Coordination,”Asia Economic Policy Conference,
       Policy Challenges in a Diverging Global Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of San
       Francisco, November 19-20, 2015.
Ghosh Atish R, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi. (2015) "Exchange rate management
       and crisis susceptibility: A reassessment." IMF Economic Review (63.1), pp 238-276.
Harberger, Arnold C. (1954) "Monopoly and Resource Allocation." American Economic Review,
       44 (May): pp. 77-87.
Harberger, Arnold C. (1959) "Using the Resources at Hand More Effectively." American
       Economic Review, Vol. 49, No. 2 (May): pp. 134-146.
Jeanne Olivier and Anton Korinek. (2010). "Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian
       Taxation Approach," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol.
       100(2), pages 403-07, May.
Korinek, Anton and Damiano Sandri (2014). Capital Controls or Macroprudential
       Regulation? (No. w20805). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Obstfeld, Maury, Jay Shambaugh, and Alen Taylor. (2009) “Financial instability, reserves, and
       central bank swap lines in the panic of 2008”, American Economic Review, 99(2), pp
       480–86.
Obstfeld, Maury, and Kenneth Rogoff. (2002) “Global Implications of Self-oriented National
       Rules,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, pp. 503–35.
Padovano, Fabio, and Larissa Venturi. (2001) "Wars of attrition in Italian government coalitions
       and fiscal performance: 1948–1994." Public Choice 109.1-2: 15-54.
Park, Yung Chul. (2009) “Reform of the Global Regulatory System: Perspectives of East Asia’s
       Emerging Economies”, presented that the ABCDE World Bank conference, Seoul, June
       2009.
Rajan, Raghuram G. (2005), Has financial development made the world riskier? No. w11728.
       National Bureau of economic Research, Presented at Jackson Hole Economic Symposium
       2005, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Rey, Hélène. (2013), Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy
       independence. WP No. 21162. National Bureau of Economic Research. Presented at
       Jackson Hole Economic Symposium 2013, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Rodrik, Dani. (1999) “Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, and
       Growth Collapses,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 4 (December): 358-412.
Rodrik, Dani. (2006) "The social cost of foreign exchange reserves." International Economic
       Journal 20.3: 253-266.
Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser. (1988), "Status quo bias in decision
       making." Journal of risk and uncertainty 1.1 (1988): 7-59.
Tobin, James. (1977). "How Dead is Keynes?" Economic Inquiry, vol. 15, No. 4 (October): pp.
       459-68.




                                               17
