                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ECONOMIC LIBERALIZATION AND THE
                 EQUILIBRIUM REAL EXCHANGE RATE
                    IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES




                       Sebastian Edwards




                     Working Paper No. 2179




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1987




A previous version of this paper was presented at the Carlos Diaz
Alejandro Memorial Conference, Helsinki, August 23-25, 1986. I
have benefited from comments by Gus Ranis and Louka Katseli. This
research is partially financed by the National Science Foundation
(Grant SES 84 19932). The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2179
                                                March 1987




               Economic Liberalization and the Equilibrium Real

                    Exchange Rate in Developing Countries




                                   ABSTRACT



     This paper deals with the relation between commercial policy and "the"

equilibrium real exchange rate. The paper clarifies the meaning of real

exchange rate by comparing five different definitions that are currently

found in the literature. The analysis focuses on the effects of an economic

liberalization program that reduces import tariffs on the equilibrium real

exchange rate under a number of alternative assumptions regarding capital

mobility. From a policy perspective this is an important issue, since

countries that embark on liberalization are usually concerned with avoiding

real exchange rate misalignment and overvaluation. The effects of terms of

trade shocks on the equilibrium real exchange rate are also investigated.




                                      Sebastian Edwards
                                      Department of Economics
                                      University of California, Los Angeles
                                      405 Hilgard
                                      Los Angeles, CA 90024
                                      (213) 825-5304
                                     1




I. Introduction

     Carlos Diaz-Alejandro's interests were remarkably broad; they ranged

from the economic history of Latin America, to the functioning of interna-

tional financial markets, to the technology of cement plants) There were,

however, two interrelated topics to which Diaz Alejandro kept coming back

time after time: the role of international trade in the development

process, and the importance of exchange rate policies. He first addressed

the exchange rate problem in his 1961 MIT dissertation, later published as

Exchange Rate Devaluation in a Semi-Industrialized Country: The Experience

of Argentina. 1955-1961 (MIT Press, 1966). In this work, which has become a

classic on the subject, Diaz-Alejandro developed a number of important

insights including the by-now popular idea that under certain circumstances

devaluations can be contractionary.2 In his later work, Diaz-Alejandro came

back to the exchange rate issue with renewed interest; he was particularly

concerned with understanding the behavior of real exchange rates in the

developing countries.

     Possibly, Diaz-Alejandro's most prominent work on the role of trade

policy in the development process is contained in his monumental volume on

the economic history of Argentina. In it he forcefully argued that during

the post-World War II period Argentina had neglected the potential role of

international trade as an engine of growth. The importance of international

trade in the development process is also a dominant aspect of Diaz

Alejandro's work on the Colombian economy. Throughout his work on the

relation between trade and growth Diaz-Alejandro emphasized that maintaining

an "appropriate" exchange rate policy was essential for the success of trade

liberalization reforms aimed at moving a country towards an export-oriented

development strategy. The maintenance of the real exchange rate at its
                                     2




"appropriate" (or realistic) level should be interpreted as meaning that the

actual value of the real exchange rate should not depart significantly from

its equilibrium value. In other words, in this Diaz-Alejandro context, an

"appropriate" real exchange rate is one that does not become misaligned, and

especially overvalued (Diaz-Alejandro, 1984).

    The purpose of the present paper is to investigate the way in which the

adoption of an export oriented policy through the liberalization of the

external sector affects the equilibrium value of the real exchange rate.

Surprisingly perhaps, in spite of the increasing importance of issues

related to trade liberalization, much of the policy discussion on the

relation between commercial policies, liberalization, and real exchange rate

has been quite confusing.4 This paper seeks to clarify and integrate some

of the issues involved by formally developing two simple general equilibrium

models to investigate the relation between changes in commercial policies

and the real exchange rate.


II. The Traditional Literature

     In the economic development policy literature on tariffs,

liberalization and development strategies it has long been recognized that

there is a relation between tariffs level and the equilibrium value of the

real exchange rate. Most of this discussion, however, has been quite vague

and has been carried out in a partial equilibrium context. The vagueness in

this policy literature has stemmed in part from the confusion that for some

time now has surrounded the concept of "the" real exchange rate. In fact,

as discussed in more detail below, there are a number of competing defini-

tions for "the" real exchange rate, and many times one is not sure which

concept a particular author has in mind.
                                      3




      The traditionally accepted view among policymakers has been that a

 reduction in tariffs in a small country will always "require" a real

 (equilibrium) depreciation to maintain external balance. The argument

 usually given is based on a partial equilibrium interpretation of the

 elasticities approach to exchange rate determination, and runs along the

 following lines: a lower tariff will reduce the domestic prióe of import-

 ables, and consequently increase the demand for imports. This, in turn,

will generate an external imbalance (i.e., a trade account deficit), which

assuming that the Marshall-Lerner condition holds, will require a (real)

devaluation to restore equilibrium. This view is clearly captured by the

following quote from Balassa (1982, P. 16): "[E]liminating protective

measures would necessitate a devaluation in order to offset the resulting

deficit in the balance of payments". On the other hand, according to Harry

Johnson (1969, p. 159):

     One of the assumptions commonly made in the context of
     liberalization of trade by underdeveloped countries is that such
     liberalization would necessarily involve a balance of payments
     deficit and the consequent necessity of devaluation....

    The proposition that a reduction (or elimination) of tariffs will

necessarily result in an equilibrium real depreciation has also been made in

the shadow pricing literature. Some authOrs have proposed that the shadow

exchange rate should be computed as the equilibrium real exchange rate under

conditions of free trade (Bacha and Taylor 1971). It has then been postula-

ted that an elimination of existing trade impediments will result in a

higher equilibrium real exchange rate (i.e., in a real depreciation). For

example, for the case of a small country which faces initial trade

equilibrium, Bacha and Taylor (1971, p. 216) proposed the following

expression for the free trade real exchange rate:
                                        4



                eF e(l+t),                                                      (1)


where eF is the free trade equilibrium (real) exchange rate, e is the

existing equilibrium (real) exchange rate prior to the elimination of

tariffs, t is the level of the tariffs and -y                      for

elasticity of demand of level of demand for imports and          elasticity of

supply for exports.

    More recently using a slightly different model, Taylor (1979, p. 207)

has insisted on this point (where the same notation applies):5

     [S]uppose that a preexisting tariff is reduced or removed
                  [tjhen [the real exchange rate] e will rise... [T]he
     altogether.. .
     result can be called the free-trade exchange rate [eF'].

     [N]aturally,     e/eF' is less than 1....

    A common feature of most early models is that they ignored, among other

things, the presence of intermediate inputs. This problem was acknowledged

by Harry Johnson (1969) in an article that uses effective rates of

protection to analyze the effect of tariff changes on the equilibrium

exchange rate (see also Corden 1971, Ch. 5). Johnson pointed out that once

intermediate goods were allowed into the picture the reduction or removal of

tariffs could result either in a devaluation or in an atpreciation. In

Johnson's words (1969, p. 159): "[T]ariffs structures may bring about a

situation in which appreciation rather than depreciation would be necessary

to preserve equilibrium under liberalization. . ."   The   reason for this is

intuitively clear. With intermediate goods it is possible that some

activities will have a negative effective rate of protection; that is the

tariff structure will impose a tax on value-added in those activities.

Consequently, the removal of tariffs will reduce the magnitude of this tax

and, according to Johnson's model, will result in higher production of these

goods. The effects of eliminating the negative rates of effective
                                     5




protection could be such that a balance of payments surplus could result,

with the consequent required appreciation of the equilibrium real exchange

rate (see also Corden 1971).6

     Most traditional treatments of the relationship between commercial

policy and the real exchange rate have also tended to (implicitly or expli-

citly) ignore the presence of nontradable goods.7 However, once nontrad-

ables are allowed into the picture the effect of tariff changes on the real

exchange rate can be different from those obtained from simpler partial

equilibrium models (Edwards, 1987). In Section III and IV of this paper two

alternative models with nontradables are used to formally analyze the

relation between tariff liberalization and the equilibrium real exchange

rate. It is shown that although in principle, within the context of a

general equilibrium framework, a commodity trade liberalization can result

in either equilibrium real depreciation or appreciation, the real

depreciation case is somewhat more plausible.


III. Tariffs and the Real Exchange Rate in a Factor-Specific Model

     In this section the relation between tariff liberalization policies and

the equilibrium real exchange rate in a model with sectoral factor specific-

ity is presented. An important property of this model is that changes in

the demand for nontradables play a predominant role in determining the new

equilibrium real exchange rate. This contrasts with the more standard model

of Section IV where the behavior of the real exchange rate is independent of

the demand for nontradables. As is pointed out below the model in this

section can be interpreted as capturing the short or medium run effects of

the tariff reform.

     Since much of the confusion found in the policy literature on the
                                        6




subject stems from the existence of numerous, and often contradictory,

definitions of real exchange rate, I begin this section with a brief

discussion on what we mean by real xchange rate. In the actual formal

analysis I use alternative definitions, as a way to contribute towards the

clarification of this issue.


111.1 Real Exchange Rate: Alternative Definitions

        Currently there are at least four or five competing definitions of

"the" real exchange rate. While thi. is not per se serious, it does

generate some communication problems.8 Although most writers define "the"

real exchange rate as a relative pce, there are disagreements on which

relative price should be called "the" real exchange rate. According to an

early definition "the" real exchange rate is equal to the nominal exchange

rate (E) corrected (i.e., multiplied) by the ratio of "the" foreign price

level (P*) to "the" domestic price level (F). This definition has often

been called the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) real exchange rate           =

EP*/P.     Depending on whether P and P* are CPIs or WPIs, or GDP defla-

tors,           will be the relative price of consumption or production

baskets

        More recently, however, most authors have defined the real exchange

rate in the context of dependent economy-type models, as the relative price

of tradable to nontradable goods (see, for example, Dornbusch 1974, 1980,

Krueger 1978, 1983, Mussa 1984, Frenkel and Mussa 1984). Assuming that the

law of one price holds for tradables and that there are no taxes on trade,

the real exchange rate is defined by these authors as: e =             where
                                                              EP/PN,
    is the world price of tradables, and        is the domestic price of

nontradables.
                                         7




     It is interesting to compare the tradables-nontradables relative price

definition with the PPP definition of the real exchange rate. Assuming that

P and P* in the PPP definition are geometrically weighted averages of

tradable and nontradable prices, with weights, a, (1-a), 8 and (l-8),

it is possible to write P                and P* —   PP1.         Further assuming

that the country in question is small, that the law of one price holds for

tradable goods (i.e., T —              and that E is fixed and equal to 1,
                              PE),
it is possible to find the relation between percentage changes in the real

exchange rate (e) and in the PPP real exchange rate (where, as usual, the

"hat" operator (") represents percentage change:
                  =
                      (l/a)   + (/a)(P-P).

     It may be seen that in general changes in the two definitions of the

real exchange rate will differ (i.e.,
                                                 ,). Moreover, e and
can even move in opposite directions, depending on the behavior of foreign

relative prices

     The above discussion has ignored taxes on international trade.

However, if there are these type of taxes a decision should be made on

whether to define a real exchange rate inclusive or.exclusive of them. If

it is assumed that tradables are subject to a uniform protective tax of rate

t, an index that takes into account the effect of protection on competi-

tiveness can be defined as eT —      e(l+t).   Obviously, if the tax on tradables

does not change, eT and e will move at the same rate:            =

     In   fact, most theoretical analyses rooted in the dependent economy

model have chosen to use eT as "the" real exchange rate. However, a

limitation of this definition, is that it assumes that all tradable goods

are subject to the same tax. In a many goods economy, the different

tradable goods are subject to taxes at different rates. For example, most
                                       8




importables are subject to differentiated tariffs or import quotas, while

some exportables are many times subject to taxes. For this reason, in

applied work, it has been proposed to define sector-specific (or good-

specific) indexes of the real exchange rate corrected by the effects of

taxes (or subsidies). 11                   .
                           For example, if sector j     is   subject to a tax of t.

this index will be                                    of course, if taxes on j
                     eT EP(l+tj)/PN. Again,
and world relative prices do not change, e and eT will move at the same

rate. If, on the other hand, the tax on sector j is altered, with relative

world prices constant, changes in              and changes in e will be linked by
                                     eT
the following simple relationship: T./(l4tj)           1 + /(14t). For this

reason, and due to the difficulty in obtaining reliable time series of taxes

on trade, most empirical studies have concentrated on real exchange rate

definitions given by e or            rather than eT.

     The above discussion has clearly illustrated the semantic confusion

that surrounds the policy literature on real exchange rates. If authors are

not careful to clearly state what concept they are referring to, significant

misunderstandings can ensue. An additional difficulty arises with defining

the equilibrium real exchange rate.13

111.2 Tariff Liberalization and Equilibrium Relative Prices

     In this section I use a fairly simple general equilibrium model to

analyze how a tariff liberalization affects the equilibrium value of five

alternative definitions of the real exchange rate. It is hoped that by

looking at this set of definitions, instead of at only one of them, the

ongoing confusion in policy discussions will be (somewhat) clarified. In

particular I focus on:     (1) the PPP definition              EP*/P; (2) the
dependent economy definition of relative prices of tradables to nontrad-

ables, excluding taxes on trade, e =                 (3) the domestic relative
                                           EP/PN;
                                     9




price of tradables to nontradables e TN' (4) the domestic relative

price of importables to nontradables, eTM MN' (5) the domestic

relative price of exportables eTX

     Assume a real model of a small country which produces competitively

importables (M), exportables (X) and nontradables (N), using capital

and labor. The nominal exchange rate is fixed and imports are initially

subject to an import tariff of r. The capital account is assumed to be

closed, and there is no international borrowing (see below, however). Also,

in order to focus on the behavior of the equilibrium real exchange rate we

set all monetary considerations aside. Capital is sector-specific, whereas

labor can move freely across sectors. In this Ricardo-Viner specification

domestic factor prices are not linked to foreign factor prices and the

Stolper-Samuelson theorem does not hold. Production technology and resource

allocation can be summarized by a revenue function (R), which gives the

maximum revenue obtainable given factor supplies F and relative prices.

It is also assumed that the revenue function is twice differentiable on all

arguments.14 Consumers preferences and consumption decisions, on the other

hand, are summarized by a twice differentiable expenditure function (E),

which gives the minimum expenditure required to achieve a level of utility

W. A useful property of revenue functions is that their partial derivatives

with respect to prices yield the corresponding supply functions. In a

similar way the partial derivative of E with respect to prices yield the

Hicksian demand functions. Assuming that the nominal exchange rate is equal

to 1 and using the price of exportables as the numeraire, the model can be

written as


               R(l,pM,pN;F) +
                                r[ER]      E(l?pM,pN;W)                    (2)
                                              10



               R E                                                             (3)



               PMPM+r; px=p=l                                                  (4)


               P    aPM +          +
                                       ePx;
                                              a +   fi +   1                   (5)


                   =        +
                       6M                                                      (6)


Equation (2) is the economy's budget constraint, where (E -R )           are
                                                                M M
imports and r(E -R )            are import revenues which are assumed to be handled
                M M
back to the public in a non-distortionary fashion. Equation (3) establishes

that the nontradable market is always in equilibrium. Naturally, the comb-

ination of (2) and (3) implies that this economy is also in external

balance. Equation (4) specifies that in this economy importables are

subject to a (specific) tariff r. P in equation (5) is an index of the

general price level, whereas T in (6) is an index of the price of

tradables.

     The equilibrium real exchange rate is defined (for any of the five RER

concepts discussed above) as that value of the RER for which internal and

external equilibrium hold simultaneously, given (long term sustainable)

values of other exogenous variables such as tariffs, international terms of

trade, technology, and preferences.15 According to equations (2) and (3),

then, this economy is initially in internal and external equilibrium, and

the initial real exchange rate is at its equilibrium level. Then, in this

context, changes in the RER induced by exogenous shock should be interpreted

as a change in the equilibrium real exchange rate.16

     The modelling strategy is to first analyze how changes in the tariff

will affect the equilibrium relative price of N and then look at how the

five different definitions of equilibrium real exchange rate are affected.

Totally differentiating (2) and (3) and using (4) we find that
                                             11




             dpN    —
                    Ew
                       {r(E      -R           -
                                                   (l-rC               -E                     (7)
             dr
                              MM MM N
                                        )C
                                                            M)(RMN MN ))
where CN — E                   E W/Ew are pure income effects on demands for
                   W/Ew, CM

nontradables and tradables.            E (r(R          -E         )C -      (l-rCM)
                                                  NM NM N
(E      -R         >0   under stability (see Appendix A).
     NN NN)}
      The sign of dpN/dr in (7) is undetermined, indicating that in this

general setting a tariff reduction can result in either a reduction or

increase of the price of nontradables relative to exportables. There are

two sources for this ambiguity. There are income and substitution effects

that work in opposite directions, and there is a possibility of comple-

mentarity in consumption between nontradables and importables. That is,

E        o.17 However, at this level of aggregation it is highly unlikely to
 NM
have this type of cross effect that results in complementarity in

consumption; for this reason in what follows it is assumed that E                           > 0
                                                                                       NM
and R        < 0 so that (l-rC ) (R               -E        )   < 0.   However, even in this
       NM                             M MN MN
case the ambiguity with respect to the sign of dpN/dr remains.

      The term r(E        -R     )C    is the income effect, and is only relevant
                      MM MM N
if initially there was a large tariff in place (i.e., r                         0). The reduc-

tion in the tariff increases welfare and thus the demand for nontradables,

exercising upward pressure on their prices. Under the assumption of gross

substitutability in consumption the substitution effect works in the

opposite direction: the tariff liberalization reduces the domestic price of

importables generating an incipient excess supply of N, which requires a

reduction in its price. Jhether the income or substitution effects

dominate, will depend crucially on the values of CN and on the initial

level of the tariff. Assuming a very small initial tariff r                           0 equation
                                            12




 (7) reduces to:

                          (R    -E      )
                   dpN  MN NM
                   dr (E -R                                                 (8)
                        NN NN
In this ca.se we can say unambiguously that a tariff liberalization will

result in a reduction of the price of nontradables relative to exports. Of

course if CN       0, dpM/dr > 0     even if r > 0.

       In general, under most circumstances it can be expected that unless the

initial distortion is very high, (i.e., the initial r is very large), the

substitution effect will dominate. Consequently, although we have seen that

rigorously (dpN/dr) cannot be signed, under most plausible assumptions - -

that   is, when all goods are gross substitutes and the substitution effect

dominate - -   we have the (dpN/dr) > 0.

       Having found (dpN/dr) in (7), all we require are straightforward

arithmetic manipulations to find how the alternative definitions of

equilibrium real exchange rates react to a tariff liberalization policy.

Table 1 summarizes the results obtained in the more general case, where the

expression for (dpN/dr) is given by (7). From this table it is clear that

in general, for many of these definitions, it is not possible to know

a priori how the equilibrium real exchange rate will change following a

trade liberalization. Moreover, even under the our simplifying assumptions

of dominating substitution effect, the changes in some of the different RER

definitions result in opposite signs! For example, assuming that the

substitution effect dominates in (7), dpN/dr > 0 and (/rA) < 0 as

postulated by traditional partial eqiflibriuin policy analyses. Moreover,
                       A <> 0 and (eT/r)
even in this case A(e/r)            A  A         >   0.
                                                 <
                                             13




                                        TABLE 1

               Tariffs and "the" Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate:

                                The Special Factor Case




Real Exchange Rate
Definition



(A) e1,1,     EP*/P;                                + 1N(T"N)     (dpN/dr))


(B) e =
            EP/PN;              (r/PN)(dpN/dr)

                                             -
(C) eT                 eT/r =    (M(r/PM)         (r/PN)   (dpN/dr))

                                             -
(D) eTM =               eTM/r =    {(r/PM)        (r/PN)   (dpN/dr))


(E)   eTX               eTX/1- =




Notes: M' N and                 are positive weights.
                                            14




      The results in equation (7) of Table 1 were derived assuming that

tariffs on all importables were reduced by the same amount. In reality,

however, liberalization reforms seldom work that way. In most instances

only some tariffs are reduced. If only tariffs on a subset k of import-

ables are reduced while for the m other importables tariffs are

maintained, we have that dpN/drk =          (Ew/)   (E
                                                         kk kk0 additional
                                                                 -R       )CN -
                                                                    (l.rCM)
                                                                      >
                                                                              NR  (R

                                                                            sources
                                                                                         )


+   r(E       -R      )C ).   Of course, since E         ,
                                                             R
      kM kM N                                      kM kM <
of sign ambiguity emerge for d /drk.

111.3 Extensions

      Wage Rigidity
          The previous discussion has been carried out under the assumption of

fully flexible factor and commodity prices. This, however, may not be the

more relevant case for a number of LDCs. The analysis can be easily

expanded to the case where some factors have a fixed price. Assume, for

example, that as is the case in numerous developing countries, the wage rate

(w) is fixed at a level w RU where R is the unconstrained revenue

function, and L is the labor force. In this case, then, we have to define

a constrained revenue function (R):18

                                   = max {[qX±pqM+pqN) -                                (9)
                                      q,L
                                                                      wL}

where q1, i = X,M,N            refers to output of exportables, importables and

nontradables. Also, the nontradable market equilibrium condition is

replaced by:

                      R =E                                                             (10)
                       N N,
where R            is the partial derivative of the constrained revenue function (9)

with respect to the price of nontradables. Neary (1985) has shown that
                                              15




under fix factor prices the following relation exists between restricted and

unrestricted revenue functions:

                     R R[pM,pN,L(,pM,pN,K)] -                                                   (11)
                                                         wL(w,pM,pN,K)

where L is the amount of labor employed in the constrained case.

        It is easy to find how the relative price of nontradables reacts to a

tariff reduction in an economy with factor spe'cificity and fix real wages)9

In order to facilitate the comparison with the case of flexible factor

prices dpN/dr is expressed in terms of the derivatives of the

unconstrained revenue function:


                              E                                        (
                           = — 4ITC ft       -R      I   - (1-rC   )   IR       -E
                     dr         IL NI   MM                     M MN MN
                          +                                                                      (12)
                                                           [RL /RLL) ]      }
where

                          i
                              -{r[i   /RLLJCN +    (lrCM)    IPNLJ}
                                                                                                (13)



Since    it.

        LPM
               ,


               LPN
                   it.    > 0 and it < 0 it follows that , >
                              LL                                                .    Also the
inspection of (12), (13) and (7) reveals that,


                    dN dpN
                                                                                                (14)


     That is, under wage rigidity the equilibrium relative price of

nontradables will be less responsive to changes in tariffs. This means that

under these circumstances it is not sufficient that the substitution effect

dominates in order for a tariff liberalization to result in a decline of the

relative price of nontradables. Moreover, it is now possible to have a
                                    16



number of pseudo-paradoxes where changes in tariff levels can result in a

real depreciation with wage flexibility, but in a real appreciation under

wage rigidity.

     Import Quotas

     The case import quotas can be analyzed in a quite straightforward

fashion by defining "virtual prices" as in Neary and Roberts (1980). The

use of virtual prices, of course, assumes that the quota is allocated

competitively via an auction mechanism. In this case the relaxation of a

binding import quota will result in a lower virtual price for importables,

which can be analyzed in a way perfectly analogous to our previous

discussion. Obviously, the reason why our tariff discussion can be directly

applied to the case of quotas is that under the assumptions made here there

is an equivalence between tariffs and quotas.

     Intermediate Goods

     Intermediate goods can also be incorporated quite easily through the

definition of net-outputs (Dixit and Norman 1980, p. 160). In this case an

additional source of ambiguity with respect to the sign of dpN/dr emerges.

The reason, of course, is related to Johnson's (1969) effective protection

case discussed above. The tariff liberalization, by reducing the tax on the

importation on inputs, not only eliminates negative effective protection in

some importable sectors, but also reduces costs of nontradables generating

forces towards a downward shift in the supply of nontradables.

     Changes in International Terms of Trade

     This model can be directly used to analyze how exogenous changes in the

international terms of trade will affect the equilibrium real exchange rate.

This was another topic of great interest to Carlos Diaz-Alejandro. For

example, in 1982 he published an empirical study on the relation between
                                               17




exchange rates and the Argentinia.n real exchange rate between 1913 and 1976,

where he found strong evidence that in that country improvements in the

international terms of trade had led to real exchange rate appreciation (see

Diaz Alejandro 1982). The empirical relation between the international

terms of trade and the real exchange rate was again picked up in his "In

Toto I don't think we are in Kansas any more".

        In terms of the model presented above the main difference between an

exogenous change in the international price of importables and a policy

induced change in the import tariff of the same magnitude resides on the

different magnitudes of the income effects. In particular dW/dp = dW/dr +

(E                                                                   is
    NN NN (EM M
         -R    )         -R )/L, where the second term on the R}IS        negative.

The effect of a reduction of the international price of M on                  is given

by:

                   dpN dpN EW(
                   —=—-—-IE               -R     Ic
                                                      N                           (15)
                   dn' dr           '   'M   r
where the second term on the RHS        is   positive. It is interesting to compare

the effects on            of changes in r and in p. For example, a number of

authors, including Carlos Diaz Alejandro (1982, pp. 32-33) have argued that

whereas a tariff reduction will lead to a real depreciation (i.e., dpN/dr >

O for the e definition of RER), an improvement in the terms of trade will

result in a real appreciation (i.e., dpN/dp <0). It is clear from

equation (15) that for these results to hold simultaneously, Ew(E             -




R     )CN/L has to be "sufficiently large"; that is the income effect

associated with the terms of trade deterioration has to be sufficiently

large. (For a detailed discussion on this subject see Edwards and van

Wijnbergern l986b).
                                           18




     Trans fers

     This model can also be used to analyze the effects of international

transfers. Denoting the transfer as H it follows that:2°


                  dpN     Ew
                                                                               (16)

     It is interesting to interpret a transfer from abroad as capital

inflows resulting from a relaxation of capital controls in a small country.

This means that if, as was the case in the recent Southern Cone liberaliza-

tions, following the opening of the capital account foreign funds flow into

the country (dH >       0),    the relative price of nontradables will increase,

generating a real appreciation for every definition of the RER used here.

In fact Diaz Alejandro (1981) was one of the first observers who

perceptively noticed the importance of this real appreciation in the

frustrating Southern Cone experiments.

     The (highly likely) possibility of dpN/dH and dpN/dr have the same

sign is at the core of recent policy discussions on the appropriate order of

economic liberalization in the developing countries (Edwards 1984). Equa-

tion (16) also highlights the fact that once capital inflows are reduced

will have to decline. If, however, due to wage rate rigidities this is not

possible, unemployment will result as was the case in Chile (see Edwards and

Cox Edwards l986).21

     International Borrowing and Lending

    Although the transfer problem framework provides a useful benchmark for

analyzing the effects of opening the capital account, the results obtained

may be somewhat misleading. Alterna:ively the model of Section 111.2 can be

transformed into a two period model with endogenous investment and

restricted foreign borrowing as in Edwards and van Wijnbergen (l986a), and
                                     19




Edwards (1986c). The results, in terms of the reaction of   N' will under
most circumstances be the same as those discussed here.22 An interesting

application of the two period model is to investigate how expected changes

in the tariff in the future will affect the path of       Since in that

setting, foreign borrowing is possible, consumers will try to smooth

consumption and will increase their demand for nontradables both in periods

1 and 2. As a result in the first period there will be positive pressure on

     even though the tariff in that period will still be on. On the other

hand, the expected reduction of r will affect the consumption rate of

interest, and present consumption on all goods will tend to be reduced. The

final outcome can be either a higher or lower      in period 1. In Edwards

(1986c), the case with foreign borrowing is analyzed in great detail,

emphasizing the distinction between permanent and temporary changes in

tariffs. However, in order to provide some idea on how this case with

foreign borrowing works, in Appendix B the general model is presented.


IV. Trade Reform and the Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate in the Mobile
     Factor Case

     The discussion of the preceding section assumed that capital was fixed

and that it could not move across sectors folowing a commodity relative

price shock. The importance of that assumption lays on the fact that factor

prices become independent of world commodity prices. As a result demand

conditions for nontradables play a crucial role in determining the real

exchange reaction to changes in r or p. In the present section the more

traditional case with full intersectoral factor mobility is analyzed. To

the extent that the fixed factors Ricardo-Viner model of Section III is

considered a short-run model, the one in the present section can be viewed

as a medium or intermediate run model.23 The comparison of both cases will
                                     20




give us some (rough) idea on the dynamics of the real exchange rate

following a trade liberalization reform.

     Consider the case of a small economy that, as before, produces

exportables (X), importables (M) and nontradables (N), using two

intersector mobile factors of production, capital (K) and labor (L). As

before, it is assumed also that the worldwide common technology is charac-

terized by constant returns to scale, that there is perfect competition,

that there is a fixed unitary nominal exchange rate and that there is an

initial tariff on the importation of M. Under these circumstances, and

ruling out specialization, the world prices of exportables (p*) and

importables (j) plus the tariff (r) determine uniequivocally the

rewards of both factors (w and r).24 These factors rewards, and under

the assumption of competition, determine the nominal price of nontradables

       Demand conditions for nontradables, in turn, determine total produc-

tion of nontradables and total factors used in their production. This

leaves a certain amount of factors (K and L) that are used in the

production of exportables and iniportables in a traditional Heckscher-Ohlin

fashion. For a discussion of the effects of changes in tradable goods

prices on production in the context of similar models see Corden and Neary

(1982), Edwards (l986a), and Edwards and van Wijnbergen (1987).

     The model can be presented in traditional Jones (1965) notation by

equations (17) and (18), where once again the price of X is taken as the

numeraire. Note that, as long as there is no specialization there is no

need to specify the demand side to find the effects of tariff changes on

prices, factor rewards and the real exchange rate. However, to find its

effect on output demand considerations are required.


         aLWW +   ar   M' aw +     ar = 1;    aW +     ar   =             (17)
         F1ure       :L-




                     A
"0
     -ç"
     I
          \I
                 I
                 I



     a
     a
     I
                                      21




                                                                         (18)
               pMpM+T;
where the a..'s are input-output coefficients. As in Section III I will

analyze how changes in r will affect the five different definitions of

real exchange rate                     and eT
                          e, eT, eT
                                   M         M
     Consider first the more plausible case for LDCs where exports are the

most labor intensive commodity, with imports being the more capital

intensive. The capital labor ratio for nontradables lays in between (K/L)M

and (K/L).25 As before the strategy is to first find how          reacts to

changes in r. From (18) it is clear that this requires knowledge of how

wages and the rate of return will change.

     The effect of a reduction of price of M on factor rewards and the

relative price of nontradables        can be analyzed using Figure 1, which is

the dual to the well-known Lerner-Pearce diagram. The initial equilibrium

is given by the intersection of the three isocosts MM, XX, and NN. These

curves present the combinations of wages and rental rates of capital that

result in a constant cost of producing these goods at the existing technol-

ogy. The slopes of these curves are equal to the capital labor ratio. The

reduction of the price of M will result in a leftward shift of the MM

curve towards M'M'. This is because now., in order to maintain equilibrium

between domestic costs and the world price of importables, plus the tariff,

lower combinations of wages and rental rates will be required. New long-run

equilibrium will be obtained at B where the new M'M' curve intersects

the XX curve. As the Stolper-Samuelson theorem indicates, the reduction

of the price of M in an economy where exportables are labor intensive,

will result in higher wages and lower rental rates (i.e., W1 > W0, and

< r0). The new equilibrium point B is below the NN isocost, indicating

that as a consequence of the tariff reduction, the price of nontradables in
                                          23




terms of exportables has to decline. As a result the isocost for N will

move down until it intersects the other two curves at B.

        Straightforward manipulation of (17) and (18) gives us the formal

expression for the change in N following a change in r:



                 —     i
                 N I9KX0KN1
                     L( J   e    (r/pM)                                         (19)



where
          9 ar/p; O 1 -             9;         9 ar/pM; and             1 -
                                                                              O.
Since our capital intensity assumptions mean             <      < O, equation
(19) implies that PN/T > 0.

        It is interesting to notice that in the present case of full factor

mobility the degree of ambiguity regarding               is much reduced in

relation to the model in Section III. For example, if the relative capital

intensities are reversed to         >          > 9, we still get that         > 0.

Only if it is assumed that nontradables are at an extreme of the capital

intensity ranking (i.e.,        <         <       or      <     <       we can get

PN/r < 0.     This, however is a rather implausible case for a developing

country. Moreover, when nontradables are at one of the extremes of the

relative capital labor ranking, it is more likely that we will have

specialization in production; in that case of course the present framework

has to be modified by explicitly bringing in the demand for nontradables.

     Table 2 contains a summary of the reaction of the different definitions

of e to changes in r. Ruling out the case where nontradables are at an

extreme of the capital intensities ranking, we get unambiguous signs for a

number of definitions of e:

                           < 0; (/) < 0;         (CTX/r) < 0.


This, of course is the traditional result which indicates that a tariff
                                                  24




                                               TABLE 2

                             Tariffs and Real Exchange Rates:

                                      The Mobile Factor Case




Real Exchange
Rate Definition



                                                              (0
(A)          = EP*/P;                    -                         i<x 9KN
                                             (T/PM) {M + 7N


(B)   e =                     =
            eP/PN;

(C)   eT =                                        -
                        eT/r         (r/PM)

(D)         =                                     -
      eTM               eTM/r         (r/PM)
                         A      A      AA
(E)                                    e/T
      eTX                eTX/T



Notes: N' 7M and                    are positive weights.
                                          25




liberalization will result in an equilibrium real depreciation. Also,

notice that since under              <
                                          8,                     < 1,

(eTM/r) <   0.
    By assuming nonspecialization, in the above discussion it has been

possible to ignore the role of the demand for nontradables. However, it is

possible that as a result of the relative price shock this country will

specialize in the production of X and N, while consuming M, X and N.

Using the notation from Section III in this case we have:


                                    (rE                                   (20)
                                      MMCN +    (lrCM)EMN )/LY
where as before L' > 0.

        As in Section III the analysis presented here can be easily extended in

several directions. With full intersectoral factor mobility, the existence

of factor price rigidities is likely to lead to specialization in the

nontradable and one of the tradables, as Brecher (1974) has shown.26 The

case of quotas can also be analyzed using the "virtual prices" trick. The

consequences of opening the capital account will, to a large extent, depend

on whether as a consequence specialization in N and X will result. It

is interesting to note that in this case if, as it is the most plausible

case,            > 0,   then          can never be positive.


V. Concluding Remarks

        In this paper the effects of tariff changes on the eiuilibrium real

exchange rate have been analyzed in some detail. It was indicated that

according to the traditional policy literature in small countries a tariff

reduction will necessarily lead to an equilibrium real depreciation, and

that a terms of trade improvement will provoke an equilibrium real

appreciation. It was then shown that these propositions are theoretically
                                        26



not strictly correct. More specifically, it was shown that within the

context of two simple general equilibrium models of a small open economy

with no capital movements the effects of terms of trade and tariff changes

on "the" equilibrium real exchange rate are ambiguous, and will depend on

factors such as relative capital intensities among importables, exportables

and nontradables; sign and magnitudes of cross-elasticities of demand and

supply and relative importance of income effects. (This was the case for

all 5 definitions of RER considered.)

     The discussion presented above has ignored the welfare effects of trade

liberalization and has taken for granted that it is desirable for the LDCs

to actually open their economies to the rest of the world. Although a

complete analysis of this issue is well beyond the scope of this paper, it

is important to briefly discuss a few issues. First, in all but one of the

models presented here (the factor specific model with wage rigidities), it

is desirable to fully liberalize the economy, opening up to commodities

trade. Moreover, if the country in question is small, under these models

the first best is to reduce tariffs to zero instantaneously. Of course,

from an actual policy perspective this sounds both inapplicable and

incorrect. The reason, of course, is that in most of the models discussed

above there are no distortions or rigidities besides the initial tariffs.

The exception is the factor specific model with real wage rigidity in

Section 111.2. In that case the reduction of an import tariff will lead to

unemployment, and may   result   in a welfare reduction of the complete

operation. However, in order to add additional real world features, more

general intertemporal models, with different types of rigidities should be

built (Edwards and van Wijnbergen l987a).
                                        27




     This paper has shown that the analytics of the relation between

commercial policies and the equilibrium real exchange rate are fairly

simple. At the empirical level, however, we still don't know too much about

the magnitudes of the coefficients involved. The lack of completely

adequate data should by no means detract analysts from seriously attempting

to understand the reaction of the RER to exogenous shocks. As Carlos Diaz

Alejandro (1986, p. 418) argued:   ".   . .policy   makers groping for a real

effective exchange rate compatible with a more open and stable economy would

gain much from knowing how that variable relates at least to the expected

terms of trade and to "normal" capital movement".
                                                   28




                                             APPENDIX A

               Stability Condition in the Nontradable Market



     Dynamic adjustment in the nontradable market is given by:


                      a(E       -   R    )   for    a > 0                            (A.l)
                            N 1N
Stability reauires that


               dp
                     < 0.
               dpN

Totally differentiating (A.l) we obtain:



               —=(E -R )+C NEW                              dW
                                                                                     (A.2)
               dpN          NN NN                           dpN


Using equation (3) in the text to eliminate dW we obtain:

                                E                                  R          > 0.
                                                                 NN 00
               EW(R
                  IDD
                            -
                                        )C'C-
                                          N   (1-rC M) (EDD       -
                                                                         )}
                      NM            NM                              NN
This means that the determinant                 in equation (7) is positive.
                                                         29




                                                     APPENDIX B

                                          The Intertemporal Case



       In this Appendix a two-period version of the model developed in the

paper is presented. As before, superscripts refer to periods (i.e.,                              R2 is

the revenue function in period 2); subscripts refer to partial derivatives

with respect to that variable (i.e., R11 is the partial derivative of

period l's revenue function relative to q                         (the price of nontradables in

period 1); R22 2 is the second derivative of                               with respect to q2 and
 2                 qp
p ):


           R1(1,p1,q1;V) + S*R2(1,p2,q2,V)                +
                                                              r1(E1-   R11) +   6*r2 (E 2- R2)


                            E[(l,p1,q1),*2(l,p2,q2),W]                                            (B.l)


                            =                                                                     (B.2)
                                Eq2


                                                                                                  (B.3)
                    R22 =       E2,

                        1       1*
                    p       p         +   r1   ,                                                  (B.4)

                    p
                        2
                            p2* + r 2          .                                                  (B.5)

where the following notation is used:

       i     1,2        Specific tariffs in period i.

5*                      World discount factor, equal to (l+r*), where r* is

                        world real interest rates (in terms of tradables).

E( )                    Intertemporal              expenditure function.

ir'(l,p1,q1)            Exact price indexes, which under assumptions of homothecity

                        and separability, corresponds to unit expenditure functions.
                                                         30



                      (See Edwards and van Wijnbergen, 1986.)

W                     Total aggregate welfare.

        Equation (B.l) is the interteniporal budget constraint, and states that

present value of income - -                 generateti   through revenues from production       +

5*R2,    plus tariffs collection -- had to equal present value of expenditure.

Given the assumption of perfect access to the world capital market, the dis-

count factor used in (B.1) is the world discount factor 6*. Equations

(B.2) and (B.3) are the equilibrium conditions for the nontradables market

in periods 1 and 2; in each of these periods the quantity supplied of N

(R'1 and R22) has to equal the quantity demanded. Given the assumptions

about preferences (separability and homothecity) the demand for N in

period i can be written as:

                                        1
                 E .      =E    .                                                           (B.6)
                      1         1           1
                  q        ir           q

Equations (B.4) and (B.5) specify the relation between domestic prices of

imports, world prices of imports and tariffs.

        The current account in period 1 is equal to the difference between

income and total expenditure in that period:


                 CA1 = R1(                  + r1(R1-          -
                                    )
                                                                  E1                        (B.7)
                                                       Eql)

        From the inspection of equations (B.1)-(B.5) it is apparent that

exogenous shocks in, say, the international terms of trade, will affect the

vector of equilibrium RERs through two interrelated channels. The first one,

which has been subject to some discussion in the literature, is related to

intratemporal effects of terms of trade shocks on resource allocation and

consumption decisions. For example, as a result of a temporary worsening of

the terms of trade, there will be a tendency to produce more and consume less
                                    31




of M in that period. This, plus the income effect resulting from the

worsening of the terms of trade will generate an incipient disequilibrium in

the nontradables market which will have to be resolved by a change in the

equilibrium q. In fact, if we assume that there is an absence of foreign

borrowing these intratemporal effects will be the only relevant ones.

However, with capital mobility, as in the current model, there is a second

intertemporal channel through which changes in exogenous variables will

affect the vector of equilibrium RERs. For example, in the case of a tempo-

rary worsening of the terms of trade, the consumption discount factor

         will be affected, altering the intertemporal allocation of consump-

tion. In the rest of the paper we will emphasize the   role   of this

intertemporal effect.
                                       32




                                     Footnotes




     1See for example Diaz-Alejandro (1970, 1972).


     20n contractionary devaluations see, for example, Katseli (1983), van

Wijnbergen (1986) and Edwards (1986).


     3See, for example, Diaz-Alejandro (1984, 1986).


     40f course, there have been some exceptions. See for example, Krueger

(1978) and Harberger (1986).


     5it should be noted that Bacha and Taylor (1971) and Taylor (1979) are

using slightly different models. See the original references for details.


     60n modern criticisms of the concept of effective rate protection see,

for example, Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1983), Jones and Neary (1984), and

Corden (1984).


     7A notable exception is Corden (1971, Ch. 5). See also Dornbusch

(1974).


     8See Edwards (1988) for a discussion on real exchange rate measurement

problems.


     9For simplicity we are ignoring issues related to multilateral exchange

rates. See, however, Edwards (1988).


            common confusion that sometimes appears in the literature is to use

the concepts of the real exchange rate and the terms of trade interchange-

ably. Of course, since the terms of trade are defined as the relative price
                                        33




of exportables to importables, and the real exchange rate is usually defined

as the relative price of tradables to nontradables, there is no reason for

them to be equivalent. In fact, there are circumstances where these two

variables will tend to move in the opposite direction. Williamson (1983)

has recently stressed the importance of distinguishing between the terms of

trade arid the real exchange rate. Also Katseli (1984) has recently shown,

using a cross-country data set, that these two variables have tended to

behave quite differently in recent years.

     11
          See, for example Krueger (1978).


     12Recently, Harberger (1986) has proposed yet another definition for

the real exchange rate: eH =            where as before E is the nominal
                                 E/P,
exchhange rate, and         is a "general" domestic price level. In this case

eH is the relative price of the domestic basket in terms of a unit of

foreign currency. In terms of the discussion in this paper e is

equivalent to e. For this reason we will not deal specifically with eH.


     13For the purpose of the present paper a general definition that can be

applied to any of the competing concepts of real exchange rate is provided.

The equilibrium real exchange rate is defined as that relative price which

simultaneously equilibrates the external and internal sectors, for given

long term equilibrium values of other key variables such as international

terms of trade, capital inflows and commercial policies. These other

variables are usually called the "fundamental" determinants of the equilib-

rium real exchange rate. "Internal equilibrium" implies that there is full

employment. For discussions see, for example, Williamson (1983), Katseli

(1984) and Edwards (1988).
                                      34



     14The existence of more factors than goods assures that R is twice

differentiable.


     15Since in this model there is no foreign borrowing the equilibrium RER

is defined in temporal terms. In models with foreign borrowing and lending

the equilibrium RER is defined in intertemporal terms. For this type of

intertemporal model see, for example, Edwards (l987b) and the section on

extensions below.


     161n this model it is assumed that the actual RER is always at its

equilibrium level. In that sense, there is no RER misalignment. On

equilibrium and disequilibrium RERs see, however, Edwards (l987a).


     '7Of course the possibility of complementarity between any two goods

arises because we have a three goods model.


     18See Neary (1985). See also Chapter 8 of Dixit and Norman (1980).

Notice that in the analysis that follows it is assumed that throughout all

three goods are produced. This is possible thanks to the assumption that

the Stolper-Samuelson theorem does not hold. See Section IV below for

further discussions on the subject.

     19  .
      An important   .   .
                   point is whether real wages are actually fix, or if they

are only inflexible downward.


    20Edwards (1984) used transfers to analyze the behavior of the real

exchange rate following a liberalization of the capital account.


          the Southern Cone also see Diaz Alejandro (1981), Edwards (1985),

Corbo (1985), Hanson and de Melo (1985), and Calvo (1986).
                                    35




     22The main difference will be that under that framework the funds

obtained from abroad will also be used to increase the capital stock.


     23The long run will be given by the case with capital accumulation and

population growth.


     24An important question that crucially impinges on the nature of the

results that follow is whether it is reasonable to assume nonspecialization.

Jones (1974) discusses the case of many commodity (one of them nontradable)

and two factors and shows that the production possibilities frontier will be

flat. Changes in world price of importables and exportables or in tariffs,

however, will shift the position of the production possibilities frontier.

The case I focus on here corresponds to that depicted in Fig. 9 of Jones

(1974) paper, where over a reasonable range the two tradables and the

nontradable are produced. This, of course, requires thatthe aggregate

capital-labor ratio net of capital and labor employed in the NT sector,

falls between the capital-labor ratios in each traded sector that guarantee

zero profits at positive activity levels for given world traded goods

prices. Since these latter two ratios will in general be different, the set

of equilibria characterized by incomplete specialization has positive

measure. In Section IV.2 I discuss the case of specialization in

nontradables and one of the tradables.


          is assumed that there are no capital intensity reversals and that

the capital intensities in value terms correspond to those in physical

terms.
                                    36




     26Notice, however, that starting from nonspecialization rigid real

wages will generate not additional problems. The reason of course is that

under our assumptions of relative capital intensities the tariff removal

will result in an increase in the real wage.
                                      37




                                 Bibliography



Bacha, E. and L. Taylor, "Foreign Exchange Shadow Prices: •A Critical Review

  of the Current Theories," Quarterly Journal of Economics (1971).

Balassa, B., Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial Economics, Oxford

  University Press, 1978.

             "Reforming the System of Incentives in Developing Economies," in

  B. Balassa (ed.), Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial Economies,

  Oxford University Press, 1982.

Bhagwati, S., and T.N. Srinivasan, Lectures in International Trade,

  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 1981.

Brecher, R., "Minimum Wages and the Pure Theory of International Trade,"

  Quarterly Journal of Economics (1974).

Calvo, C., "Fractured Liberalism," Economic Development and Cultural Change

   (Apr. 1986)

Cavallo, D., and P. Cotani, "Real Exchange Rates in Developing Countries,"

   The World Bank, 1985.

__________ and Y. Mundlak, Agriculture and Economic Growth in an Open

   Economy: The Case of Argentina, IFPRI, 1982.

Corbo, V., "Chilean Economic Policy and International Economic Relations

   Since 1970," in G.M. Walton (ed.), The National Economic Policies of

   Chile, Greenwich CT: JAI Press, 1985.

Corden, W.M., The Theory of Protection, Oxford University Press, 1971.

_________    "The Normative Theory of International Trade," in P. Kenen and

   R. Jones (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Vol. I, Amsterdam:

   North-Holland, 1984.

__________   Protection.   Growth and Trade, Oxford: Blackwell, 1985.
                                      38




_________     "The Exchange Rate, Monetary Policy and North Sea Oil," Oxford

   Economic Papers (1981): 23-46.

Corden, W.M., and J.P. Neary, "Booming Sector and De-Industrialization in a

   Small Open Economy," Economic Journal (1982): 825-48.

Diaz-Alejandro, C.F., Exchange Rate Devaluation in a Semi-Industrialized

   Economy: Argentina 1955-1961, MIT Press, 1966.

_________     "The Argentine Tariff 1906-1940," Oxford Economic Papers (Mar.

   1967).

__________    Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine Republic, Yale

   University Press, 1970.

___________   "Some Characteristics of Recent Export Expansion in Latin

   America," in H. Giersch (ed.), The International Division of Labor, 1974.

              "Turning from Import Substitution to Export Promotion in

   Colombia," in J. Ramati (ed.), Economic Growth in Developinz Countries,

   Praeger, 1975.

_________     "The Post-1971 International Financial System in the LDCs," in

   G.K. Helleiner (ed.), A World Divided: The LDCs in the International

   Economy, Cambridge University Press, 1975.

_________     "Trade Policies and Economic Development," in P.B. Kenen (ed),

   International Trade and Finance, Cambridge University Press, 1975.

__________    "The New Colombian Exports: Possible Effects on Income

   Distribution," in A. Berry and R. Soligo (eds.), Economic Policy and

   Income Distribution in Colombia, Westview, 1980.

_________     "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans," in W.R. Cline and S.
   Weintraub (eds.), Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries,

   Brookings, 1981.
                                       39




__________   "Latin   America in Depression, 1929-39," in M. Gersovitz, et.

   al., The Theory and Experience of Economic Development, Allen and Unwin,

   1981.

             "Exchange Rates and Terms of Trade, in the Argentine Republic:

   1913-76," in M. Sryquin and S. Teitel (eds.), Trade. Stability.

   Technology and Equity in Latin America, Academic Press, 1984.

             "Open Economy, Closed Polity?" in D. Tussie (ed.), Latin America

   in the Worle Economy: New Perspectives, Glower, 1983.

_________    "No Less than 100 Years of Argentine Economic History," in C.

   Ranis, et al. (eds), Comparative Development Perspectives: Essays in

   Honor of Lloyd C. Reynolds, Westview, 1984.

_________    "Latin   American Debt: I Don't Think We ae in Kansas Any More,"

   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1984.

_________    "Comment on Harberger," in S. Edwards and L. Ahamed   (eds),
   Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rate in Developing Countries, University

   of Chicago Press. 1986.

Dixit, A., and V. Norman, Theory of International Trade, Cambridge

   University Press, 1980.

Dornbusch, R., "Tariffs and Nontraded Goods," Journal of International

   Economics (May 1974): 117-85.

__________   Oien Economy Macroeconomics, New York: Basic Books, 1980.
Edwards, S., "The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector," Princeton

   Essays on International Finance, N156, 1984.

__________   "Stabilization   and Liberalization: An Evaluation of the Years

   of Chile's Experiment with Free Market Policies, 1973-1983," Economic

   Development and Cultural Change, January 1985.
                                            40



___________   "The Order of Liberalization of the Current and Capital Accounts

   of the Balance of Payments," in A. Cleoksi and D. Papageorgion (eds.),

   Economic Liberalization in Develoiing Countries, Oxford: Blackwell,

   l986a.

___________   "The Liberalization of the Current and Capital Accounts and the

   Real Exchange Rate," paper presented at American Economic Association

   Meetings, 1986b.

              "Exchange Rate Misalignment in Development Countries," CPD

   Working Paper, The World Bank l987a.

              "Tariffs, Terms of Trade and Real Exchange Rate in an

   Intertemporal Model of the Current Account," NBER Working Paper, 1987b.

              Exchange Rates in Developing Countries, forthcoming, MIT Press,

   1988.

Edwards, S., and A. Cox Edwards, Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean

   Experiment, forthcoming, Ballinger, 1987.

Edwards, S., and S. van Wijnbergen, "The Welfare Effects of Trade and

   Capital Market Liberalization," International Economic Review (Feb.

   l986a)

__________    and _________ ,   "Tariffs,    Real Exchange Rates and the Terms of

   Trade: On Two Popular Propositions in International Economics," Oxford

   Economic Papers (forthcoming 1987).

Ethier, W., "Nontraded Goods and the Heckscher-Ohlin Model," International

   Economic Review (1972).

Frenkel, J.A. ,   and M. Mussa, "Asset Markets, Exchange Rates and the Balance

   of Payments: A Reformulation of Doctrine," in R.J. Jones and P. Kenan

   (eds.) Handbook of International Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland,

   1984.
                                       41




Hanson, J., and J. de Melo, "External Shocks, Financial Reform and

   Liberalization Attempts in Uruguay," World Development, 1985.

Harberger, A., "Economic Adjustment and the Real Exchange Rate," in S.

   Edwards and L. Ahamed (eds.), Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates in

   Developing Countries, University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Johnson, H.G., "A Model of Protection and the Exchange Rate," Review of

   Economic Studies (Apr. 1966).

Jones, R.S., "The Structure of Simple Macroeconomic Models," Journal of

   Political Economy (1965).

_________    "A Three Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History," in J.

   Bhagwati (ed.), Trade. Balance of Payments Growth, Amsterdam: North-

  Holland Publishing Co., 1971.

__________   "Trade with Many Commodities," Australian Economic Papers

   (1974).

Jones, R.S., and J.P. Neary, "The Positive Theory of International Trade,"

   in R. Jones and P. Kenen (eds.) Handbook of International Economics,

  Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1984.

Katseli, L., "Devaluation: A Critical Appraisal of the IMF's Policy

  Prescriptions," American Economic Review (May 1983).

_________    "Real Exchange Rates in the 1970s," in J. Bilson and R. Marston

   (eds.), Exchange Rates in Theory and Practice, University of Chicago

   Press, 1984.

__________   "Discrete   Devaluation as a Signal to Price Setters: Suggested

   Evidence From Greece," in S. Edwards and L. Ahamed, Economic Adjustment

   and Exchange Rates in Developing Countries, University of Chicago Press,

   1986.
                                      42



Khan, M., and R. Zahier, "Trade and Financial Liberalization in the Context

   of External Shocks and Inconsistent Domestic Policies," IMF Staff Papers,

   March 1985.

Krueger, A.O., Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

   tion Attempts and Conseciuences, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1978.

_________   Trade and Employment in Developing Countries, University of

   Chicago Press, 1983.

Mayer, W., "Short-Run and Long-Run Equilibrium for a Small Open Economy,"

   Journal of Political Economy (1974).

Mussa, M.L., "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of

   Factor Specificity," Journal of Political Economy (1974).

            "Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model,"

   Journal of Political Economy (1978): 1191-203.

________    "On the Optimal Speed of Trade Liberalization," unpublished ins.,

   The World Bank, 1983.

Neary, P., "Short-Run Capital Specificity and the Pure Theory of

   International Trade," Economic Journal, 88 (1978): 448-510.

            "Dynamic Stability and the Theory of Factor-Market Distortions,"

   American Economic Review (1978): 671-82.

_________   "International   Factor Mobility, Minimum Wage Rates, and Factor

   Price Equalization: A Synthesis," Quarterly Journal of Economics (1985).

Neary, J.P., and K. Roberts, "The Theory of Household Behavior Under

   Rationing," European Economic Review

Taylor, L.., Macro Problems for Developing Countries, McGraw Hill, 1979.

van Wijnbergen, S., "The Dutch Diseae: A Disease After All?" Economic

   Journal (Mar. 1984).
