NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

URBAN NETWORKS: CONNECTING MARKETS, PEOPLE, AND IDEAS
Edward L. Glaeser
Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto
Yimei Zou
Working Paper 21794
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21794

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015

Glaeser acknowledges financial support from the Taubman Center for State and Local Government.
Ponzetto acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
(RYC-2013-13838 and ECO-2014-59805-P), the Government of Catalonia (2014-SGR-830) and the
Barcelona GSE. Zou acknowledges financial support from the La Caixa-Severo Ochoa International
Doctoral Fellowship. E-mail: eglaeser@harvard.edu, gponzetto@crei.cat, yimei.zou@upf.edu. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21794.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto, and Yimei Zou. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Urban Networks: Connecting Markets, People, and Ideas
Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto, and Yimei Zou
NBER Working Paper No. 21794
December 2015
JEL No. F15,O18,R10,R58
ABSTRACT
Should China build mega-cities or a network of linked middle-sized metropolises? Can Europe’s mid-sized
cities compete with global agglomeration by forging stronger inter-urban links? This paper examines
these questions within a model of recombinant growth and endogenous local amenities. Three primary
factors determine the trade-off between networks and big cities: local returns to scale in innovation,
the elasticity of housing supply, and the importance of local amenities. Even if there are global increasing
returns, the returns to local scale in innovation may be decreasing, and that makes networks more appealing
than mega-cities. Inelastic housing supply makes it harder to supply more space in dense confines,
which perhaps explains why networks are more popular in regulated Europe than in the American
Sunbelt. Larger cities can dominate networks because of amenities, as long as the benefits of scale
overwhelm the downsides of density. In our framework, the skilled are more likely to prefer mega-cities
than the less skilled, and the long-run benefits of either mega-cities or networks may be quite different
from the short-run benefits.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Yimei Zou
Plaça de la Mercè, 10-12
Barcelona, 08002
yimei.zou@upf.edu

Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto
CREI, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and Barcelona GSE
C/ Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
gponzetto@crei.cat

1

Introduction

Should rapidly urbanizing nations, like China, build mega-cities or disperse their population
into networks of smaller urban centers linked by high-speed transit? Should Europe, which
is historically tied to its smaller cities, work to cultivate urban networks as a substitute
for large scale agglomeration? What factors determine whether mega-cities dominate urban
networks?
While the United State has long accepted the unbridled growth of regionally dominant
metropolitan areas, such as New York, Los Angeles and Chicago, Europe and China more
seriously question whether networks can be a substitute for mega-city growth. China’s
interest in urban networks is motivated by scale. Urban population growth is so immense
that mega-cities seemed doomed to terrible diseconomies of density, such as crowding and
tra¢ c congestion. Europe’s interest is motivated by history. Since Europe urbanized when
transport costs where high, the continent has an abundance of smaller cities that it does not
wish to abandon. Busan— the second largest city in South Korea— would also be the second
largest city in Western Europe. Section 2 brie‡y discusses the history and current state of
discussion on networks of cities.
This paper investigate the welfare economics of urban networks, de…ned as groups of cities
that enable the exchange of goods, people and ideas. In our framework, networks enable
the movement of skilled workers and ideas. They di¤er from cities in three ways. While
local entrepreneurs can draw inspiration from the wider network, they particularly depend
on their home city for intellectual resources. Less skilled workers are able to move readily
across employers within a city, but not within a wider network. This distinction follows the
U.S. Census de…nition of a metropolitan area as a single labor market. Finally, amenities
are shared within cities but not across cities in an urban network.
Mega-cities, like Seoul or Los Angeles, are made up of sub-city neighborhoods and can
resemble urban networks. However, we assume that some amenities are common to an entire
mega-city and that the less skilled are mobile within a mega-city. Though they may live in
neighborhoods that are largely segregated by income, they can work in businesses throughout
the mega-city. Finally, while ideas are shared throughout an urban network, their circulation
is more homogeneous within a mega-city. Consistent with these assumptions, tra¢ c ‡ows
are city-wide in a mega-city like Los Angeles. Conversely, economic interactions have a
point-to-point pattern across nodes of an urban network such as the Randstad (Van Oort,
Burger and Raspe 2010).
We ask two policy-motivated questions. When is it desirable to link cities to form a single
large mega-city? When is it desirable to abandon distinct cities altogether and merge populations into a single megalopolis? Our …rst question imagines a single larger city connected
by better transportation and communication technology. Our second question imagines a
single denser city with less land. We refer to the …rst type of city-creation as consolidation
and the second type of city-creation as densi…cation. The di¤erence between the two represents the loss of land. Since consolidation brings all of the bene…ts of densi…cation and
delivers more land, the case for consolidation is always better than the case for densi…cation.
In reality, however, densi…cation may be the only realistic alternative to a far-‡ung urban
network. We can certainly envision compact urban networks like the Randstad or the BostonWashington corridor becoming integrated mega-cities, a process that is arguably already
2

under way (Gottmann 1961). Conversely, we cannot expect Bu¤alo and Rochester to merge
into New York, Nantes into Paris, or Nottingham into London. In such cases, the rise of a
mega-city would require the gradual emptying of the lesser nodes of the urban network.
We examine urban networks in a model of endogenous amenities and recombinant growth
that follows Weitzman (1998) and Jacobs (1969). Di¤erent locations are endowed with land
and unskilled labor, which can move within a mega-city but not across cities. Locations
also begin with initial stocks of …rms and amenities. Skilled workers can move across cities
within an urban network and must therefore be indi¤erent between cities within the network.
Housing is produced with land and the numeraire good. Individuals privately invest in
amenities, but there are spillovers both across time and space. We bene…t from amenities
built in the past, such as beautiful old buildings, and amenities built by our neighbors, such
as beautiful new buildings.
The economic engine of the model is that skilled workers create new …rms, which provide
value by generating new varieties of intermediate goods following Ethier (1979). The number
of new …rms in a location is a function of the number of old …rms in that place, the number
of skilled workers in that place, and the number of skilled workers elsewhere in the urban
network. The number of old …rms and the pool of unskilled people determines the in‡ux
of young, skilled people who then start …rms that determine the employment level and the
number of old …rms during the next period. Just as in the real world, there is a healthy
mutual causality between population ‡ows and employment demand (Boarnet 1994).
The number of old …rms matter because we assume that new ideas are produced from old
ideas. The number of skilled workers in the area matters both because those skilled workers
are themselves the entrepreneurs and because they can learn from other entrepreneurs within
the area. The number of skilled workers in the network matters because we assume that
there are intellectual links that bind the network together. Moreover, the skilled workers in
the network may have been educated together and may have learned from each other at that
earlier stage. As a result, cities that are linked within a network bene…t from “borrowed
size” (Alonso 1973; Meijers and Burger 2015). Their performance is better than their own
size alone would justify, because they bene…t from spillovers from their neighbors. Yet,
we do not assume a priory that city network externalities are perfect substitutes for local
agglomeration economies. Accordingly, we assume that there are increasing returns in the
creation of new …rms at the level of the network, but not necessarily at the level of the city.
We …rst consider the case of locational symmetry, in which every place is endowed with
an identical amount of land, unskilled labor, initial …rms, productivity levels and initial
amenity levels. We consider both the short-run and long-run bene…ts of urban network
expansion, consolidation and densi…cation. We examine the expansion of urban networks
through improvements in communications and transportation technology. Within the model,
these expansions have no downsides and increase the ‡ow of ideas. Unsurprisingly, larger
urban networks mean more …rm creation, higher income levels and high utility levels. In
reality, these bene…ts would have to be weighed against the investment costs of linking
more cities together into a larger network. Yet, since we do not explicitly model the price
of network expansion, which will depend on local technology and costs, our framework is
better suited to discuss the trade-o¤s between networks and cities than the case for network
expansion.
Our framework does have a real trade-o¤ when we consider the consolidation of already
3

networked cities into a single mega-city. Even if there is no land lost through the process,
city formation can harm entrepreneurship. There can be diminishing returns in new …rm
creation at the city level, even if there are increasing returns at the level of the network. The
model admits the possibility that local culture may be lost when cities are combined, and
that creates the possibility that bigger cities may not be better for creativity. If there are
local increasing returns to new …rm formation, then urban consolidation is always bene…cial
for incomes and utility. If there are local decreasing returns to new …rm formation, urban
consolidation may be bene…cial for utility, even if it reduces entrepreneurship and income,
because more amenities can be enjoyed in a larger city.
The case for densi…cation is always weaker than the case for consolidation because of the
loss of land. Even if there are local increasing returns to new idea creation, then densi…cation
may be harmful if housing is a large enough share of consumption or if housing supply
is su¢ ciently inelastic. The role of housing supply may explain why mega-cities are more
common in the American sunbelt while urban networks, like the Randstad, are more common
in Europe. Houston’s geography and regulations make it easy to build massive amounts
of housing (Glaeser and Tobio 2008). Amsterdam presents a more challenging building
environment.
Despite the reduction in the availability of land, it is possible that densi…cation will lead
to an increase in the housing stock. This can occur only if densi…cation strongly increases
new …rm formation and the supply of housing is quite elastic, perhaps as in New York City
at the start of the twentieth century. Naturally, housing prices will then be signi…cantly
higher after densi…cation.
As the skilled and unskilled have di¤erent preferences over amenities, the skilled may
prefer consolidation or densi…cation while the unskilled may prefer separation. With consolidation, this preference divergence can only occur when there are decreasing returns to scale
in new idea creation. In the case of densi…cation, it is possible for the unskilled to dislike
a bigger city even if incomes go up as long as prices rise su¢ ciently. The extra amenities
generated by a bigger city may be enough to o¤set the pecuniary losses for the skilled but
not for the unskilled, and in that case there may be a political con‡ict. To us, this con‡ict between rich and poor resembles the current debate over inequality in cities like New
York and London. Urban expansion seems to have been bene…cial for skilled, but many less
successful urbanites seem convinced that rising housing prices have left them worse o¤.
We then turn to the long run, …rst considering the case where the system converges to
a steady state. The expansion of urban networks has even larger positive e¤ects in the long
run than in the short run, because the process of new …rm creation builds up over time.
For the same reason, the creation of larger cities through consolidation will also have bigger
e¤ects on pecuniary variables in the long run than in the short run, although these e¤ects
can be either positive or negative.
Perhaps most interestingly, there could be a reversal of preferences in the long run compared to the short run. If denser cities increase incomes because of increasing returns to
scale in new idea creation, but reduce welfare in the short run because of more expensive
housing, then it can be that the income gains in steady state are so large that welfare eventually rises with density. The larger lesson is that since densi…cation and consolidation will
have a persistent impact on growth, it is important to take a longer term perspective when
considering the costs and bene…ts of changing urban connectivity.
4

We next allow for heterogeneity: …rst across regions, assuming that the cities within a
region are identical, and then across cities. With asymmetries, it is possible that consolidation or densi…cation can be harmful when done for any one region but helpful for the
world as a whole. It is also possible that consolidation or densi…cation can be helpful at the
regional level, but harmful for the world as a whole. Increased innovation produces a crossregional externality. Any change in new …rm creation will impact regions elsewhere. When
consolidation or densi…cation reduce incomes, then even if local utilities increase because of
increases in amenities, global welfare may decline.
We suspect that the more realistic case for a con‡ict between local and global objectives is
that densi…cation raises incomes but lowers welfare at the local level because of higher housing
costs. Yet densi…cation at a national or global scale might still be bene…cial because of the
external bene…ts of new product creation. There are many successful areas in the United
State and Europe, such as Silicon Valley and London, that have restricted densi…cation
through land use regulations. These regulations may have created local bene…ts, but the
reduction in density may have also created global harm by reducing the total amount of
innovation world-wide.
Finally, we turn to the case where there are heterogeneous locations within a region. We
…rst consider a small set of cities that considers consolidation or densi…cation. If consolidation
or densi…cation appeals to the skilled, either by increasing amenities or incomes, then this will
attract the skilled to this set of places. The movement of the skilled will make urbanization
more appealing on the margin, since the skilled are always more likely to bene…t from urban
growth than the unskilled, because they care more about the growth in amenities. This
result could be reversed if densi…cation created congestion disamenities that are particularly
disliked by the skilled. The larger point in this case is that local choices will impact the
migration of entrepreneurs, and this can radically alter the local bene…ts from urban change.
If land is constant across locations and other factor endowments move together, then a
simple condition determines whether densi…cation is bene…cial, depending on whether the
returns to local scale are decreasing or increasing. If the returns are decreasing then lower
density is better, while if there are increasing returns then higher density is better. Consolidation can be unattractive when heterogeneity is low but become appealing if heterogeneity
rises enough. If the areas are more di¤erent, then there are essentially gains from trade
from consolidation, which can increase the returns to forming one large city. This e¤ect gets
exacerbated when factor endowment do not perfectly move together. In that case, forming
a single city better matches the factor endowments with each other and leads to enhanced
welfare.
This result again can help explain why the United States turns to mega-cities while
Europe turns to urban networks. American locations can be remarkably di¤erent even
within a single metropolitan area. The less well educated residents in Oakland bene…t from
access to the San Francisco job market. European egalitarianism also operates at the city
level, which should mean that networks make relatively more sense.
Our analysis builds upon and contributes to a long literature on the formation of systems
of cities (Abdel-Rahman and Anas 2004). Like all studies since Henderson’s (1974) seminal
contribution, we model the equilibrium size of cities as the solution to a trade-o¤ between the
costs of congestion, represented by the scarcity of urban land, and Marshallian agglomeration
economies. City-speci…c amenities in our model correspond to the classic centripetal foce
5

of local public goods (Arnott and Stiglitz 1979), but our main focus is on agglomeration
economies in knowledge generation and transmission (Glaeser 1999; Duranton and Puga
2001).
While knowledge spillovers were among Marshall’s (1890) original agglomeration forces,
the literature has more often considered productivity gains from specialization in a context
of imperfect tradability, both statically (Abdel-Rahman and Fujita 1990; Krugman 1991)
and in a dynamic framework of endogenous growth (Ioannides 1994; Black and Henderson
1999). We share with New Economic Geography models the assumption of di¤erentiated
products and imperfect competition. However, in our model trade in goods is costless;
agglomeration and growth re‡ect instead innovation spillovers (Eaton and Eckstein 1997;
Helsley and Strange 2002).
Our focus on entpreneurial creativity is also re‡ected in our analysis of the distributional
consequences of di¤erent urban structures. We distinguish between skilled entrepeneurs
and unskilled workers (Henderson and Becker 2000) and assume that the former a mobile,
but the latter are not (Forslid and Ottaviano 2003). As a result, our policy-motivated
question is not simply whether governments should subsidize or tax the entry of mobile
agents into large cities (Henderson 1974; Arnott and Stiglitz 1979; Arnott 2004). Instead,
we consider the possibility of choosing between an urban network or an integrated mega-city.
This policy alternative re‡ects public investments in infrastructure (Hsieh 2015) and placemaking policies (Glaeser and Gottlieb 2008) that fundamentally transform the mobility of
ideas and people— especially the less skilled— in ways that decentralized private activity is
unable to replicate.
Our framework posits an abstract geography with symmetrically located cities, rather
than considering explicitly a continuous space (Fujita, Krugman and Mori 1999; Desmet
and Rossi-Hansberg 2014). As a result, like most models of systems of cities in urban
economics, we take a view of geography closer to Pred (1977) than Christaller (1933). While
some cities are larger, more productive or more innovative than others, all cities trade with
each other rather than belonging to a hub-based hierarchical structure. Such horizontal
non-hierarchical relationships are considered the de…ning feature of a city network in the
economic-geography literature (Camagni and Salone 1993).
In the terminology suggested by Taylor, Hoyler and Verbruggen’s (2010) central ‡ow
theory, we are not modeling town-ness, i.e., the simple and static hierarchic relationship of
an urban agglomeration with its hinterland. Instead, our focus is on city-ness: the complex
and dynamic network process that links together cities and creates “a cosmopolitan mix of
peoples, commodities and ideas” (p. 2812). Empirically, therefore, ours is a model of the
horizontal links between the major nodes of an urban network— such as Amsterdam, the
Hague, Rotterdam and Utrecht in the Randstad. Conversely, we do not explicitly model the
hierarchical core-periphery patterns linking each urban core to its regional hinterland. These
vertical relationships are instead represented implicitly by our assumption that amenities
and commutes are concentrated around each network node, and even idea ‡ows are not fully
symmetric throughout the network.

6

2

Urban Networks in History and Today

In the theory that follows, we will discuss three speci…c alternatives for spatial organization:
larger cities, denser cities, and urban networks. We use “larger” cities to refer to physical
locales that may have been once distinct, but are now single labor markets or metropolitan
areas. Typically, cities becomes larger because transportation innovations have linked previously disparate locales. The Brooklyn Bridge, for example, turned Manhattan and Brooklyn
from distinct cities, with clearly separate central business districts, into a single labor market
that would eventually merge into a single political unit. We mean “denser” cities to refer
to the case where people have abandoned several locations and come together in a single
place. While abandonment is extreme, this densi…cation has been the standard process of
urbanization throughout most of human history.
An urban network is de…ned in the model as a linked set of cities that share ideas and
across which skilled labor moves readily. In a sense, a network is just like a city, but with
weaker links. Like cities, networks exist to speed the ‡ow of goods, people and ideas.
The …rst urban networks emerged to facilitate the trade in goods. Networks came before
mega-cities because of high transport costs. As argued by Christaller’s (1933) Central Place
Theory, historically farmers would only travel as far as small market towns to sell, and then
merchants brought those goods to regional centers and great national cities. Europe and the
eastern United States urbanized when transport costs were high, and so dispersed smaller
cities remain.
Yet, as transportation costs have declined, goods-based networks have become far less
meaningful, although a few links remain particularly important, such as São Paulo and
Santos. Instead, networks are linked by the movement of people and ideas. There has also
been a rise in long-distance networked cities, linked typically by air and telecommunications,
such as New York and London, and a rise of short-range linkages, such as the towns of
the Brabant. The shortest-range networks can be di¢ cult to distinguish from a standard
commuting zone.
In areas that urbanized after 1900, including the Western United States, Latin America,
and Asia, transport costs were lower and massive agglomerations became far more standard
than networks of smaller cities. Yet even in those newer areas, the debate between networks and agglomerations is not dead. In China, there is a lively urban planning debate
about whether to facilitate the increased expansion of the vast agglomerations of Beijing and
Shanghai or whether to focus on creating networks of cities that are smaller, albeit still much
larger than almost all of the cities of Western Europe. The current government policy favors
networks, in the hope that connected smaller cities may be free of the extreme downsides of
mass agglomeration, such as extreme congestion, pollution and high housing costs.

2.1

Urban Networks in History

The most ancient urban networks formed along rivers, such as the Indus, the Tigris and the
Euphrates, more than six thousand years ago. One plausible view is networks emerged …rst
for trade reasons, but were then consolidated into political units under the military power
of kings and empires. This consolidation required military technology and organization to
reach the point where the residents of one city were able to control the residents of a second
7

city.
The Greeks developed the …rst great European urban network. Vermeule (1960) argues
that the Mycenaean diaspora was a response to maritime disorder in the thirteenth century
B.C.: “Inability to import seems to have demanded emigration as an alternative.”Yet it was
trade links that turned these scattered settlements into a network that was strong enough
to induce Athenians to …ght when Persia menaced the Greek cities of the Ionian Coast.
Athenian …ghting strength was magni…ed because of the network that came together to
form the anti-Persian Delian league. The Phoenicians built a parallel urban network that
stretched from the Levant to the straits of Gibraltar.
These networks traded goods, but new technological ideas also moved along the network.
Vermeule (1960) notes how iron, the Protogeometric pottery style and “new fashions in
body armor and swords” are found in the areas “which maintained Mycenaean traditions
the longest, and which lay open to contact with the East by sea.”Even more momentously,
the Phoenicians spread their alphabet, which became our alphabet, across their network of
cities (Howard 2012).
The cities of Rome and China were also connected, but networks seem distinct from
empires, because imperial metropolises are connected as much by political administration
and the military as by trade. In 400 B.C., Zhuo Zhuan describes a pattern of hierarchical
city sizes that has a resemblance to central place theory, but the city sizes are determined
entirely by the city leader’s place in the aristocratic hierarchy.
In the West, non-imperial networks resume when cities start growing again three centuries
after the fall of Rome. Hohenberg and Lees’s (1995) classic study documents that while some
Medieval cities, such as Leicester, …t Christaller’s (1933) model of nested market towns,
others, like Venice, do not. The larger, trading city is “more concerned with the world at
large than with its own backyard.”(p. 70) These connected urban networks were responsible
for remarkable economic and cultural achievements.
For example, the medieval period saw the emergence of a strong trading network of
Tuscan cities, including Pisa, Florence and Sienna, which are linked to each other and to
the other trading powerhouses of Genoa and Venice, which was in turn closely linked across
the Mediterranean to Constantinople. There was a second great urban network in the Low
Countries, especially Bruges, Ghent, Leuven and Brussels. These two networks were also
linked by trading and …nance, and in the …fteenth century, an artistic revolution was fed by
links across these networks. The knowledge of detailed painting in oil moved from Flanders
to Italy and the knowledge of linear perspective moved from Italy to Flanders (Skipnes 2007).
The Hanseatic League may be the ultimate example of an historic urban network. Beginning with a simple trading alliance between Hamburg and Lubeck, the League became the
master-traders of the North. From Bruges to Novgorod, Hanseatic traders would carry wool,
salted …sh and knowledge. The core Hanseatic cities may have been part of the Holy Roman
Empire, but their network was so strong that they were almost a nation unto themselves.
They shared a legal system, the Lubeck Law, a language, Middle Low German, and fought
successful wars against nations, like England and Denmark, that threatened to curtail their
trading.
The Hanseatic network also helped spread major innovations such as the printing press.
The printing press was invented in Mainz, but it naturally spread along the Rhine to great
Hanseatic city of Cologne. William Caxton was an English merchant who led the Merchant
8

Adventurers of London’s outpost in the Hanseatic city of Bruges, visited Cologne and learned
about the press. When he returned to Bruges, he created the …rst printed book in English
and then returned and introduced the printing press to England. Caxton’s return to England
followed London’s return to the Hanseatic urban fold, after an unsuccessful attempt by the
English to defeat the Hanseatic League.
America’s …rst urban network was tied by the Atlantic seaboard, which enabled goods
to move far more cheaply than any land-based transportation mode. Boston, Providence,
New Haven, New York, Philadelphia and Baltimore were linked by sailing vessels during the
eighteenth century. People, like the young Benjamin Franklin, travelled from one city to the
next, carrying knowledge with them. The trade links between New York City and the South
made New York a hotbed of opposition to the Civil War. The northeast Atlantic seaboard
remains so tightly connected that it is reasonable to debate whether it is better seen as a
network or as a single megalopolis (Gottmann, 1961).
As Americans moved west, new networks emerged around the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River and then along the western seaboard. Yet the later the area was urbanized, the
more that development took the form of a single large agglomeration rather than a network
of smaller cities. Anas, Arnott and Small (1998) provide a broad overview of the varieties
of urban spatial structure throughout the United States and of the transition from compact
older cities in the Northeast to sprawling megacities in the Southwest, exempli…ed by Los
Angeles.
Asia was later to urbanize and its urban networks are still emerging. As China has
opened to the world, a network emerged in the south that includes Hong Kong, Guangzhou
and Shenzhen. Singapore’s network is really global, but it has particular ties to its proximate
neighbors, Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta. In the Persian Gulf, Abu Dhabi, Doha and Dubai
share close ties despite the political boundaries that separate them.

2.2

Urban Networks Today

No modern network of cities enjoys ties as strong as the Hansa, and modern urban networks
do not wage wars. Those who would celebrate the strength of linked twenty-…rst century cities
must still recognize the monopoly on force and political power wielded by the modern nationstate, which is diluted only in Europe by the European Union. Modern urban networks share
connections, but they do not exercise legal authority and jealous national governments are
unlikely to surrender their political power.
Perhaps more signi…cantly, modern networks in the developed world are not usually focused on the transmission of goods. To make this point, Table 1 documents the ten strongest
“trade”linkages in America’s metropolitan areas. We start with the 2012 Commodity Flow
Survey, which is a survey of the physical shipments across the United States. We then calculate the total value of ‡ows going into each metropolitan area and the share that comes from
every other area in the sample. This creates a matrix with each entry ij being the share of
area i’s imports that come from area j. The table simply lists the ten largest entries in the
matrix. If America’s cities were split up into tight networks of goods-connected metropolitan
areas, we would expect to see strong reciprocal relationships exchanging goods.
This list shows ten pairs of metropolitan areas with extremely strong one-way links.
Every one of the destination metropolitan areas receives at least one …fth of its shipments,
9

by value, from the origin metropolitan area. Somewhat remarkably, in four of those cases
Seattle, Washington, is the origin metropolitan area. That fact re‡ects the enormously
high value of the transportation equipment shipped from Seattle, and typically produced by
Boeing.
Conversely, however, in nine of the ten cases less than 2.5 percent of shipments to the
origin come from the destination area. With the sole exception of Portland, which does indeed
originate a signi…cant fraction of shipments to Seattle, all of the linkages are decidedly one
way. This doesn’t mean that American cities don’t ship goods to another. They do. Yet the
system is so well linked that it ceases to be a visible network and is instead just one national
marketplace where trucks and trains carry goods from one area to the other (Glaeser and
Kohlhase 2004).
We still think of Europe as the home of great urban networks, some of which lie within
nations while some sprawl across old borders. The POLYNET project (Hall and Pain 2006,
2008) highlighted eight “polycentric mega-city regions”at the heart of northwestern Europe:
southeast England, the Randstad, central Belgium, the Rhine-Ruhr and Rhine-Main regions,
northern Switzerland, greater Paris and greater Dublin. Slightly to the South, northern Italy
enjoys an urban network that stretches from Turin to Venice and Bologna (Camagni and
Salone 1993).
While some of these regions have a primary center, not all do. Taylor, Evans and Pain
(2008) study inter-city linkages between o¢ ces of the same business-services …rm and conclude that Paris, Frankfurt and Dublin clearly act as hubs of their respective regions. Conversely, the centrality of London is less clear-cut, while Belgium and northern Switzerland
are positively ambiguous cases. The Randstad and the Rhine-Ruhr de…nitely have multiple
cores.
Furthermore, all these city-regions have become increasingly polycentric as globalization
progresses. In particular, polycentricity is associated with the rise of a knowledge economy
in which services, and especially information-based “advanced producer services” represent
an ever growing share of economic activity (Hoyler, Kloosterman and Sokol 2008).
One of the major conclusions of the POLYNET project is that the concept of polycentricity itself is crucially scale-sensitive. On the one hand, each individual metropolis still
displays hierarchical patterns, with global …rms overwhelmingly clustering in the main core
(or cores). On the other hand, the system of European metropolises is itself a crucial crossborder network. At a minimum, the London–Paris–Milan–Munich–Hamburg pentagon can
be considered a polycentric “Europolis.”More broadly, it is a stated policy objective of the
European Union to reduce concentration in this area and promote instead a broader city
network that also connects major cities to the South, North and East (Vandermotten et
al. 2008). Likewise, Germany, the birthplace of the Hansa, has actively promoted urban
networks on a nationwide basis since reuni…cation (Mueller 2000).
In fact, regional monocentricity and European polycentricity are positively connected.
Meijers, Burger and Hoogerbrugge (2015) …nd that larger cities are more successful network nodes. Within a city region, greater network connectivity heightens competition and
generate a hierarichical “agglomeration shadow.” Across metropolitan areas, instead, thick
connections to national and international networks bring the bene…ts of borrowed size. Yet,
urban networks fail to substitute fully for the bene…ts of physical proximity.

10

2.3

Motivating the Model

In the model that follows, we will be considering networks that allow the mobility of people
and ideas, essentially expanding the urbanity of a place to a multitude of urban areas. We
will assume that all areas can trade goods with one another. We de…ne a city as an area
with perfect mobility across …rms and a free ‡ow of ideas.
Between the trading system and the commuting zone lie the smaller groups of cities that
represent what is typically meant by an urban network. These mid-level networks enable
the ‡ow of people and ideas, and often the two move together. In our model, we will assume
that skilled workers can relocate easily within the network, either because the distances are
short or because the cultural similarities are high. We are not suggesting that it is legally or
physically impossible to relocate anywhere within the European Union or the United States,
but it is easy for a Dutchman to move from Rotterdam to Amsterdam and still see his
parents once a month (or once a week, if he has such an appetite). A move to Warsaw will
be far more wrenching. Similarly, a move from Boston to New York is far less jarring than
a move to Las Vegas.
In modern urban networks, as opposed to the Hanseatic League, there is no bright boundary at a network’s edge. The di¢ culty of moving from Boston rises gradually with physical
and cultural distance: there is no discontinuous jump at the Hudson River. We assume that
networks have clear borders solely for expositional ease. We also focus on the mobility of the
skilled rather than the unskilled partially for expositional reasons, but also to re‡ect reality.
Inter-metropolitan mobility rates are typically much lower among those with less education. For example, Overman (2015) …nds that 52 percent of British workers without formal
quali…cations work where they were born but only 31 percent of workers with degrees have
stayed put. Only 23 percent of Americans with college degrees live in the town where they
were born, while 43 percent of those with a high school degree or less have never moved
(Cohn and Morin 2008).
Our second assumption is that the network is also marked by the movement of ideas.
Following Jacobs (1969) and Weitzman (1998), we assume that new ideas are formed from
old ideas. A stock of successful entrepreneurs begets the next generation of entrepreneurs.
We assume that knowledge moves more readily over short distances, not because we doubt
the e¢ cacy of the internet for transferring basic facts, but because there are still abundant
examples of important intellectual exchanges the occur in crowded corridors. It is somewhat
ironic that the ideas that created Facebook, which thrives by facilitating electronic friendships, seem to have been formed by face-to-face conversations in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
We assume that entrepreneurs draw particularly on the ideas in their own metropolitan area,
but can also bene…t from the ideas in their larger urban network.
Urban networks and mega-cities have many things in common. Indeed, it is debatable whether the U.S. Northeast corridor is an urban network or the BosWash megalopolis
(Gottmann 1961). We make three assumptions about networks that we would not make
about mega-cities. First, we assume limited mobility of low skilled people across the network, whereas we would typically assume that the less skilled are mobile within a mega-city.
Second, we assume that within the network amenities are city-speci…c, whereas we would
typically assume that there is a sizable component of mega-city amenities that is city-wide,
like Los Angeles tra¢ c. Finally, we assume the idea exchange is more homogeneous within
11

a mega-city, while the nodes of an urban network retain a greater entrepeneurial distinctiveness.
Our choices can be debated in either direction. The low skilled may be mobile across
a network and immobile within a mega-city. Some amenities may be network-wide and
many amenities are certainly speci…c to neighborhoods within a mega-city. Mega-cities may
have distinctive entrepeneurial neighborhoods and creative partnerships may thrive across
a network. Nonetheless, we believe that these distinctions capture some elements of the
distinction between mega-cities and networks. Even the most celebrated urban network,
the Dutch Randstad, remains quite far from complete functional economic integration: connection between …rms are thicker within than across cities (Van Ort, Burger and Raspe
2010).
The stereotypical network contains distinct urban nodes, and there is little commuting
from one node to another that crosses the heart of a third node. Consequently, an increase in
tra¢ c density in one node has little impact on adjoining nodes. The stereotypical mega-city
has employment strewn throughout and increases in tra¢ c density will spill over throughout
the city. Consequently, we tend to think that our assumption of city-speci…c amenities is
more justi…ed for networks than for mega-cities. Empirically, the Randstad is characterized
by distinct sub-regions centered on each of the four core cities of Amsterdam, the Hague,
Rotterdam and Utrecht, each having strong hierarchical links to its own hinterland.
The stereotypical mega-city is one vast connected urban space and mobility would seem to
be pretty free within that area. The geographic mobility within mega-cities can be enormous.
The U.S. Census’ American Community Survey reports that ten percent of Los Angeles
households move within Los Angeles county every year. By contrast, the residents of urban
networks often have close ties to their speci…c urban home: a resident of Rotterdam will
often see himself as quite distinct from a resident of Utrecht.
The same distinctive culture underpins a di¤erence in the ‡ow of ideas. Entrepreneurs,
workers and business models circulate seamlessly within a mega-city such as Tokyo, which
we view as a single pool of ideas. Conversely, an urban network like the Northeast corridor
comprises distinct business cultures in Boston and in New York. As our model will show,
this can be both a weakness to the extent that fragmentation hinders idea exchange and a
strength to the extent that diversity enhances entrepreneurial creativity.
We will use our model to ask both positive questions, about the determinants of city size
and income growth, and normative questions about the optimal network size. The model
will yield predictions about how the fortunes of cities and ordinary workers change when
they are part of a network, and how they change based on the composition of the network.
We focus on expanding the size of urban networks, but not changing the extent of global
trade, which has been well studied. Typically easier trade enhances welfare, but the positive
e¤ects of increased trade are hardly universal. As in Je¤erson (1939), a smaller city that
is included into a network with a more productive neighbor could easily lose both business
growth and population. The skilled workers in a smaller network might lose out if their
network becomes linked to a larger network with a far higher ratio of skilled to unskilled
workers. In our model, these forces do not operate at the level of the trading network because
trade is not driven by di¤erence in factor proportions, à la Heckscher-Ohlin, but rather by
gains from specialization that every location can reap when it has access to a larger market.
We focus above all on the trade-o¤ between network formation and urban growth, either
12

through densi…cation or consolidation. The network is an alternative to a single large city,
but it is not exactly the same. The network may have more land available and particular local
advantages that show up when there are decreasing returns to scale in new idea formation.
Big cities can also have the advantage of more amenities. We now turn to the model.

3

Setup of the Model

We …rst describe the core assumptions of the model about production, new …rm creation,
amenities and housing. We then characterize the equilibrium.

3.1

Production

There is a continuum of cities of measure C. Each city c is endowed with unskilled labor Lc
and land Tc . Neither of these factors of production are mobile. City c will also host skilled
labor Hc;t and a measure Nc;t of …rms in period t. The quantity of skilled labor and the
number of …rms are endogenously determined equilibrium outcomes.
Firms make di¤erentiated products that can be costlessly traded and then aggregated
into a composite good with the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) speci…cation
Yt =

Z

0

C

Z

Nc;t

1

1

j
yc;t

for

djdc

> 1.

(1)

0

The composite good serves as our numeraire so its price is normalized to one.
Each variety is manufactured using unskilled labor according to a linear production funcj
j
j
its unskilled
tion: yc;t
= Ac;t lc;t
, where ycj is the output of …rm j in city c in period t, lc;t
workforce, and Ac;t the productivity common to all …rms in the city.
In equilibrium, city output is
Z Nc;t
1
j
pjc;t yc;t
dj = Yt (Ac;t Lc ) 1 Nc;t .
Yc;t =
(2)
0

Wages for the unskilled equal the marginal product of labor, which is proportional to output
per worker:
1 Yc;t
wc;t =
(3)
Lc
Firm pro…ts, i.e., revenues minus labor costs, are identical across …rms in the same place
and time and are proportional to output per …rm. Aggregate output of the composite good
integrates output from all …rms in all the separate cities:
Yt =

Z

C

(Ac;t Lc )

0

13

1

1

1

Nc;t

dc

.

(4)

3.2

Entrepreneurship

The cities are partitioned into distinct urban networks, which we refer to as “regions,”
r = 1; 2; :::; R. We order cities so that region r includes cities c 2 [cr 1 ; cr ] where c0 = 0 and
cR = C. Each region includes a positive measure Cr = cr cr 1 > 0 of cities.
Region r is endowed with Hr skilled agents. While the unskilled are immobile, the skilled
can move within regions, but not across regions. The mobility within regions is meant to
capture the cultural connections within the region and the ease of connecting with friends
and family in one’s place of origin. As we typically assume that regions are identical, the
assumption of immobility across regions is largely irrelevant.
These skilled agents are the entrepreneurs in our economy. Firms are created in an
entrepreneurial culture through imitation of successful businesses and intellectual spillovers
across entrepreneurs within urban networks. Our model of interactive idea creation follows
Weitzman’s (1998) theory of recombinant growth with four stages.
First, “business concepts” are created by skilled entrepreneurs in a city by looking at
existing business models. Second, these concepts are developed into primary ideas by consulting with skilled workers throughout the region. Third, these primary ideas are turned
into matched ideas by connecting with other primary ideas in the city. Fourth, these matched
ideas are turned into business plans by consulting with other skilled people in the city. The
ultimate equations that drive our model do not depend on this particular process, but it
does justify why new …rm creation depends on skills within the city, skills within the region
and the stock of old …rms in the city. This four-stage structure is inspired by Weitzman
(1998), but we are responsible for assuming that external regional skill matters more at an
earlier stage and external local skill matters more at the later stage.
The Nc;t 1 varieties produced in city c in period t 1 and the Hc;t skilled entrepreneurs
combine to produce Nc;t 1 Hc;t business concepts.
These concepts are developed into primary ideas through regionwide consultation. The
productivity of each seed depends on the attention it receives from high-skill agents in the
entire regional network, and so the stock of primary ideas is
~c;t = nc;t Nc;t 1 Hc;t
N

Hr
Nc;t 1 Hc;t

for

2 [0; 1]

(5)

where nc;t is a productivity shock.
Capturing the assumption of recombinant growth, successful business ventures emerge
from the meeting of two entrepreneurs with primary ideas that can be successfully combined.
2
~c;t
The number of such matches in city c, which we refer to as secondary ideas, is N
=2.
The development of secondary ideas into …nal business plans depends on the attention
given by entrepreneurs in the city, so the total number of varieties that can be successfully
produced in city c in period t is
Nc;t

~2
N
c;t
=n
~ c;t
2

Hc;t
2
~
Nc;t
=2

where n
~ c;t is a productivity shock.
14

!~

for ~ 2 [0; 1] ,

(6)

We can rewrite this equation more compactly
Nc;t =

(7)

c;t Nc;t 1 Hc;t Hr

for an aggregate productivity in …rm creation
2 (1
) 1 ~ 2 [0; 2],
+ ~ 2 [0; 2] and

1 ~

n2c;t =2
n
~ c;t and elasticities
1 ~ 2 [0; 2] such that + + =

c;t

2

1 + (3 2 ) 1 ~ 2 [1; 4].
Firm pro…ts accrue to the skilled agents who create and manage the …rms. Spillovers
from pre-existing …rms and skilled entrepreneurs in the rest of the regions are pure positive
externalities. If Hc;t is the equilibrium measure of skilled labor in city c and period t, then
each entrepreneur’s nominal income is proportional to output per entrepreneur:
ec;t =

3.3

1 Yc;t
.
Hc;t

(8)

Consumption and Endogenous Amenities

Consumption is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of housing hic;t , direct consumption of the nui
i
meraire qc;t
, and consumption of amenity-generating goods gc;t
. Man-made amenities yield
spillovers across people and over time. The most natural example of such amenities would
be the aesthetics of one’s residence. We can also think of other amenities that are potentially
produced collectively, such as a community club, as long as the club’s membership is …nite
and hence has measure zero.
Resident i of city c at time t has utility
uic;t

=

1

i
qc;t

hic;t
1

i
gc;t
Gc;t

i

i

,

(9)

i

where interpersonal and intertemporal spillovers are captured by
!
Z
Gc;t =

i

1
c;t Gc;t 1

i
gc;t
di

for

Ic;t

2 (0; 1)

(10)

i
when each city resident i 2 Ic;t spends gc;t
units of the numeraire on amenities.
In keeping with standard income elasticities of housing consumption (Glaeser, Kahn and
Rappaport 2008), all agents have the same budget share for housing . We do, however,
assume that the budget share of amenities i is higher for skilled than unskilled individuals:
H > L . The simplest justi…cation for the assumption that the skilled put more weight on
amenities is that education teaches them to appreciate the better things in life. Alternatively,
the connection between skills and taste for amenities can be seen as an approximation for
assuming that amenities are luxury goods. R
i
The city-wide expenditure on amenities is Ic;t gc;t
di = Yc;t , where = H = + L (
1) =
is the average budget share of amenities, which in turn re‡ects the equilibrium share of total
income going to skilled and unskilled individuals. Amenities therefore equal

Gc;t =

1
c;t Gc;t 1

15

( Yc;t ) .

(11)

Amenities will generally be higher in more skilled cities for two reasons in this model.
First, the skilled will choose to select into higher amenity cities. Second, the skilled will
invest more in local amenities. We believe that both of these forces are also at work in the
real world.

3.4

Housing

Housing is built with a Cobb-Douglas production function using land and the numeraire:
!1
j
z
c;t
hjc;t = c;t
tjc;t for 2 (0; 1) ,
(12)
1
j
where c;t is the productivity of the construction sector, zc;t
is …rm j’s input of the numeraire,
j
and tc;t the land acquired by the …rm from absentee landlords.1 Somewhat counter-factually,
for the sake of tractability we assume that housing lasts only one period. Even if we think
of a period as a generation, this assumption still surely underestimates the durability of
housing.
Demand for housing is hc;t = Yc;t =rc;t , which is a function of city output Yc;t and house
prices rc;t .
The construction industry is competitive. The housing market is in equilibrium when
construction …rms earn zero pro…ts because housing prices equal construction costs, given
land rents, and when all land is used for construction. In equilibrium, the housing supplied
will equal
hc;t = c;t Tc ( Yc;t )1 ,
(13)

with housing prices
rc;t =

1
c;t

and land rents
c;t

3.5

=

Yc;t
Tc

(14)

Yc;t
.
Tc

(15)

Spatial Equilibrium

Given their equilibrium incomes wc;t and ec;t , amenities Gc;t , and house prices rc;t as a function
of city output Yc;t , the utility of unskilled workers in city c at time t is
"
#
1
+ L
wc;t Gc;tL
L Yc;t
1
Tc
1
L
uc;t =
=
,
(16)
c;t
c;t Gc;t 1
rc;t
Lc
while the utility of skilled entrepreneurs is
"
H
e
G
1
Tc
c;t
c;t
uH
=
c;t
c;t =
rc;t

#

1

1

1
c;t Gc;t 1

H

Yc;t

+

Hc;t

H

.

(17)

Our results would be qualitatively unchanged if we assumed instead that landowners consume local
housing and local amenities.

16

We assume that productivity shocks c , Ac , c;t and c are realized before skilled workers
choose their location, so there is no residual uncertainty. The free mobility of the skilled
implies that skilled workers must receive the same utility in all cities within a region where
0 with complementary slackness.
uH
Hc;t > 0. For all c 2 r, uH
r;t and Hc;t
c;t
The spatial equilibrium is described by the distribution of skilled agents across cities
H
that satis…es this indi¤erence condition as well as the labor market clearing condition
R cc;t
r
Hc;t dc = Hr .
cr 1
When skilled agents choose their location for period t, each city c is characterized by
eight pre-determined characteristics: its time-invariant endowment of unskilled labor Lc and
land Tc ; its stock of pre-existing …rms Nc;t 1 and amenities Gc;t 1 ; and its productivity in
entrepreneurship c;t , production Ac;t , amenities c;t and construction c;t .
The mobility of the skilled represents both a movement of population and a movement
of potential employers, since the skilled will start the …rms that employ the unskilled. The
skilled move in response to the pre-existing health of the economy, re‡ected by productivity
in entrepreneurship and amenities, and by the stock of pre-existing …rms. The skilled will also
enter because of quality-of-life amenities, suggesting the power of climate, as in Silicon Valley,
or historical beauty, as in Amsterdam, to drive the location of innovative entrepreneurs.
Given the joint distribution of these characteristics across cities, the equilibrium sorting
of skilled agents Hc;t yields a stock of …rms described by equation (7). The number of
…rms determines city output by equation (2) and output in turn determines the city’s wages
(eq. 3), housing stock (eq. 13), house prices (eq. 14) and land rents (eq. 15). We refer to
these outcomes, along with pro…ts per entrepreneur, as the pecuniary outcomes. Output
also determines amenities (eq. 11) and unskilled workers’utility (eq. 16). The pro…ts and
the utility of each skilled entrepreneur are determined both by output and directly by the
number of his peers and competitors Hc;t (eq. 17). Solving this system of equations implies
that the skilled entrepreneurs’utility in city c in region r is
uH
c;t

=

1

c;t Nc;t 1 Hr Yt

(Ac;t Lc )

1

1

+

H

"

Tc
c;t

#

c;t

G1c;t

H

1
1

Hc;t

+

H

1

. (18)

We adopt the standard heuristic notion of stability of the spatial equilibrium: an equilibrium is stable if transferring a marginal amount of skilled agents from one city to another
makes the sending city better o¤ and the receiving city worse o¤. Stability in this sense
requires that the centrifugal forces arising from the scarcity of land and unskilled labor are
su¢ cient to o¤set the centripetal forces resulting from spillovers in entrepreneurship and
man-made amenities.
Assumption 1 The budget share of housing ( ) is su¢ ciently high, while the housing supply
elasticity (1=
1), the appeal of amenities to the skilled ( H ), within-city spillovers in the
creation of …rms ( ) and amenities ( ) and productivity gains from …rm creation ( = (
1))
are su¢ ciently low that a stable equilibrium exists:
> (1 +
17

H

).

When this condition is satis…ed, there is a unique stable equilibrium with a positive
number of skilled agents and …rms in every city. Equilibrium sorting in region r is given by
the equilibrium number of skilled people in each city c:
Hc;t =
Hr
R cr
cr

1

c;t Nc;t

1 (Ac;t Lc )

s;t Ns;t 1

(As;t Ls )

1

1

1

1

+

+

1
c;t Gc;t 1

H

(1

+

c;t Tc

H)

H

(1

+

s;t Ts

1
s;t Gs;t 1

H)

H

, (19)
H

ds

The numerator is a function solely of a multiplicative combination of parameters that determine the utility level of the skilled, holding the number of skilled entrepreneurs constant.
The denominator simply averages that combination across cities in the region. A city attracts more than the average amount of talent (Hr =Cr ) if and only if it has more than the
average appeal. Factors that increase utility of the skilled holding the number of skilled
residents constant, i.e., the stock of old …rms, productivity, unskilled labor, land and past
amenities, also increase the number of skilled entrepreneurs that come to the city.

4

Urban Networks with Spatial Symmetry

We begin by deriving closed-form solutions for the fully symmetric case. The economy
consists of R equal-sized regions, each comprising measure Cr of cities. All cities and thus
all regions have the same factor endowments and common productivity shocks. If the initial
endowments of …rms and amenities are also identical, then in the dynamic equilibrium all
cities (and thus all regions) are always identical, with equal shares of skilled entrepreneurs.
Then the aggregate number of …rms is
Nt = Cr RNc;t =

1
t Cr

R1

H

+

Nt 1 ,

(20)

so aggregate output is
1

Yt = Cr RYc;t = At LNt

1

.

(21)

The basic equations of our model then apply directly, without city-speci…c indices, to all
pecuniary variables. Eq. (3) yields wages and eq. (8) pro…ts per entrepreneur; eq. (13) the
aggregate housing stock (ht = Cr Rhc;t ), eq. (14) house prices and eq. (15) land rents; eq.
(11) the aggregate amount of amenities (Gt = Cr RGc;t ). As a result, unskilled workers have
utility
"
#
! L
1
G
1
T
1
t
1
+ L
t
1
Yt
(22)
uLt =
t
L
Cr R
and skilled entrepreneurs have utility
"
1 1
T
H
ut =
t
H

#

t

18

G1t
Cr R

1

!

H

1

Yt

+

H

.

(23)

The spatial structure of the economy a¤ects welfare through two channels. First, amenities generate local externalities within a commuting zone. As a consequence, the smaller
and more fragmented such commuting zones, the less access to man-made amenities each
resident enjoys. The importance of this e¤ect is measured by the share of amenity-generating
consumption in an individual’s budget ( i ). Second, human-capital spillovers in innovation
at the region and the city level determine incomes. Welfare is naturally increasing with
incomes. The relationship between income and welfare is stronger when the output share
that is absorbed by the construction sector ( ) is smaller and when the higher the amenity
spillovers from consumption ( H ) are larger.
The number of …rms, and therefore total output, increases with the number of cities if
and only if + is less than one. This condition determines whether the local ingredients in
new …rm creation (human capital and the stock of old ideas) display increasing or decreasing
returns. When + is greater than one, then there are local increasing returns and more
division leads to less creativity. When + is less than one, then there are locally decreasing
returns, and fragmentation increases creativity. The knife-edge case when + exactly equals
one corresponds to a scenario in which in which a dispersed but linked network perfectly
substitutes for the creativity of an agglomeration of entrepeneurs in a single city (Johansson
and Quigley 2004).
The following proposition formalizes these points.
Proposition 1 Suppose the economy consists of identical cities divided into identical regions.
Fragmentation of the economy into separate idea networks reduces …rm creation (@Nt =@R <
0), output (@Yt =@R < 0), wages (@wt =@R < 0), pro…ts per entrepreneur (@et =@R < 0), the
housing stock (@ht =@R < 0), house prices (@rt =@R < 0), land rents (@ t =@R < 0), and
everyone’s utility (@uit =@R < 0 for i 2 fH; Lg).
Fragmentation of each idea network into separate commuting zones reduces all pecuniary
variables (@xt =@Cr < 0 for x 2 fN; Y; w; e; h; r; g) if and only if + > 1. It reduces
individual i’s utility (@uit =@Cr < 0) if and only if
i

+ (1

+

i)

+

1
1

> 0.

The …rst part of the proposition merely makes the point that idea networks are unambiguously good. There is no downside in a symmetric world to increasing the ‡ow of ideas.
More new …rms are created which means higher incomes, higher amenities and higher welfare levels. Our model of recombinant growth implies that creativity comes from connection,
and so network connections are good (formally, + + > 1). This theoretical result is
consistent with evidence that greater network connectedness is associated with better city
performance in Europe (Capello 2000).
The second part of the proposition notes that the once networks are in place, the advantages of expanding commuting zones are more ambiguous, and depend on whether + > 1.
If …rm creation is primarily determined by local variables, then agglomeration into larger
commuter zones increases new …rm creation and wealth by allowing fruitful matches between
existing …rms and young talent within a single commuting zone. The proposition shows that

19

all of the pecuniary variables, including incomes and housing costs, rise or fall along with
new …rm creation.
Conversely, if region-level spillovers are high enough relative to purely local spillovers
(1
< + < 1), then fragmentation can be bene…cial. Firm creation is liveliest if
entrepreneurs are separated in di¤erent cities with di¤erent local cultures that can pro…t
from interactions within the idea network but develop distinctive ideas that would be lost in
the homogeneity of a single commuting zone.
Empirically, there is evidence suggesting local increasing returns in creativity. Bettencourt, Lobo and Strumsky (2007) show that the logarithm of patenting increases more than
one-for-one with the logarithm of metropolitan area population, because there are more inventors in larger cities. Glaeser (2007) …nds that the self-employment rate is higher in big
cities. Glaeser and Kerr (2009) regress the log of employment in new establishments within
an industrial cluster of a city on the log of population in that city and that cluster. The sum
of the coe¢ cients is greater than one, which also suggests local increasing returns. More
broadly, Meijers and Burger (2010) study city productivity and …nd that interconnected
smaller cities bene…t from network externalities, but that these are insu¢ cient to substitute
fully for the agglomeration economies of a single larger city. If this evidence actually means
that + > 1, then the model suggests the even within urban networks, further integration
into common commuting zones will speed new …rm creation and increase average incomes.
If greater integration does correspond to greater creativity, then it surely increases welfare as well. However, the …nal part of Proposition 1 reminds us that the converse is not
necessarily true, because e¢ ciency in production does not coincide with optimality. Amenities also matter. The residents of a more connected commuting zone get to enjoy the bene…ts
of all the amenities within the area. Anyone living in greater Paris can visit the Louvre on
the weekend. An additional cost of fragmentation is that individuals are prevented from
enjoying man-made amenities that spillover within a city, but not outside the commuting
range.
This additional source of local spillovers unambiguously favors larger commuting zones.
It implies that welfare may decline with fragmentation even as output rises. This ranking
reversal is especially likely when amenities are more important (higher H ); when greater
…rm creation raises income less (higher ); when housing has a higher income share ( ) and
more rigid supply (higher ), so income gains accrue less to consumers and more to the
housing sector; and when amenities are more persistent (lower ), so they react less to a
decline in income.
A …nal implication of our result is that high- and low-skill workers may have opposite
preferences over the separation of commuting zones, because they have di¤erent tastes for
amenities. High-skill workers may bene…t from larger commuting zones, even if the reduce
incomes, because amenities also go up. They are willing to forgo income to live in a consumer
city. Low-skill workers, who care relatively more about their wages, however, may oppose
amenity-enhancing integration if local spillovers in entrepreneurship are low enough that
integration lowers incomes.
Proposition 1 presents the consequences of improvements in information technology and
transportation technology that make idea exchange and commuting possible over greater
distances. We now ask a di¤erent question: when or whether it would be preferable to
concentrate people, …rms and amenities in a smaller, denser city relative to leaving them in
20

a more far-‡ung ideas network. This is exactly the public policy question that countries like
China face when they are deciding between expanding a single mega-city, like Shanghai, or
building a second urban center that will be connected to the mega-city by tight transportation
and communication linkages. In a European context, where networks are already the norm,
the question is whether to replace the network with a single large city.
This question is slightly di¤erent from the question of simply expanding a commuting
zone, discussed above, because we assume that there are congestion costs from expanding
the city. In our model, the single city will have less land than the network and that will
mean higher housing prices. In the real world, the larger city could indeed sprawl further,
which would ease pressure on housing prices, but there would also be costs from congestion
in transportation, which we do not model.
Proposition 2 Suppose the economy consists of identical cities divided into identical regions. Concentrating people, …rms and man-made amenities within an idea-sharing region
into denser commuting zones with less land (such that @ ln T =@ ln Cr = 1) increases …rm
creation, output, wages and pro…ts per entrepreneur (dxt =dCr jT /Cr < 0 for x 2 fN; Y; w; eg)
if and only if + > 1. It increases individual i’s utility (duit =dCr jT /Cr < 0) if and only if
i

+ (1

+

i)

+

1
1

> 0.

The proposition’s requirement that @ ln T =@ ln Cr = 1 simply means that the land availability scales down with the number of cities. So as the population as consolidated in ten
percent fewer commuting zones, it must adapt itself to live on ten percent less land.
The proposition shows that the condition for generating positive changes in income and
…rm creation from consolidation into fewer cities with less land is the same as the condition
for generating positive changes in income and …rm creation from consolidation into fewer
cities with the same amount of land, given in Proposition 1. This should not be surprising,
for land plays no role in our production process. More density might be unpleasant, but it
will not reduce productivity following the assumptions of our model.
The condition for improving utility, however, is di¤erent and more stringent when density
is increased as a result of consolidation. Improvements in commuting technology raise welfare
if, but not only if, they raise output. Instead, increases in density may raise output yet lower
welfare, just as they still can lower output but increase welfare. Intuitively, changes in density
have not one but two e¤ects independent of income. On the positive side, they still enable
greater access to amenities. On the negative side, however, they reduce the availability of
land and thereby drive up house prices. This downside is greater the larger the budget share
of housing ( ) and the lower the housing supply elasticity (the higher ).
Accordingly, the larger the value of
the more likely it becomes that density decreases
welfare even though it raises output. This ranking reversal is especially likely when greater
…rm creation raises income less (higher ) and when amenities are less important (low H )
and more persistent (lower ), so they react less to an increase in income.
This result suggests that urban networks might be optimal in the Netherlands, while
bigger cities might be optimal in Texas. The Netherlands has signi…cant land use controls
which limit the elasticity of housing supply. Texas does not. Consequently, it is relatively
easy for Houston to expand its housing stock, even within a given geographic footprint,
21

which is much harder in Amsterdam. According to this view, the reliance on networks in
Europe is a natural means of adapting to the constraints that history and geography place
on the growth of that continent’s older cities.
Incidentally, it is not automatic that consolidation will lead to higher housing costs
or less housing production. It is possible that consolidation will lower productivity by so
much that housing costs and land rents will drop (@ ln rt =@ ln Cr + @ ln rt =@ ln T > 0 if
and only if + + < 2). Conversely, if incomes increase, not only do house prices
increase: if the rise in output and the housing supply elasticity are high enough, housing
production may also rise (@ ln ht =@ ln Cr +@ ln ht =@ ln T < 0 if and only if the supply elasticity
is 1=
1>(
1) = ( +
1) > 0).
We can also consider the impact of consolidating the population into fewer regions with
less land. In this case, we assume that land per city is constant (so T = Cr RTc for given
Tc ), but that the size of the regions shrink as the number of regions shrink. Conversely, in
this experiment a decline in density is equivalent to considering the creation of a new region,
not linked to the old, but with new land. Perhaps the most natural interpretation of these
results is that they capture the potential bene…ts of expanding the frontier of an economy
into previously empty space that is distant from the original populations.
Corollary 1 Suppose the economy consists of identical cities divided into identical regions.
Concentrating people, …rms and man-made amenities into denser regions with greater idea
sharing but less land (@ ln T =@ ln R = 1) increases …rm creation, output, wages and pro…ts
per entrepreneur, house prices and land rents (dxt =dRjT /R < 0 for x 2 fN; Y; w; e; r; g) .
It increases individual i’s utility (duit =dRjT /R < 0) if and only if
i

+ (1

+

i)

+ +

1
1

> 0.

As in Proposition 1, more populous regions always lead to more productivity and higher
incomes. As in Proposition 2, increasing density has costs that technological progress does
not. While the e¤ects on …rm creation, incomes and amenities are unchanged, increasing
density now pushes house prices up, and this can lead to a reduction in utility. The condition
for consolidation at the region level weighs the bene…ts of greater connections against the
loss of physical space.
Again, whether this loss translates in a reduction in the supply of housing depends
on the elasticity of housing supply. The increase in income could be large enough that
a denser region builds up so much that the housing stock increases (if the elasticity is
1=
1 > (
1) = ( + +
1)). More generally, density is again more likely to be
desirable if the supply of housing is elastic or if housing is a small share in total consumption.
If there are local increasing returns to new …rm creation, then denser regions create a horse
race between two positive forces and a negative one: density raises incomes and amenities,
but it makes housing scarcer.
In the case of denser commuting zones or denser regions, the skilled and the unskilled
could have opposite preferences. The skilled would typically rather have greater density,
more entrepreneurship and more amenities at the cost of smaller and more expensive houses.
The unskilled would prefer fewer amenities but cheaper real estate in a less dense economy
with lower idea spillovers.
22

4.1

Urban Networks in the Long Run

We now turn to the dynamics of this system of cities. Again, our focus will be on the
connection over cities into networks of ideas and larger commuting zones. With complete
symmetry, the growth path of the economy is characterized exactly by a log-linear …rst-order
vector autoregression for the number for …rms and the amount of amenities (ln Nt and ln Gt ).
If < 1, this stochastic process is stationary. Denote the steady-state value of each
variable by x = exp (E ln xt ). In the steady state, the number of …rms is
N=

Cr1

R1

H

1

+

1

,

(24)

so aggregate output and the aggregate amount of amenities are respectively
Y = ALN

1
1

and G =

1

Y.

(25)

All other pecuniary variables follow from our basic equations: wages (eq. 3) and pro…ts per
entrepreneur (eq. 8); the aggregate housing stock (eq. 13), house prices (eq. 14) and land
rents (eq. 15). All these variables are monotonically increasing in the number of …rms.
Naturally, they depend directly on other factors as well, but they do not depend directly on
the number of cities or regions.
Aggregate amenities depend only on aggregate output and a productivity shock. However, the e¤ective enjoyment of amenities decreases directly with the number of commuting
zones, because amenity spillovers operate through a commuting zone. As a result, in the
steady state unskilled workers have utility
"
#
! L
1
T
11
L
Y1 + L
(26)
u =
L
Cr R
and skilled entrepreneurs have utility
"
1
1
uH =
H

T

#

1

Cr R

!

H

Y1

+

H

.

(27)

We can now state our …rst proposition about urban dynamics.
Proposition 3 If the economy consists of identical cities divided into identical regions, its
growth path converges to a steady state if and only if < 1.
Consolidation into larger idea networks has larger positive e¤ects on all outcomes in the
steady state than in the short run (@ x=@R < @xt =@R < 0 for x 2 N; Y; w; e; h; r; ; uL ; uH ).
If + > 1, so does consolidation of each idea network into larger commuting zones ( + >
1 ) @ x=@Cr < @xt =@Cr < 0 for x 2 N; Y; w; e; h; r; ; uL ; uH ).
If instead + < 1, consolidation of each idea network into larger commuting zones
has larger negative e¤ects on all pecuniary variables in the steady state than in the short
run ( + < 1 ) @ x=@Cr > @xt =@Cr > 0 for x 2 fN; Y; w; e; h; r; g). Then there is a
non-empty range of gains from variety such that consolidation into larger commuting zones
increases individual utility in the short run and decreases it in the steady state (@uit =@Cr <
23

0 < @ ui =@Cr , 2 ( is ; is )). When gains from variety are higher, consolidation into larger
commuting zones decreases individual utility in the steady state more than it does in the short
run (@ ui =@Cr > @uit =@Cr > 0 , < is ). When gains from variety are lower, consolidation
into larger commuting zones increases individual utility in the steady state less than it does
in the short run (@uit =@Cr < @ ui =@Cr < 0 , > il ). The range of gains from variety
that generate such a preference reversal expands when amenities have greater persistence
i
i
i
(@ ( is
s ) =@ < 0), when housing has greater supply elasticity (@ ( s
s ) =@ < 0) and
i
i
a lower budget share (@ ( s
s ) =@ < 0), and when human capital generates lower local
i
spillovers (@ ( is
)
=@
<
0).
s
An economy of identical …rms in identical regions will converge to a steady state as long
as < 1. Otherwise increasing returns are so strong that the growth is perpetual. Larger
idea networks are always good for …rm creation and welfare in both the short run and in
steady state. The e¤ects are magni…ed in the steady state, relative to the short run, because
changes in …rm creation accumulate over time. The changes in the pecuniary variables build
on accumulating new …rm creation and gradually grow to their steady-state size.
This result may be signi…cant when considering the evaluation of investments that expand
urban networks. The proposition suggests that the full e¤ects of these investments will
appear only after a long period of time. This suggests that cost-bene…t analysis of network
formation needs to internalize longer-term impacts on the growth of the economy.
The impact of larger commuting zones on the number of new …rms and the other pecuniary …rms remains ambiguous, but the sign of the e¤ect depends on exactly the same
condition in the long run and the short run. If + > 1, so that local variables display
increasing returns, then larger commuting zones increase new …rm creation in the short run
and the long run, and all other pecuniary variables follow the same rule. If + < 1, then
larger commuting zones reduce new …rm creation and incomes, and do so more in the long
run than in the short run. Just as in the case of larger idea networks, larger commuting
zones have stronger e¤ects on output in the long run than in the short run, although these
e¤ects can be either positive or negative.
Moreover, it is possible in the long run, as well as in the short run, for consolidation to
lower income levels and still raise welfare, because larger metropolitan areas expand the range
of amenity spillovers. It is also possible to see a reversal of fortune such that consolidation
increases welfare in the short run by increasing the e¤ective level of amenities, but reduces
welfare in the long run by reducing new …rm formation: formally, that
@ ln uit
= (1
@ ln Cr

+

i)

1
i

1
<

<0
@ ln ui
= (1
@ ln Cr

+

i)

1
(1

)(

1)

i.

(28)

Such reversals can only occur when entrepreneurship spillovers are mostly regional rather
than local and as a consequence fragmentation increases …rm creation ( + < 1). In the
short run amenities are largely predetermined, so lower fragmentation is attractive because it
allows wider enjoyment of existing amenities. In the long run, however, not only does the cost
of reduced …rm creation increases by a factor 1= (1
) as lower creativity is compounded.
The ensuing slowdown in income growth also translates into lower levels of amenities because
24

amenities are generated with income, and their income elasticity is higher in the long run
than in the short run due to their persistence ( < 1).
This reversal occurs when love of variety occupies a middle range. If is too high, then
the pecuniary e¤ects of new …rm creation become modest and the amenity e¤ect will always
dominate. At the extreme, as the overall production function becomes close to linear in
output across …rms, new …rms would have no value at all, and expanding the city size would
always be bene…cial because of the increased availability of amenities. If is too close to one,
then the pecuniary e¤ects of new …rm creation become extremely strong, and the welfare
consequences of consolidation will depend completely on the impact on new …rm creation,
which always has the same sign in the short and long run. But when occupies a middle
ground, then it is possible that access to amenities matters most in the short run, but the
pecuniary e¤ect dominates in the long run, leading to a preference reversal.
i
The comparative statics on the size of the interval is
s can be interpreted as comparative statics on the likelihood of a welfare reversal occurring. For example, the comparative
statics on amenity persistence can be interpreted as suggesting that a reversal is more likely
when amenities persist longer over time. More persistent amenities make the early welfare
gains from consolidation stronger because of the legacy of past amenities. These amenities
will eventually decrease because of the lower level of …rm creation after consolidation. A
lower housing supply elasticity or a larger budget share of housing make reversals less likely
because more of the income losses from consolidation are absorbed by lower housing prices.
Likewise, greater human-capital spillovers imply smaller income losses from consolidation.
The range ( is ; is ) depends on an individual’s preferences and shifts down as amenities
become more important (@ is =@ i < @ is =@ i < 0). As a result, both groups may experience a preference reversal, or either group alone might. Yet, preference reversals by the
skilled always bring them into closer alignment with the unskilled, if initially the skilled like
consolidation but later come to dislike it. Preference reversals by the unskilled are more
likely to break the alignment, since the unskilled will move from preferring consolidation,
like the skilled, to disliking consolidation. This result suggests that short-sightedness by
unskilled workers may be a thornier political problem. Consensus-building politicians would
have an incentive to dispel myopic reasoning by the skilled in order to reach a result that is
in everyone’s long-run interest. Conversely, they may have a perverse incentive to cultivate
myopia in the unskilled so they support a consolidation that brings them short-run gains
but long-run losses.
We now return to increases in density, just as in Proposition 2 and Corollary 1, instead
of improvements in technology. This generates the scope for a di¤erent preference reversal,
where densi…cation is unattractive in the short run but attractive in the long run. As before,
we begin with the trade-o¤ between an idea network and a mega city by examining the
e¤ects of consolidating the population of an idea network into fewer, denser cities with less
land.
Proposition 4 Suppose the economy consists of identical cities divided into identical regions
and that < 1.
If > 1
, consolidation of each idea network into denser commuting zones has larger
positive e¤ects on all pecuniary variables in the steady state than in the short run ( + >
1 ) dx=dCr jT /Cr < dxt =dCr jT /Cr < 0 for x 2 fN; Y; w; e; h; r; g). Then if and only if
25

<
there is a non-empty range of gains from variety such that consolidation into denser
commuting zones reduces individual utility in the short run and increases it in the steady state
(duit =dCr jT /Cr > 0 > dui =dCr jT /Cr , 2 id+ ; id+ ). When gains from variety are higher,
consolidation into denser commuting zones increases individual utility in the steady state
more than it does in the short run (dui =dCr jT /Cr < duit =dCr jT /Cr < 0 , < id+ ). When
gains from variety are lower, consolidation into denser commuting zones decreases individual
utility in the steady state less than it does in the short run (duit =dCr jT /Cr > dui =dCr jT /Cr >
0 , > id+ ). The range of gains from variety that generate such a preference reversal
i
expands when amenities have greater persistence (@ id+
< 0) and when local
d+ =@
i
i
i
i
spillovers are higher (@ d+
d+
d+ =@ > @
d+ =@ > 0).
If instead < 1
, consolidation of each idea network into denser commuting zones
has larger negative e¤ects on all pecuniary variables in the steady state than in the short
run ( + < 1 ) dx=dCr jT /Cr > dxt =dCr jT /Cr > 0 for x 2 fN; Y; w; e; h; r; g). Then if
and only if i >
there is a non-empty range of gains from variety such that consolidation
into denser commuting zones increases individual utility in the short run and decreases it in
the steady state (duit =dCr jT /Cr < 0 < dui =dCr jT /Cr , 2 id ; id ). When gains from
variety are higher, consolidation into denser commuting zones decreases individual utility in
the steady state more than it does in the short run (dui =dCr jT /Cr > duit =dCr jT /Cr > 0 ,
< id ). When gains from variety are lower, consolidation into denser commuting zones
increases individual utility in the steady state less than it does in the short run (duit jT /Cr <
dui =dCr jT /Cr < 0 ,
> id ). The range of gains from variety that generate such a
i
=@ < 0)
preference reversal expands when amenities have greater persistence (@ id
d
i
i
=@ < 0).
and when human capital generates lower local spillovers (@ d
d
i

Proposition 4 again shows that the condition for consolidation into denser cities to increase wealth and new …rm creation is the same in the long run as it is in the short run. As
in Proposition 3, the long-run e¤ects on all pecuniary variables are larger than the short-run
e¤ects because new …rm creation accumulates over time. Also as in Proposition 3, it is
possible to have a preference reversal, such that people initially prefer densi…cation (or not)
but eventually prefer the opposite.
In the case where + > 1, densi…cation increase incomes, but as in Proposition 2,
welfare may go down because the cost of housing increases. This can only happen if welfare
is more responsive to higher housing costs than to greater access to amenities ( > i ).
However, it is possible that even if higher housing costs overwhelm the bene…ts of density
in the short run, they no longer do so in the long run, when output rises much more and
translates into even greater man-made amenities: formally, that
@ ln uit
@ ln uit
+
=
@ ln Cr
@ ln T

i

>

(1

+

i)

@ ln ui
@ ln ui
+
=
@ ln Cr
@ ln T

+

1
1
i

>0
(1

+

i)

(1

+
)(

1
1)

. (29)

As in Proposition 3, preference reversals are possible when gains from variety are intermediate, so the short-run increase in …rm creation does not raise income enough to o¤set
the welfare loss from higher housing costs, but the long-run increase does. The range of
returns to diversity consistent with such a preference reversal is higher when density induces
26

a larger increase in …rm creation because local spillovers in …rm creation are stronger; and
when amenities are more persistent, so the wedge between the long-run and short-run welfare
impacts of a change in incomes is larger.
In this case, preference reversals for a single group display the opposite pattern as in
Proposition 3. The less skilled spend relatively more on housing and less on amenities
than the skilled. Thus, their preference reversal tends to generate consensus: initially they
dislike density and the ensuing increase in house prices, but eventually they recognize its
overwhelming productivity bene…ts. Conversely, when the skilled have a preference reversal
of this sort, alignment across groups may be broken: in the short run everyone prefers less
density, but in the long run the skilled alone …nd density attractive.
The second part of Proposition 4 shows that when density reduces productivity ( + < 1)
preference reversals are analogous to the case of larger commuting zones. As in Proposition
2, the bene…t of greater access to amenities might o¤set the cost of both income losses and
the loss of real estate (provided that i > ). Just as in Proposition 3, this might be true
in the short run but not in the long run, when any income losses are magni…ed. Given that
densi…cation entails a reduced endowment of land, if it reduces productivity it is naturally
less likely that it should prove attractive in the short run, and conversely more attractive
that it should be welfare-reducing in the long run.
A similar set of results occur when we consider densi…cation across rather than within
regions.
Corollary 2 Suppose the economy consists of identical cities divided into identical regions
and that < 1. If and only if i <
there is a non-empty range of gains from variety such
that crowding into denser regions reduces individual utility in the short run and increases
it in the steady state (duit =dRjT /R > 0 > dui =dRjT /R , 2 ( iD ; iD )). When gains from
variety are higher, crowding into denser regions increases individual utility in the steady state
more than it does in the short run (dui =dRjT /R < duit =dRjT /R < 0 , < iD ). When gains
from variety are lower, crowding into denser regions decreases individual utility in the steady
state less than it does in the short run (duit =dRjT /R > dui =dRjT /R > 0 , > iD ). The
range of gains from variety that generate such a preference reversal expands when amenities
i
< 0) and when innovation spillovers are higher
have greater persistence (@ ( iD
D ) =@
i
i
i
i
i
i
(@ ( D
D ) =@ > @ ( D
D ) =@ = @ ( D
D ) =@ > 0).
As in Corollary 1, denser regions generate higher output and o¤er greater access to
amenities at the cost of a loss of land. Again, if real estate a¤ects welfare more than access
to amenities (
> i ) there is a range of returns to variety that generate a preference
reversal. When gains from variety are intermediate, long-run income gains from denser
idea networks overcome greater scarcity of land in the steady state even though they are
insu¢ cient to do so in the short run.
The range is larger than in Proposition 4 because it is increasing in innovation spillovers,
and a denser idea network enables more human-capital spillovers than a denser commuting
zone. For the same reason, in this case only one type of preference reversal is possible: shortterm losses followed by longer-term gains. Density unambiguously increases …rm creation
and output when densi…cation occurs throughout the network and reaps all gains from idea
exchange, rather than the more limited gains from consolidation within a commuting zone
27

(recombinant growth implies that + + > 1). When densi…cation can only cause new
…rm formation to rise, then the long run can only be better than the short run.

4.2

Urban Networks and Balanced Growth

While we will not consider the case of explosive growth, we can address the knife-edge case
where = 1 and the economy has a balanced growth path. Then the mean growth rate of
the aggregate number of …rms is
E (ln Nt

ln Nt 1 ) = ( + ) (ln H

ln R)

ln Cr + E ln

t

for all t.

(30)

The mean growth rate of aggregate output, wages, pro…ts per entrepreneur, land rents and
aggregate amenities is 1= (
1) times that of …rms. The mean growth rate of the aggregate
housing stock is (1
)=(
1) times that of …rms and the mean growth rate of house
prices is = (
1) times that of …rms. The mean growth rate of utility is
E ln uit

ln uit

1

=

1

+
1

i

E (ln Nt

ln Nt 1 ) for i 2 fH; Lg .

(31)

These equations illustrate that along a balanced growth path, fragmentation reduces the
mean growth rate. The ambiguous earlier results disappear in this case, because a balanced
growth rate can only occur when = 1, which also guarantees that consolidation is bene…cial
in the earlier cases as well. When the impact of past local ideas is strong enough to generate
balanced growth, then they are also strong enough to ensure that larger networks and larger
commuting zones are also bene…cial.
Naturally, it is quite possible to imagine di¤erent idea generation processes that generate
balanced growth without strong agglomeration economies at the city level. For example, if
all past idea were shared within the entire idea network, not just a single city, then it would
be possible to have balanced growth with much weaker local agglomeration e¤ects. In that
case, it would be possible for consolidation to reduce the growth rate.
Proposition 5 Suppose the economy consists of identical cities divided into identical regions
and that …rm creation is di¤erence stationary ( = 1). Then the economy converges to a
balanced path of endogenous growth.
The mean growth rate of each variable is higher when the economy is less fragmented into
separate idea-sharing networks and when these are less fragmented into separate commuting
zones. The separation of idea-sharing networks is more harmful than that of commuting
zones (@E ln (Nt =Nt 1 ) =@R < @E ln (Nt =Nt 1 ) =@Cr < 0).
A balanced growth path exists only in the knife-edge case of a di¤erence-stationary
process of …rm creation. Such a process implies that …rms are perfectly persistent at the
local level. This immediately implies that any fragmentation is bad in the short run and even
worse in the long run. Fragmentation reduces steady-state growth relative to the case of a
single megalopolis, which can better combine the stock of human capital with the aggregate
stock of persistent …rms.
This result emphasizes, again, that agglomerations need to be judged for their longrun e¤ects as well as their short-run e¤ects. While the short-run costs of connecting a
28

metropolis or a network may not be o¤set by the short-run bene…ts, if those connections
lead to a higher growth rate, then eventually the bene…ts will o¤set the costs. The decision
to invest in connections will then depend on the discount rate.

5

Urban Networks and Regional Heterogeneity

We now relax the assumption of complete symmetry across regions. We now assume that
all cities in region r have the same endowments of factors, …rms and amenities and the same
productivity levels, but that these endowments and productivities can di¤er across regions.
This assumption is akin to assuming that Europe is made up of di¤erent urban networks
and those networks might be very di¤erent, but within each network, every city is the same.
Given this symmetry, the total number of …rms in each region r is
Nr;t = Cr Nc;t = Cr1

Hr +

r;t Nr;t 1 .

(32)

The evolution of the number of …rms in each region then follows a logarithmic …rst-order
autoregressive process independent of conditions in all other regions. The simultaneous but
disjoint process of …rm creation in each region drives aggregate output, which equals
Yt =

(

R
X

1

(Ar;t Lr )

1

Nr;t

r=1

)

1

.

(33)

The basic equations of our model then apply directly, with region- instead of city-speci…c
indices, to all pecuniary variables. Eq. (2) yields total regional output (Yr;t = Cr Yc;t ),
eq. (3) wages, eq. (8) pro…ts per entrepreneur; eq. (13) the region’s total housing stock
(hr;t = Cr hc;t ), eq. (14) house prices and eq. (15) land rents; eq. (11) total amenities in the
region (Gr;t = Cr Gc;t ). As a result, in region r unskilled workers have utility
"
#
! L
1
G
1
T
1
r;t
r
r;t 1
1
+ L
Yr;t
(34)
uLr;t =
c;t
Lr
Cr
and skilled entrepreneurs have utility
"
1 1
Tr
H
ur;t =
c;t
Hr

#

r;t

G1r;t
Cr

1

!

H

1

Yr;t

+

H

.

(35)

Gains from trade imply that …rm creation in one region entails positive spillovers for all
its trading partners:
@ ln Yr;t
1
Ys;t
=
> 0 for all s 6= r.
(36)
@ ln Ns;t
(
1) Yt
From the point of view of one region, these spillovers are externalities, which raise the
possibility of coordination failures. It is certainly possible that one region might pursue
policies that increase utility within that region at the expense of …rm creation, perhaps by
reducing the density of cities. These policies would harm the rest of the country.
29

Proposition 6 Suppose the economy consists of R regions, each divided into measure Cr of
identical cities.
If + > 1 and i <
there is a non-empty range of gains from variety such that if
a region represents a su¢ ciently small share of aggregate output then its residents’ utility
decreases if commuting zones become denser in the region but increases if commuting zones
become denser in all regions (Yr;t =Yt < y^di + , @ ln uir;t =@ ln Cr + @ ln uir;t =@ ln Tr > 0 >
PR
i
i
s=1 @ ln ur;t =@ ln Cs + @ ln ur;t =@ ln Tr ). The threshold is lower when amenities are more
i
important (@ y^d+ =@ i < 0) and less persistent (@ y^di + =@ < 0), housing has a higher supply
elasticity (@ y^di + =@ > 0) and a lower budget share (@ y^di + =@ > 0), and local spillovers or
gains from variety are greater (@ y^di + =@ = @ y^di + =@ < 0 < @ y^di + =@ ).
If + < 1 there is a non-empty range of gains from variety such that if a region
represents a su¢ ciently small share of aggregate output then its residents’ utility decreases
if commuting zones become smaller in the region
if they become smaller in all
PRbut increases
i
i
regions (Yr;t =Yt < y^s , @ ln ur;t =@ ln Cr < 0 < s=1 @ ln ur;t =@ ln Cs ). The threshold is lower
when amenities are less important (@ y^s =@ i > 0) and less persistent (@ y^s =@ < 0), housing
has a higher supply elasticity (@ y^s =@ > 0) and a lower budget share (@ y^s =@ > 0), gains from
variety are greater (@ y^s =@ > 0) and local spillovers are smaller (@ y^s =@ = @ y^s =@ > 0).
It + < 1 and i >
there is a non-empty range of gains from variety such
that if a region represents a su¢ ciently small share of aggregate output then its residents’
utility increases if commuting zones become denser in the region but decreases if they become denser in all regions (Yr;t =Yt < y^d , @ ln uir;t =@ ln Cr + @ ln uir;t =@ ln Tr < 0 <
PR
i
i
s=1 @ ln ur;t =@ ln Cs + @ ln ur;t =@ ln Tr ). The threshold is lower when amenities are less important (@ y^d =@ i > 0) and less persistent (@ y^d =@ < 0), housing has a lower supply
elasticity (@ y^d =@ < 0) and a higher budget share (@ y^d =@ < 0), gains from variety are
greater (@ y^d =@ > 0) and local spillovers are smaller (@ y^d =@ = @ y^d =@ > 0).
The proposition details three possibilities in which there can be con‡ict between local
bene…ts and national bene…ts. In the …rst part of the proposition, we assume that + > 1,
which means that …rm creation increases as cities become denser. In this case, there is a
positive externality from denser cities and there will be a potential con‡ict if the density
reduces utility within the region.
As in Proposition 2, the condition i <
ensures that housing supply is su¢ ciently
important and su¢ ciently inelastic that it is possible that the increased land made available
by expanding the number of cities o¤sets the losses generated by a reduction in new …rm
formation and the losses from reductions in amenity spillovers, which is captured by i . Yet
that extra land provides no bene…t for the other regions of the country, and collectively they
may lose if all regions reduce density. Formally, the condition is
@ ln uir;t @ ln uir;t
+
=
@ ln Cr
@ ln Tr
>0>

i

(1

+

i

)

R
X
@ ln uir;t
s=1

+
(

@ ln uir;t
+
=
@ ln Cs
@ ln Tr

1

1+

1)
i

(1

Yr;t
Yt
+

i

)

+

1
1

. (37)

As before, we have assumed that the change in the amount of available land is proportional to the change in the number of cities (@ ln Tr =@ ln Cr = 1). The …rst expression in the
30

condition is the change in utility within a network from increasing the number of cities and
the amount of land. The third term, which re‡ects …rm creation, is negative since + < 1.
The overall derivative can be positive only if
i is positive and large enough to o¤set the
last term, which means that the gains from extra land minus the losses from amenity spillover
reductions are large enough to o¤set the lost income. Crucially, the change in income from
an increase in …rm creation re‡ects both a direct e¤ect (
1) and a general-equilibrium
e¤ect that is proportional to the size of region r relative to the whole economy (Yr;t =Yt ).
The last expression in the condition re‡ects the net impact on national utility if all regions
increase their number of cities in the same proportion. The direct e¤ect of increasing land
availability but reducing access to amenities is unchanged. The third term, which again
re‡ects the welfare loss from reduced new …rm formation, is always larger in magnitude and
hence more negative than the comparable term on the …rst line. This increase in magnitude
re‡ects the internalization of gains from variety across regions.
The increase in magnitude also makes it possible for densi…cation to be bad at the region
level but good at the national level. Once again, this can occur only if gains from variety
are neither so small that increasing density in the whole economy fails to compensate the
loss of land, nor so large that the direct income gain from greater density dominates even
before the general-equilibrium bene…ts are taken into account. For intermediate gains from
variety, some regions may be tempted to free-ride on the innovation provided by the others,
as in Epifani and Gancia (2009).
This result may well re‡ect real-world conditions. Many areas in the developing world
limit densi…cation, which plausibly causes an increase in the total number of urban areas.
Land use restrictions may well restrict the growth of Greater London, which in turn increases
the number of people living elsewhere in England. Land use restrictions in Silicon Valley
similarly push some would-be entrepreneurs to locate elsewhere. These restrictions are often
locally popular, which is presumably why they are so common. Yet it may well be that
restricting the densi…cation of London and Silicon Valley hurts the overall economies of the
United Kingdom and the United States.
Naturally, the temptation to free-ride is greater for smaller regions. A region with a
lower share of output has less weight in global productivity. If its rate of innovation declines,
aggregate income is going to be less a¤ected. This perhaps explains why larger cities, like
New York, have more aggressively tried to allow increase in density despite neighborhood
opposition to building. In larger regions, the region itself bene…ts internalizes more of its
own productivity gains— while all regions fully internalize changes to land availability and
amenities.
The comparative statics follow intuitively from this tug of war. When output gains are
large, internalizing a small share of the global economy is enough to dispel coordination
failure. Hence, free-riding is less of a problem when local spillovers and gains from variety
are large. Greater love of amenities has the same e¤ect, both because it makes density itself
more attractive, and because it makes individuals keener on raising output, as does lower
persistence of amenities. Conversely, a greater share of housing and a lower elasticity of
housing supply both make density locally costlier and reduce the utility value of income
gains, a greater fraction of which is absorbed by the housing sector. In that case, free-riding
becomes more tempting even for larger regions.
The second part of Proposition 6 examines the reverse case, where densi…cation is bad
31

for new …rm creation because + < 1. In this case, densi…cation can be attractive only
because it increases the level of amenities. We …rst consider the case of shrinking the size of
commuting zones, holding total land constant. We did not consider that case when + > 1
because in that case larger commuting zones are good for both productivity and amenities
and have no impact on land availability, so they are always good for both region and nation.
But when + < 1, smaller commuting zones can be good because there is more
entrepreneurship. However, smaller commuting zones have lower access to amenities. In this
case, it is possible to have local utility gains from larger cities, and global utility losses. If
cities expand primarily because of amenities and this creates a loss in productivity, then the
country as a whole su¤ers as a result.
Perhaps the closest real-world counterpart to this case occurs when large capital cities
grow as places of consumption, rather than production. This may have been true of London
or Paris in particular epochs and it may be true in some developing world countries today.
If these large cities reduce productivity, even as they raise their own residents’welfare, then
they are harming the rest of the country.
In this case, free riding is a greater problem when amenities are more important, because
now increased access to amenities rather than increased availability of land is the reason why
the region’s preferences depart from the nation’s. Instead, the role of persistence in amenities
and of the housing parameters remains the same because they are identically re‡ected in the
welfare value of changes in income. Again, free riding is more easily solved when income
changes are larger, namely when gains from variety are larger but, in this case, when local
spillovers are smaller and so the disadvantages of concentration are starkest.
The …nal part of Proposition 6 discusses densi…cation when + < 1. In this case,
the increase in amenities needs to o¤set both the loss in productivity and the loss in land.
Again, if these amenity bene…ts are large enough, it is possible that the network may bene…t
from having fewer commuting zones with less total land and that the nation as a whole may
lose out because of the reduction in …rm formation. Naturally, in this last case a greater
importance of housing makes a preference for income-reducing density more unlikely, and
thus tends to eliminate the incentive to free-ride.
In the long run, if < 1 then ln Nr;t follows a stationary …rst-order autoregressive process
and the number of …rms, amenities and welfare levels converge to their steady-state levels.
A version of Proposition 6 applies again because in the steady state
@ ln uir
= (1
@ ln Cr
while

+

i)

R
X
@ ln uir
= (1
@ ln Cs
s=1

1
(1

)(

+

i)

1+

1)
1
(1

)(

1)

Yr
Yt

i.

i

(38)

(39)

As in Proposition 3, income e¤ects loom larger in the long run because they are ampli…ed
and fully impact on amenity levels.
This magni…cation implies that when a coordination failure exists in the short run, foresight tends to make it disappear. Foresight brings income e¤ects in sharper focus, and makes
changes in access to amenities of the endowment of land less important. Even smaller re-

32

gions, then, are less likely to free ride: formally, the three thresholds y^i are all decreasing in
the magnitude of income changes.
It does not follow, however, that foresight unambiguously reduces the possibility of coordination failures. On the contrary, it can also create free riding where none existed in the
short run. A coordination failure requires not only that a single region should care more
about amenities or real estate than innovation and output, but also that output gains should
be large enough to dominate welfare ‡osses at the aggregate level. If this latter condition
is satis…ed only in the steady state, then coordination failures emerge only in the long run.
Long-run national welfare may rise when density increases in all regions, accelerating innovation and yielding productivity gains. Yet the scarcity of real estate may su¢ ce both to o¤set
the short-run national gains, and to make densi…cation in one’s own region welfare-reducing
at any time horizon.

6

Urban Networks and Urban Heterogeneity

We now introduce heterogeneity and look at the incentives of a small set of cities to combine
into a larger commuting zone or even into a smaller denser city. These incentives re‡ect not
only the direct impact of this consolidation but also the impact that city size will have on
migration to and from the cities. We assume that these cities form a small open economy
whose decisions have no impact on the overall level of output in the system. For simplicity,
we also retain our assumption that the rest of the economy includes no heterogeneity within
regions, so we can refer to the representative city in each region.
Formally, we assume that a full measure Cr of cities in every region r are identical.
This assumption captures the homogeneity of the outside economy that is not considering
consolidation. We focus on a …nite, measure-zero set of atomistic cities in region r that
may di¤er from the representative city. This assumption guarantees that the cities that are
consolidating are small (measure-zero), while allowing them to be di¤erent from the rest of
the economy. As long as these di¤erent cities have a …nite endowment (Lc ; Tc ; Nc;t 1 ; Gc;t 1 ),
they will have no in‡uence on aggregates at the regional level, nor on the global economy.
In period t each city c in region r attracts a number of high-skill entrepreneurs equal to
Hc;t =

Hr
Cr

8"
< CN
r c;t 1
:
Nr;t 1

Cr Lc
Lr

1

#1

+

H

C r Tc
Tr

Cr Gc;t 1
Gr;t 1

(1

)

H

9
=
;

(1

+

H)

.
(40)

The city would attract an even share Hr =Cr of the region’s aggregate amount of talent if
it were exactly as attractive as the representative city. It attracts more or fewer skilled
entrepreneurs depending on their relative attractiveness, which is an increasing function of
their relative endowments. We maintain the assumption that productivity shocks are instead
common to all cities in the region.

33

Firm creation in city c is then
Nc;t =

N
r;t

n
Nc;t

1

h

1

Lc

(1

+

H)

(1 )
Tc Gc;t 1

H

i o

(1

+

H)

,

(41)

where to simplify notation we let N
r;t (which is de…ned in the appendix) denote a composite
of all regional variables, which are independent of conditions in any …nite set of atomistic
cities. Locally, the number of …rms in a city is an increasing function of its endowment of
…rms last period, labor, land, and historic amenities. Again, we see the mutual causality
between employment and population (Hoogstra and van Dijk 2004). Skilled residents are
drawn in by economic potential, which they then create themselves.
City output is determined by eq. (2), wages by eq. (3) and pro…ts by eq. (8); the housing
stock by eq. (13), house prices by eq. (14) and land rents by eq. (15); and city amenities
H
by eq. (11). The spatial equilibrium requires that skilled entrepreneurs’utility uH
c;t = ur;t is
equalized throughout each region. Since we are considering a non-measurable set of cities,
these cities will have no impact on the aggregate welfare of the mobile skilled. However, since
the unskilled are …xed geographically, their welfare will change. Unskilled workers’utility is
(1

uLc;t

=

u
r;t

Tc Gc;t
Lc

)
1

L

n
Nc;t 1 Lc

1

h

(1 )
Tc Gc;t 1

H

i o

1

(1

+

L
+

H)

,

(42)

where again ur;t is independent of local conditions and reported explicitly in the appendix.
Endowments of land, amenities and labor have a direct e¤ect on workers’utility, and also
an indirect e¤ect because they attract more skilled entrepreneurs and make them more
productive. This in‡ux of skilled entrepreneurs will increase wages and amenities, which is
good for the unskilled, but more skilled workers will also increase home prices.
This double-edged impact of the skilled on the unskilled can explain why the unskilled
and politicians that cater to them try to attract the skilled into commercial zones but not into
residential zones. Less skilled urbanites can sometimes support local investments that appeal
to the more skilled, such as local universities or innovation districts, like Boston’s Innovation
Zone. Simultaneously, they can still oppose gentri…cation of higher poverty areas. The
economic energy brought by skilled entrepreneurs bene…ts the poor, while the rich’s demand
for housing space hurts the poor.
We now ask whether any …nite set of cities has a unilateral incentive to unite in a single
larger commuting zone, or even to concentrate in a single denser city at the cost of having a
reduced endowment of land. As opposed to our previous results, in this case, a key element
in assessing consolidation or densi…cation is whether these changes will attract more skilled
entrepreneurs.
A natural benchmark is the case of where the cities in region r that are considering
consolidation are identical to each other and to other cities in the region. As we will show
below, this proves to be the setting that is least favorable to consolidation and most favorable
to an urban network.
Proposition 7 If a …nite set of identical cities form a single wider commuting zone whose
endowment is the sum of their endowments of labor, land and existing …rms and amenities,

34

their average level of amenities always increases. The number of skilled entrepreneurs in the
set of cities rises if and only if
H

+ (1

+

H)

+

1

> 0.

Consolidation creates more …rms, produces more output, expands the housing stock, increases
average wages, housing prices and land rents if and only if
+ (1 +

H)

> 1.

Consolidation increases the welfare of the less skilled if and only if
L

+ (1

+

L)

+ (1 + H )
(1
+

1
H)

> 0.

The …rst condition embeds the three major e¤ects of consolidation on the fate of the
skilled: higher amenities, higher housing prices and a change in the amount of spillovers,
which can be positive or negative depending on +
1. These three forces, and the
…rst condition, also determine whether the skilled would prefer a region that produces a
negligible amount of world output (Yr;t =Yt = 0) to be made up of larger commuting zones.
The skilled are directly attracted by the greater amenities in the larger city (captured by
the term H ). Consolidation can attract more skilled entrepreneurs, even if it reduces the
pro…ts to entrepreneurship, if the positive impact on amenities is su¢ ciently high. But the
skilled will also be more attracted by a large city if local spillovers ( ) and the persistence of
local …rms ( ) are su¢ ciently strong. Higher returns from new varieties and new innovation
(lower ) exacerbate the e¤ect of increases or decreases in the level of spillovers.
The spatial equilibrium implies that if consolidation makes a set of cities more attractive
to entrepreneurs, then su¢ ciently many entrepreneurs will move to the city so that their
utility is equalized to the utility of the skilled elsewhere in the region. Since the set of cities
merging is small, the overall utility of the skilled will not change.
The condition on whether larger commuting zones will increase wages and housing prices
has weakened relative to the earlier condition ( + > 1) found in Proposition 1, which
applied to all region-wide changes. Larger commuting zones mean higher amenity levels, and
this attracts more entrepreneurs to the city if the rest of the region remains fragmented. This
‡ow of entrepreneurs into the larger city raises …rm creation further by a factor H . This
result emphasizes that consumer cities are not just about static welfare gains in consumption
(Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz 2001), but also about the dynamic gains that can result when skilled
entrepreneurs locate in a particular area. The welfare consequences for the unskilled have
a natural split. They bene…t directly from amenities ( L ) and indirectly from any in‡ow of
the skilled, which raises incomes and amenities albeit also housing prices.
We now turn to the impact of consolidation of population into a single city with less
land. As before, the creation of a single mega-city becomes less appealing when the overall
density level rises dramatically.
Proposition 8 If a …nite set of identical cities shrink into a single denser commuting zone
whose endowment is the sum of their endowments of labor and existing …rms and amenities,
35

but whose land area is that of a single city, then average amenities, housing prices and land
rents always increase. The number of skilled entrepreneurs in the set of cities rises if and
only if
+
1
+
(1
+ H ) > 0.
H
Densi…cation creates more …rms, produces more output and increases average wages if and
only if
+ (1
+ H ) > 1.
Densi…cation increases the welfare of the less skilled if and only if
L

+ (1

+

L)

+ (1
(1

+ H) 1
> 0.
+ H)

Densi…cation expands the housing stock if and only if
+ (1

+

H)

1> [

1+

+ (1

)

H] .

The …rst three conditions in Proposition 8 are analogous to those in Proposition 7 immediately above, except that residents now su¤er from greater scarcity of land and thus costlier
housing, which is re‡ected in the additional terms . Land loss makes consolidation into
a single city less appealing, and the reduction in appeal is a function of the elasticity of
housing supply and the importance of housing in the utility function. Again, this result is
consistent with the observation that in places where housing supply is highly inelastic, such
as much of Europe, urban networks are more common than mega-cities.
Higher density means higher housing costs and this also repels entrepreneurs, who also
value cheap housing. Thus, an inelastic housing supply generates three costs of density to
the unskilled. First, as in the case of wider commuting zones, a greater share of any income
gains are absorbed by the housing sector. Second, land scarcity makes house prices rise
even in the absence of income gains. Third, income gains are themselves muted because
the skilled are less keen on moving to an expensive dense city. This combination of forces
can be readily seen in the “a¤ordable housing crises” which have now become the norm in
successful cities, such as London and New York.
Just as abundant amenities can become an economic development strategy, because they
attract skilled entrepreneurs, policies that make it easier to build cheap housing may also
generate economic returns by attracting workers who create …rms. If there are policies that
both increase amenities and reduce housing supply, such as historic preservation districts or
greenbelts, then the impact on entrepreneurship and economic growth becomes a horse race
between the impact on prices and the impact on the welfare of skilled.
The last result in Proposition 8 establishes that, somewhat paradoxically, less land can
mean more housing supply as long as housing supply is su¢ ciently elastic (low ). This
e¤ect can occur only if density leads to an extremely sharp increase in housing demand,
either because of higher amenities or greater productivity.

6.1

Urban Heterogeneity and the Case for Consolidation

We now asses the connection between heterogeneity and the impact of both densi…cation
and consolidation. We continue to characterize the rest of the region by a representative
36

city. We also retain the assumption that all cities considering consolidation have identical
endowments of land, so that a single denser city would simply have the same land endowment
as any one city.
For tractability, we restrict and parametrize the types of heterogeneity within the set
of cities that consider consolidation. We assume that for some fraction of these cities, all
factors other than land move together in lockstep. For the rest of the cities, the three factors
are independently distributed. These assumptions will allow us to characterize the joint
empirical distribution of the endowments of labor, …rms and amenities (Lc ; Nc;t 1 ; Gc;t 1 )
across cities in the network with an index of heterogeneity in factor sizes and an index of
correlation of factor sizes.
To capture the overall variance in factor sizes, we assume a non-degenerate empirical
distribution S^ of shares: aPset of K distinct P
values s^k 2 (0; 1) and associated empirical
K
K
probabilities fk such that
^k = 1=m. We de…ne an empirical
k=1 fk = 1 and
k=1 fk s
distribution S with the same empirical probabilities fk and corresponding values
sk = s^k +

1
m

.

(43)

This distribution is a linear combination of the non-degenerate S^ distribution, and the degenerate distribution that delivers the same amount to each city in the set. The index 2 [0; 1],
which determines the weight on the non-degenerate distribution, becomes our measure of
heterogeneity in endowment
Pm sizes within the set of cities.
We use sF;c
Fc = d=1 Fd to denote each city’s share of the total factor endowment
in the network for Fc 2 fLc ; Nc;t 1 ; Gc;t 1 g. We then assume that the sample of cities is
split between a fraction ! of cities which have shares of each factor that are independent
but identically distributed, with marginal distribution S; and a fraction 1 ! of cities that
have common factor proportions and whose shares sL;c = sN;c = sG;c have distribution S.2
This distribution is a mixture of an independent distribution of the three endowments, and
of a distribution with perfect correlation between the three. The index ! 2 [0; 1], which
determines the weight on the perfectly correlated distribution, serves as our measure of
correlation in cities’endowments across factors.
The overall joint empirical distribution is then described by
Pr (sL;c = si ; sN;c = sj ; sG;c = sk ) = !fi fj fk + 1i=j=k (1

!) fk .

(44)

With these assumptions, we can derive results on the ways in which heterogeneity in‡uences
the decision to create cities out of networks.
Proposition 9 Consider a …nite set of cities with identical land endowments. The distribution of their relative endowments of labor, …rms and amenities is a mixture of a perfectly
correlated distribution, with weight 1 !, and three independent marginal distributions, with
weight !. Each of these distributions is a linear combination of equal shares, with weight
1
, and any unequal distribution of shares, with weight 2 [0; 1].
2

We assume that the network comprises a su¢ ciently large number of cities for the empirical distribution
of the three factor shares to be independent: (1 !) m 8.

37

If forming a single larger or denser city attracts more skilled entrepreneurs; or creates
more …rms, produces greater output and pays higher wages; or provides higher utility to
unskilled workers; or entails a larger housing stock, then it also does so for any 0
and
any ! 0 !.
Our baseline case of identical cities corresponds to = 0. Proposition 9 establishes that
heterogeneity in city size always makes it more likely that a single city should be preferred
to a network of separate commuting zones. Heterogeneity in factor proportions within a city
also makes forming a single city more attractive.
These results re‡ect the gains from trade that occur within larger commuting zone. Just
as allowing trade between two identical countries does little in a standard Heckscher-Ohlin
framework, merging two identical cities doesn’t allow new combinations of past …rms and
unskilled labor. However, if some cities have many workers but few …rms, and others have
many …rms but few workers, then there will be bene…ts from consolidation into a single city.
When the communities are distinct, there is ine¢ ciency because in the …rst set of cities it is
di¢ cult to create new …rms but easy to grow them, while in the latter …rms are easily created
but then cannot reach their optimal size. Workers bene…t from being able to commute to
the places with higher …rm density.
Higher values of ! imply a more frequent mismatch in endowments across cities. Higher
values of exacerbate the size of any existing mismatch, between labor, …rms and amenities
(if ! > 0) and between all of them and the endowment of land, which is distributed uniformly.
Di¤erences in density also make a larger commuting zone desirable: workers and …rms from
denser cities bene…t from access to land in less dense parts of the network. As the size and
the frequency ! of endowment mismatches grow, the network becomes less e¢ cient, and the
city becomes more advantageous.
When = 0 all of the cities have perfectly equal shares of land and every other factor
(then ! is irrelevant). This is exactly the case discussed above, which minimizes the gains
from urban consolidation. When > ! = 0, then the cities di¤er in size, but all the factors
except land move together. In this case, greater heterogeneity makes a network less likely to
be preferred to a larger city, but it does not a¤ect its ranking relative to a denser city.
When ! = 0, the ratio of output in a network of m cities to output in a single denser
city equals
1
"Y;L +"Y;N +"Y;G
X
1
+ s^k
,
(45)
fk
m
m
k=1
where "Y;F is the equilibrium elasticity of output to factor F , taking into account both its
direct e¤ect in production and its indirect e¤ect through the induced in‡ux of skilled entrepreneurs. For any distribution S and any heterogeneity , this ratio is less than one if and
only if the sum of the elasticities is above one, namely if output displays increasing returns to
(Lc ; Nc;t 1 ; Gc;t 1 ). This condition determines whether the network is more productive than
the denser city of not. The same condition with di¤erent elasticities applies to unskilled
workers’welfare.
Increasing returns always make a single denser city better than the network. A rise
in mitigates this preference by making the network relatively more appealing, because
increasing returns also imply gains from inequality; but such a rise can never induce a
38

preference reversal. Similarly, decreasing returns always make the network better than a
single a denser city. A rise in again mitigates this preference by making the network
relatively less appealing, because decreasing returns imply losses from inequality; but again
such a rise cannot induce a preference reversal. Changes in a¤ect the intensity of preferences
for density, but not their sign.
However, a larger city is unambiguously preferred to a denser one because it enjoys the
same gains from agglomeration but also bene…ts from a greater endowment of land. This
explains why increases in can switch preferences from the network to a large city. Such a
preference reversal takes place in a context of decreasing returns and losses from inequality.
When is low the network is so much better than a denser city that it is also better than a
larger one. As rises, the appeal of consolidation rises until a denser city is only a slightly
worse than the network, and a larger one is better. The gain from undoing uneven density
across the network more than o¤sets the losses from decreasing returns when average density
does not have to increase.
The same reasoning apply to densi…cation as soon as ! > 0. In that case, increases
in either variable always make it weakly more likely that the single city, whether denser or
larger, is preferred to the network. This does not mean that increases in always increase the
appeal of the city relative the network, but rather than when there is a range of parameters
such that the network might be preferred to the city, increases in make the city more
appealing and can trigger a change in the preference ordering. Just as in the case where
! = 0, however, there are also parameter values such that the city is always preferred to the
network, and in that case increases in reduce the city’s advantage relative to the network
Proposition 9 gives us another means of understanding the relative appeal of networks
in the Randstad and networks in Texas. European cities are generally more homogeneous,
along many dimensions, than U.S. cities, which can di¤er dramatically in skill levels, capital
investment and density. For example, Yonkers di¤ers dramatically from Manhattan in many
ways, which suggests that it is a good thing that Yonkers residents can commute to Manhattan. The homogeneity of many European urban networks suggests that the gains from
consolidation are lower.

6.2

Urban Heterogeneity in the Long Run

We now extend this case to the long run, and we focus on the case where there is a steady
state. We assume that there is a measure-zero set of cities that are considering merging. We
must limit our analysis to the case in which their endowments of …rms and amenities remain
…nite. In that case, Lemma 1 follows.
Lemma 1 If the economy consists of R regions and each region r comprises both measure Cr
of identical cities and also measure zero of cities whose initial endowments (Lc ; Tc ; Nc;0 ; Gc;0 )
di¤er from those of the representative cities, then the economy converges to a steady state in
which aggregate variables are independent of non-representative cities if and only if
(1

)

> (1

+

H) .

Each non-representative city has a steady-state number of …rms
Nc =

N
r

Lc(

1)(1

+

H)

39

Tc

(1

)

(1

+ H)

and steady-state amenities
Gc =
where the steady-state constants
representative cities.

G
r

L(1
c
N
r

)(

and

1)
G
r

1

Tc

(1

)

(1

+ H)

,

are independent of conditions in the set of non-

It is more di¢ cult to guarantee convergence to a steady state when there are nonrepresentative cities. When the cities are all intrinsically identical, ongoing migration to
a single city is less likely than when cities di¤er. The migration that becomes more likely
with heterogeneity means that in the long run all of the population might crowd into a particularly attractive city, and that reduces the possibility for a steady state in which a positive
measure of cities continue to host skilled entrepreneurs, …rms, and production. Consequently,
the assumption in Lemma 1 is more restrictive than either Assumption 1 or < 1, which
guarantee convergence to a steady state when all cities in a region are identical.
Firms make entrepreneurs more productive and thus tend to persist. If < 1, their
persistence is insu¢ cient to break stationarity at the aggregate level. However, at the city
level …rms also attract more entrepreneurs from other cities, which can mean that a city with
greater initial endowments will eventually tend to attract the region’s entire skilled population. Consequently, to have a steady state in which the full-measure set of representative
cities do not disappear, the level of …rm persistence must be lower, and housing prices must
rise fast enough with the in‡ux of high-skill agents.
When the condition in Lemma 1 is satis…ed, we can extend Proposition 7 to consider
steady-state changes.
Proposition 10 If (1
) > (1
+ H ), then if a …nite set of identical cities consolidate into a single larger commuting zone their residents will enjoy greater average amenities
in steady state. The zone will attract more skilled entrepreneurs than the network in steady
state if and only if
+
1
> 0.
+ H)
H + (1
(1
)
Consolidation will increase the steady-state number of …rms, output, housing stock, wages,
house prices and land rents if and only if
+ (1 +

H)

> 1.

Consolidation will increase the steady-state utility of the less killed if and only if
L

+ (1

+

L)

(1

+ (1 +
)
(1

H)

1
+

H)

> 0.

The steady state has two di¤erences from the short run. First, changes in …rm creation
and income are magni…ed by a factor 1= (1
). Second, amenities are fully endogenous
and no longer depend on the initial persistence of existing amenities. This also magni…es the
impact of income, because income ultimately determines the steady-state stock of amenities.
Both changes mean that in the long run, the impact of consolidation depends more on
whether + > 1.
40

The condition for whether consolidation will increase output and the other nominal variables is the same as in the short run. The magnitude of the impact expands in the long run,
but the sign does not change. This result would change if we assumed that migration took
time, and in that case, if + (1 + H ) > 1 > + , which means that output falls without
migration but rises with migration, it would be to have a long run e¤ect that has a di¤erent
sign from the short run e¤ect.
Moving from the short run to the long run also ampli…es the role that income changes
have on utility. For example, if + (1 + H ) < 1 and income falls with consolidation, then
it will be harder for changes in amenities to make up for that shortfall in the long run than
in the short run.
The next proposition deals with densi…cation into a single city.
Proposition 11 If (1
) > (1
+ H ), then if a …nite set of identical cities shrink
into a single denser commuting zone with the land of only one city their residents will enjoy
greater average amenities but pay higher house prices and land rents in steady state. The
zone will attract more skilled entrepreneurs than the network in steady state if and only if
H

+ (1

+

H)

+
(1

1
)

> 0.

Densi…cation will increase the steady-state number of …rms, output and wages if and only if
+ (1

+

H)

> 1.

Densi…cation will increase the steady-state utility of the less killed if and only if
L

+ (1

+

L)

+ (1
(1
)

+
(1

H)

1

+

H)

> 0.

Densi…cation will increase the steady-state housing stock if and only if
+ (1

+

H)

1 > (1

)(

1) .

The condition that determines whether densi…cation increases income and other nominal
variables is the same in the long run as in the short run. Just as with consolidation, in
steady state the change in the stock of new …rms is magni…ed. The sign of the impact of
densi…cation on income becomes more important in determining whether welfare increases
with densi…cation because of the long-run endogeneity of amenities.
The magni…cation of long-run income changes also means that the housing stock is unambiguously more likely to rise with density in the steady state than in the short run. If the
immediate increase in income compensates for the decline in the endowment of land, then
there will be an even larger long-run increase in the housing stock. Naturally, this will be
accompanied by large increases in housing costs.
Finally, we address the role of heterogeneity in factor endowments. Proposition 9 applies
identically to the steady state, but the correlation (!) between endowments of labor, past
…rms and historic amenities becomes irrelevant because neither …rms nor amenities are persistent in the long run. As a consequence, from a long-run perspective a city’s endowment is
41

truly two-dimensional, and to consider correlation we must allow endowments of both land
and labor to vary across cities.
When we extend the empirical distribution of Proposition 9 we obtain the following
results, which are particularly relevant for the steady state but once again apply identically
to the short run.
Corollary 3 Consider a …nite set of cities, the distribution of whose relative endowments
of land, labor, …rms and amenities is a mixture of a perfectly correlated distribution, with
weight 1 !, and four independent marginal distributions, with weight !. Each of these
distributions is a linear combination of equal shares, with weight 1
, and any unequal
distribution of shares, with weight 2 [0; 1].
If forming a single larger city attracts more skilled entrepreneurs; or creates more …rms,
produces greater output and pays higher wages; or provides higher utility to unskilled workers;
or entails a larger housing stock, then it also does so for any 0
and any ! 0 !.
If forming a single denser city attracts more skilled entrepreneurs; or creates more …rms,
produces greater output and pays higher wages; or provides higher utility to unskilled workers;
or entails a larger housing stock, then it also does so for any ! 0 !.
Corollary 3 echoes the results on heterogeneity in Proposition 9 except for the relationship between densi…cation and . Higher values of ! always make both densi…cation and
consolidation more appealing relative to the network. Higher values of also always make
consolidation more appealing relative to the network. These results are the same when land
is uniformly distributed and when the endowment of land is heterogeneous across cities.
With densi…cation, however, the results on size heterogeneity become ambiguous once
they apply to land endowments as well. Heterogeneity ( ) has an ambiguous e¤ect on the
trade-o¤ between a dense mega-city and a network, and its sign depends on the correlation
(!) between endowments of di¤erent factors.
When ! = 0, the ratio of output in a network of m cities to output in a single larger city
equals
1
"Y;T +"Y;L +"Y;N +"Y;G
X
1
.
(46)
+ s^k
fk
m
m
k=1

Consolidation into a larger commuting zone is desirable if and only if the sum of elasticities
is above one, regardless of . In this case, output (or welfare, mutatis mutandis) displays
increasing returns to scale with respect to all four endowments. In the long run, this means
that steady-state output displays increasing returns to the combination of land and labor,
given that it is independent of initial endowments of …rms and amenities.
Increasing returns also mean that greater size heterogeneity makes consolidation less
attractive. Again, the preference ordering between a network and a single larger commuting
zone cannot change, but the magnitude of preferences shrinks as increases. Densi…cation,
however, is desirable if and only if the gains from consolidation are so large as to o¤set the
loss of land (formally, if the ratio is below m "Y;L ). Therefore, if ! = 0 and the endowments
of all factors including land are perfectly correlated, densi…cation is going to be attractive if
and only if size is su¢ ciently low.
When instead ! > 0, the appeal of consolidation behaves in Corollary 3 just as in
Proposition 9. There must be decreasing returns for the network ever to be desirable. When
42

is large enough, a larger city dominates an idea network because the gains from eliminating
heterogeneity in factor proportions are large enough to o¤set losses from diminishing returns.
The relationship between size heterogeneity and densi…cation is then ambiguous. If !
is small, di¤erences in factor proportions are second-order. Then there must be increasing
returns— or else the network would always be better than a denser city— and preferences
can only switch from the city to the network as increases. If ! is large, densi…cation
may trade-o¤ instead losses from decreasing returns and gains from eliminating inequality
in factor proportions, as with consolidation and as in Proposition 9. The city dominates the
network as increases.

7

Conclusion

This paper has examined the trade-o¤ between urban networks and mega-cities in a model
with recombinant growth and endogenous amenities. In our framework, larger cities lead
to more amenity spillovers, which improves welfare and will attract the skilled. New …rm
creation may either rise or fall when networks merge into a single city depending on whether
there are increasing or decreasing returns to local scale in innovation. Densi…cation also
carries the cost of lost land.
Large mega-cities dominate networks when there are increasing returns to scale in idea
creation, but even when are decreasing returns to scale, the extra amenities added in a large
city can tip the balance in favor of urban size. This conclusion would be muted if we added
extra disamenities of size that are not present in our model.
The attraction of denser, not larger, mega-cities is determined also by the elasticity of
housing supply. When it is easy to add extra homes on a narrow plot of land, as in Texas,
then density becomes more attractive. European urban networks may well be the right
answer because history and regulation makes it so hard to build in Europe’s older cities.
Even though China has usually been quite friendly towards skyscrapers, the sheer scale of
the Chinese population may still make the case for urban networks.
A running theme of this paper is that the long run may be di¤erent from the short run.
It could be, for example, that urban networks are good for Europe in the short run, but that
in the long run, Europe will su¤er from the lack of new …rm creation that would come from
larger mega-cities. A second theme is that skilled and unskilled workers may have di¤erent
preferences, where the skilled typically have a keener taste for mega-cities, as opposed to
networks, because they have a stronger taste for urban amenities.
Yet, while this paper o¤ers a framework for evaluating the trade-o¤ between networks
and mega-cities, it is only a model. Its implications depend on parameters that need to
be estimated empirically. Three major empirical facts would need to be con…rmed to make
any recommendations: the connection between urban size and amenities, housing supply
elasticities, and returns to scale in idea creation. Moreover, since these parameters can
surely di¤er between, for example, China and the United States, we would need to have
place-speci…c estimates.
There are two standard approaches to estimating the relationship between urban size
and amenities. The …rst approach is to measure directly the amenities and examine the
relationship. The second approach is to use the logic of the spatial equilibrium, which
43

suggests that real wages, or wages corrected for housing costs, can provide a measure of local
amenities.
Papers that examine the relationship between metropolitan area size and crime, congestion, pollution and even mortality exemplify the …rst approach. While the basic regression
is simple, two major and one minor problem bedevil the attempt to connect city size and
disamenities. The …rst major problem is the selection of di¤erent people into cities of different sizes. Any relationship between urban size and either crime or mortality is likely to
re‡ect di¤erential selection as much as city size. With congestion and air quality, selection
is likely to be less problematic.
The second major problem is the endogeneity of city size. Areas that are pollution-prone
due to natural geography may be smaller than they otherwise would be, which would dilute
the measured relationship between urban growth and area quality. Conversely, areas that
attract particularly productive pollution-prone industries may be unusually large and this
may bias the estimated relationship between city size and air quality upwards.
A slightly more modest problem is heterogeneity within cities and across cities. It may
be that average commute times in a big metropolitan area completely miss the realities of a
tough downtown commute, because so many people have switched to working in sprawling
suburban o¢ ce parks. Moreover, if public policy has the ability to mute urban disamenities,
any cross-sectional relationship will be muddied by the di¤erences in policy competence
across space.
Ideally, the best experiment would involve exogenous shifts to city size that were unrelated
to the urban amenities in question. If an industry-share instrument à la Bartik (1991)
predicts city growth, then that instrument may help us determine whether city growth
increases tra¢ c congestion or crime. This instrument would be a less likely candidate for
estimating city-size pollution relationships, since the industry mix will also shape the level
of pollution.
Yet, while these amenity-by-amenity approaches o¤er the possibility of better identi…cation, they do not get at the more holistic question of whether people are …nding bigger cities
more or less pleasant. To get at the entire picture, it is natural to take a Rosen-Roback
approach of looking at real wages, which should be high in unpleasant cities and low in
pleasant cities. Hence, the impact of scale on disamenities is tested by examining whether
real wages rise or fall with city size.
Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz (2001) found that real wages were higher in cities in 1970,
suggesting that amenities were decreased by urban consolidation of densi…cation. By 2000,
there was, if anything, a slightly negative relationship between real wages and metropolitan
area population, which provides one possible source of information about the connection
between amenities and city size.
There are also major challenges to estimating the relationship between city size and
real wages. Di¤erential selection remains a problem, as does the endogeneity of city size.
Moreover, mismeasurement of either wages or the cost of living seems a bigger problem than
mismeasurement of pollution.
Simple instrumental-variable approaches are not straightforward, especially if there are
heterogeneous preferences for living in the city, as in Diamond (2015). A shock to city labor
demand will push up real wages, because the marginal worker of a larger city has less innate
preference to be in that city. This will not present a clean estimate of the impact of city size
44

on the amenities experienced by any particular worker. A shock to labor supply, such as an
exogenous in‡ux of immigrants, seems likely to lower real wages both by raising prices and
lowering wages, which will also fail to identify the link between amenities and city size.
To estimate the impact of city size on overall amenity levels, researchers will need sources
of exogenous variation and a structural model. This can presumably supplement more
reduced-form estimates that are obtained with direct measures of urban amenities, as described above.
Housing supply estimates are a crucial part of the model, and typically these are estimated with shocks to housing demand. Saiz (2010) follows this approach and documents the
di¤erences of these elasticities across the United States, which only reinforces the di¢ culty
of providing a single answer about whether densi…cation is better or worse than urban networks. He uses industrial shocks to di¤erent cities as the source of heterogeneous housing
demand.
In some cases, information about supply elasticities can be gleaned more directly from
detailed information about local housing markets. For example, in some cases, the supply of
housing may be frozen in the central city and all supply may be on the fringe. In that case,
data on construction and commuting costs may provide information about the structure of
housing supply. In other cases, the relevant supply margin is the ability to build up. Again,
detailed information on construction costs may provide information on housing supply in the
local area. For example, the marginal cost of building up provides one measure of housing
supply.
Housing supply di¤ers because of topography, regulations and the competitiveness of the
construction industry. Saiz (2010) shows the supply is far less elastic in areas where land is
less available for building, either because the land is hilly or because the land is underwater.
Gyourko and Saiz (2006) document the modest but real di¤erences in the physical costs of
construction across space within the U.S., which are due partially to di¤erences in the costs
of labor and transportation costs for inputs.
By far the most attention has been paid to the role of regulations in shifting construction
costs. For example, Glaeser and Ward (2009) examine the impact of new housing regulations
on construction and prices across greater Boston. Vermeulen and Van Ommeren (2009)
document that these restrictions are extremely powerful in the Netherlands as well, and may
have played an outsized role in shaping the Randstad urban network. De Graa¤ and Van
Leuvenstijn (2013) connect housing market restrictions with European labor mobility more
generally.
Estimating the impact of regulation on housing supply can be di¢ cult, because of the
endogeneity of supply. Often, the most attractive, most educated places take the strongest
actions to restrict new supply. Typically, the best work in this area uses a panel structure,
which compares communities before and after they impose new building rules. Hopefully,
future work will …nd more satisfying sources of exogenous variation in land use rules.
Finally, Section 2 discussed some of the evidence on returns to scale in idea creation.
This evidence is far from de…nitive. Population size is itself endogenous to the amount
of idea creation. Ideally, the impact of population size on idea creation could be estimated
with exogenous shocks to city population, which might re‡ect migration or shocks to housing
supply or quality of life. The key is to …nd variables that have no direct imspact on creativity
but that would still increase the size of the city. We hope that future work will add the
45

empirical meat needed to turn the theory in this paper into a better guide for urban policy.

References
[1] Abdel-Rahman HM, Anas A (2004) Theories of systems of cities. In: Duranton G,
Henderson JV, Strange WC (eds) Handbook of regional and urban economics, vol. 4.
North Holland, Amsterdam
[2] Abdel-Rahman HM, Fujita M (1990) Product variety, Marshallian externalities, and
city sizes. Journal of Regional Science 30(2): 165–183
[3] Alexander-Skipnes I (2007) Cultural exchange between the Low Countries and Italy
(1400-1600). Brepols, Turnhout
[4] Alonso W (1973) Urban zero population growth. Daedalus 109: 191–206
[5] Anas A, Arnott R, Small K (1998) Urban spatial structure. Journal of Economic Literature 36(3): 1426–1464
[6] Arnott RJ (2004) Does the Henry George Theorem provide a practical guide to optimal
city size? American Journal of Economics and Sociology 63(5): 1057–1090
[7] Arnott RJ, Stiglitz JE (1979) Aggregate land rents, expenditure on public goods, and
optimal city size. Quarterly Journal of Economics 93(4): 471–500
[8] Bartik TJ (1991) Who bene…ts from state and local economic development policies?
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI
[9] Bettencourt LMA, Lobo J, Strumsky D (2007) Invention in the city: Increasing returns
to patenting as a scaling function of metropolitan size. Research Policy 36 (1):107–120
[10] Black D, Henderson JV (1999) A theory of urban growth. Journal of Political Economy
107(2): 252–284
[11] Boarnet MG (1994) An empirical model of intrametropolitan population and employment growth. Papers in Regional Science 73(2): 135–152
[12] Camagni RP, Salone C (1993) Network urban structures in northern Italy: Elements
for a theoretical framework. Urban Studies 30(6): 1053–1064
[13] Capello R (2000) The city network paradigm: Measuring urban network externalities.
Urban Studies 37(11): 1925–1945
[14] Christaller W (1933) Die zentralen Orte in Süddeutschland: Eine ökonomischgeographische Untersuchung über die Gesetzmäß
igkeit der Verbreitung und Entwicklung
der Siedlungen mit städtischen Funktionen. Gustav Fischer, Jena.
[15] Cohn D, Morin R (2008) American mobility: Who moves? Who stays put? Where’s
home? Pew Research Center social and demographics trends report
46

[16] De Graa¤ T, Van Leuvensteijn M (2013) A European cross-country comparison of the
impact of homeownership and transaction costs on job tenure. Regional Studies 47(9):
1443–1461
[17] Desmet K, Rossi-Hansberg E (2014) Spatial development. American Economic Review
104(4): 1211–1243
[18] Diamond R (2015) The determinants and welfare implications of US workers’diverging
location choices by skill: 1980–2000. American Economic Review, forthcoming
[19] Duranton G, Puga D (2001) Nursery cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and
the life cycle of products. American Economic Review 91(5): 1454–1477
[20] Eaton J, Eckstein Z (1997) Cities and growth: Theory and evidence from France and
Japan. Regional Science and Urban Economics 27(4-5): 443–474
[21] Epifani P, Gancia G (2009) Openness, government size and the terms of trade. Review
of Economic Studies 76: 629–668
[22] Ethier WJ (1979) Internationally decreasing costs and world trade. Journal of International Economics 9(1): 1–24
[23] Forslid R, Ottaviano GIP (2003) An analytically solvable core-periphery model. Journal
of Economic Geography 3: 229–240
[24] Fujita M, Krugman PR, Mori T (1999) On the evolution of hierarchical urban systems.
European Economic Review 43(2): 209–251
[25] Glaeser EL (1999) Learning in cities. Journal of Urban Economics 46(2): 254–277
[26] Glaeser EL (2007) Entrepreneurship and the city. NBER working paper No. 13551
[27] Glaeser EL, Kahn M, Rappaport J (2008) Why do the poor live in cities? Journal of
Urban Economics 63(1): 1–24
[28] Glaeser EL, Kerr WR (2009) Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How
much of the spatial distribution can we explain? Journal of Economics and Management
Strategy 18(3): 623–663
[29] Glaeser EL, Kohlhase JE (2004) Cities, regions and the decline of transport costs. Papers
in Regional Science 83(1): 197–228
[30] Glaeser EL, Kolko J, Saiz A (2001) Consumer city. Journal of Economic Geography 1:
27–50
[31] Glaeser EL, Tobio K (2008) The rise of the sunbelt. Southern Economic Journal 74:
610-643
[32] Glaeser E, Ward B (2009) The causes and consequences of land use regulation: Evidence
from greater Boston. Journal of Urban Economics 65(3): 265–278
47

[33] Gottmann J (1961) Megalopolis: The urbanization of the Northeastern seaboard of the
United States. MIT Press, Cambriege, MA
[34] Gyourko J, Saiz A (2006) Construction costs and the supply of housing structure. Journal of Regional Science 46(4): 661–680
[35] Hall P, Pain K (2006) The polycentric metropolis: Learning from mega-city regions in
Europe. Earthscan, London
[36] Hall P, Pain K (2008) Informational quantity versus informational quality: The perils
of navigating the space of ‡ows. Regional Studies 42(8): 1065–1077
[37] Helsley RW, Strange WC (2002) Innovation and input sharing. Journal of Urban Economics 51(1): 25–45
[38] Henderson JV (1974) The sizes and types of cities. American Economic Review 64(4):
640–656
[39] Henderson JV, Becker R (2000) Political economy of city sizes and formation. Journal
of Urban Economics 48(3): 453–484
[40] Hohenberg P, Lees L (1995) The making of urban Europe 1000–1994. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA
[41] Hoogstra GJ, van Dijk J (2004) Explaining …rm employment growth: Does location
matter? Small Business Economics 22(3-4): 179–192
[42] Howard MC (2012) Transnationalism and society. McFarland, Je¤erson, NC
[43] Hoyler M, Kloosterman RC, Sokol M (2008) Polycentric puzzles: Emerging mega-city
regions seen through the lens of advanced producer services. Regional Studies 42(8):
1055–1064
[44] Hsieh CT (2015) Policies for productivity growth. Paper presented at the “Global dialogue on the future of productivity growth: Towards an OECD productivity network”,
Mexico City, 6–7 July
[45] Ioannides YM (1994) Product di¤erentiation and economic growth in a system of cities.
Regional Science and Urban Economics 24(4): 461–484
[46] Jacobs J (1969) The economy of cities. Random House, New York, NY
[47] Je¤erson M (1939) The law of the primate city. Geographical Review 29: 226–232
[48] Johansson B, Quigley JM (2004) Agglomeration and networks in spatial economics.
Papers in Regional Science 83(1): 165–176
[49] Krugman PR (1991) Increasing returns and economic geography. Journal of Political
Economy 99(3): 484–499

48

[50] Marshall A (1890) Principles of economics. Macmillan, London
[51] Meijers EJ, Burger MJ (2010) Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan
areas. Environment and Planning A 42(6): 1383–1402
[52] Meijers EJ, Burger MJ (2015) Stretching the concept of ‘borrowed size.’Urban Studies,
forthcoming
[53] Meijers EJ, Burger MJ, Hoogerbrugge MM (2015) Borrowing size in networks of cities:
City size, network connectivity and metropolitan functions in Europe. Papers in Regional Science, forthcoming
[54] Mueller B (2000) From cities and towns to urban networks in Germany: Intra regional
competition versus regional co-operation and inter regional competitiveness. Urbani Izziv
11(1): 134–138
[55] Overman HG, Bosquet C (2015) Why does birthplace matter so much? Sorting, learning
and geography. London School of Economics working paper
[56] Pred AR (1977) City systems in advanced economies: Past growth, present processes,
and future development options. Hutchinson, London
[57] Saiz A (2010) The geographic determinants of housing supply. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125(3): 1253–1296
[58] Taylor PJ, Evans DM, Pain K (2008) Application of the interlocking network model to
mega-city regions: Measuring polycentricity within and beyond city-regions. Regional
Studies 42(8): 1079–1083
[59] Taylor PJ, Hoyler M, Verbruggen R (2010) External urban relational process: Introducing central ‡ow theory to complement central place theory. Urban Studies 47(13):
2803–2818
[60] Vandermotten C, Halbert L, Roelandts M, Cornut P (2008) European planning and the
polycentric consensus: Wishful thinking? Regional Studies 42(8): 1205–1217
[61] Van Oort FG, Burger MJ, Raspe O (2010) On the economic foundation of the urban
network paradigm: Spatial integration, functional integration and economic complementarities within the Dutch Randstad. Urban Studies 47(4): 725–748
[62] Vermeule E (1960) The fall of the Mycenaean empire. Archaeology 13(1): 66–76
[63] Vermeulen W, van Ommeren J (2009) Does land use planning shape regional economies?
A simultaneous analysis of housing supply, internal migration and local employment
growth in the Netherlands. Journal of Housing Economics 18(4): 294–310
[64] Weitzman ML (1998) Recombinant growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2):
331–360

49

A
A.1.

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1

By eq. (20),
@ ln Nt
=1
@ ln R

< 0 and

@ ln Nt
=1
@ ln Cr

.

(A1)

By eq. (21),
@ ln Yt
1 @ ln Nt
=
for x 2 fR; Cr g .
(A2)
@ ln x
1 @ ln x
All other pecuniary variables increase if and only if the number of …rms and output do:
wages (eq. 3), pro…ts per entrepreneur (eq. 8), the aggregate housing stock (eq. 13), house
prices (eq. 14) and land rents (eq. 15).
By eqs. (22) and (23),
@ ln uit
= (1
@ ln x

+

i)

@ ln Yt
@ ln x

i

for i 2 fL; Hg and x 2 fCr ; Rg ,

(A3)

such that @uit =@R < 0, while @uit =@Cr < 0 if and only if the condition in Proposition 1 holds.

A.2.

Proof of Proposition 2

Firm creation (eq. 20), output (eq. 21), wages (eq. 3) and pro…ts per entrepreneur (eq. 8) do
not depend on the endowment of land, so the condition for them to rise with fragmentation
is the same as in Proposition 1.
By eqs. (22) and (23), @ ln uLt =@ ln T = @ ln uH
. Individual i’s utility rises
t =@ ln T =
with concentration into denser commuting zones if and only if @ ln uit =@ ln Cr +@ ln uit =@ ln T <
0, and thus if and only if the condition in Proposition 2 holds.
Moreover, by eq. (13)
@ ln ht
@ ln ht
+
=
@ ln Cr
@ ln T

+ (1

)

@ ln t
@ ln t
+
@ ln Cr
@ ln T

=

@ ln Yt
=
@ ln Cr

+ (1

)

1

,

1

(A4)

while by eqs. (14) and (15)
@ ln rt
@ ln rt
+
=
@ ln Cr @ ln T

A.3.

@ ln Yt
@ ln Cr

1

=

1
1

1 . (A5)

Proof of Corollary 1

Firm creation (eq. 20), output (eq. 21), wages (eq. 3) and pro…ts per entrepreneur (eq. 8)
do not depend on the endowment of land, so they decline with R as in Proposition 1. A
fortiori, house prices and land rents decline with R because
@ ln t @ ln t
1
+
=
@ ln R @ ln T

@ ln rt @ ln rt
+
@ ln R @ ln T

50

=

@ ln Yt
@ ln R

1<

@ ln Yt
.
@ ln R

(A6)

Individual i’s utility rises with concentration into denser regions if and only if @ ln uit =@ ln R+
@ ln uit =@ ln T < 0, and thus if and only if the condition in Corollary 1 holds.
Moreover, by eq. (13)
@ ln ht @ ln ht
+
=
@ ln R
@ ln T

A.4.

+ (1

)

@ ln Yt
=
@ ln R

+ (1

)

1

,

1

(A7)

Proof of Proposition 3

The dynamics of the economy are characterized by a two-dimensional …rst-order vector
autoregression:
ln Nt = (1

) ln Cr + (1

) ln R + ( + ) ln H + ln Nt

1

+ ln

(A8)

t

and
ln Gt =

ln + ln L +

(1

) ln Cr + (1

) ln R + ( + ) ln H
1

+

1

ln Nt

1

+ (1

) ln Gt

1

+

1

ln

t

+ ln At + ln

By inspection, this process is stationary for < 1, di¤erence stationary for
explosive for > 1.
By eq. (24)
@ ln N
1 @ ln Nt
=
for x 2 fCr ; Rg ,
@ ln x
1
@ ln x

t.

(A9)

= 1, and

(A10)

so the short-run e¤ects of consolidation on all pecuniary variables are magni…ed in steady
state.
By eqs. (26) and (27)
@ ln Yt
@ ln ui
= (1
+ i)
(A11)
i for i 2 fL; Hg and x 2 fCr ; Rg ,
@ ln x
@ ln x
so for an increase in R not only the short-run decline in output is magni…ed in steady state,
but its welfare impact also rises for any < 1.
For an increase in Cr , a preference reversal occurs if and only if eq. (28) holds, and
therefore if and only if + < 1 and
i
s

1+

1

+

(1

)<

i
s

<

1+

1

+1

i

The interval ( is ;

i
s)

i

1
1

.

(A12)

is a non-empty subset of (1; 1). By inspection,
i
s

i
s

= (1

)

1
i

is decreasing in , , ,

and

i.

51

1

+

1
1

(A13)

A.5.

Proof of Proposition 4

If + > 1 then @ Y =@Cr < @Yt =@Cr < 0, so all pecuniary variables rise with city density
in the short run, and more so in steady state. A preference reversal occurs if and only if eq.
(29) holds, and therefore if and only if
> i and
i
d+

1+

1

+

i

( +

1) <

i
d+

<

1+

1

+

i

The interval

i
d+ ;

i
d+

+
1

i

i

1

.

(A14)

is a non-empty subset of (1; 1). By inspection,

i
d+

i
d+

(1
1

=

)

1

+

+

1

(A15)

i

1

i

is increasing in , and i , and decreasing in , and .
If + < 1 then @ Y =@Cr > @Yt =@Cr > 0, so all pecuniary variables fall with city density
in the short run, and more so in steady state. A preference reversal occurs if and only if
neither inequality in eq. (29) holds, and therefore if and only if i >
and
i
d

1 + (1

+

i)

1

<

<

i
d

1+

(1

+

i

The interval

i
d

i
d

;

A.6.

1
1

i

.

(A16)

is a non-empty subset of (1; 1). By inspection,

i
d

is decreasing in ,

i)

i
d

and

(1
1

=

i,

)

1

+

1

1

and increasing in

(A17)

i
i

and .

Proof of Corollary 2

Since + + > 1, all pecuniary variables rise with regional density in the short run, and
more so in steady state: @ Y =@R < @Yt =@R < 0. A preference reversal occurs if and only if
@ ln uit @ ln uit
+
=
@ ln R
@ ln T

(1

i

and therefore if and only if
1+

1

+

i

+ +

i)

>

( + +

i

1
1

@ ln ui @ ln ui
+
=
@ ln R
@ ln T

>

i
D

+

i

(1

+

i
D;

i
D)
i
D

is increasing in , ,

i)

+ +
(1
)(

1
, (A18)
1)

and
1) <

i
D

<

1+

1

i

The interval (

>0

+

+ +
1

i

i

1

. (A19)

is a non-empty subset of (1; 1). By inspection,
i
D

(1
1

=

and

i,

)

+

1
1

and decreasing in ,
52

+ +

1

i
i

and .

(A20)

A.7.

Proof of Proposition 5

The evolution of …rms (eq. A8) is independent of that of amenities. If and only if = 1 it
is a di¤erence stationary process whose time-invariant mean growth (eq. 30) implies
@
E (ln Nt
@ ln R

A.8.

ln Nt 1 ) =

<

@
E (ln Nt
@ ln Cr

for all t.

ln Nt 1 ) =

(A21)

Proof of Proposition 6

With asymmetric regions, spillovers are described by eq. (36) while for each region
@ ln Yr;t
1
=
@ ln Nr;t

1

1+

Yr;t
1 Yt

.

(A22)

If + > 1 , @Nr;t =@Cr < 0, denser commuting zones increase all incomes. A coordination failure occurs if and only if eq. (37) holds, and thus if and only if
> i ; moreover
( +

1)

1

+

i

<

<1+( +

1)

1

+

i

i

,

(A23)

i

an interval whose intersection with (1; 1) is non-empty; and …nally
Yr;t
< y^di +
Yt

(

i

1)

+

11

+

1 ,

(A24)

i

a positive threshold that by inspection is increasing in , and , and decreasing in , ,
and i .
If + < 1 , @Nr;t =@Cr > 0, denser or larger commuting zones increase all incomes. A
coordination failure over density occurs if and only if both inequalities in eq. (37) fail, and
thus if and only if i > ; moreover
(1

)

1

+

i

<

< 1 + (1

)

1

+

i

i

,

(A25)

i

an interval whose intersection with (1; 1) is non-empty; and …nally
Yr;t
< y^di
Yt

(

1)

i

1

1

+

1 ,

a positive threshold that by inspection is increasing in , ,
and .
A coordination failure over size occurs if and only if
@ ln uir;t
= (1
@ ln Cr

+

i

)

1
(

1+

1)
<0<

Yr;t
Yt

R
X
@ ln uir;t
s=1

@ ln Cs
53

(A26)

i

and

i,

and decreasing in ,

i

= (1

+

i

)

1
1

i,

(A27)

and thus if and only if
(1

)

1

+

i

<

< 1 + (1

)

1

+

i

i

,

(A28)

i

an interval whose intersection with (1; 1) is non-empty; and moreover
Yr;t
< y^s
Yt

(

i

1)

1

1

1 ,

+

a positive threshold that by inspection is increasing in , , , ,
in .

A.9.

(A29)

i

and

i,

and decreasing

Derivation of Equations (41) and (42)

Plugging eq. (40) into eq. (7) yields eq. (41) for
N
r;t

Hr +
r;t
Cr
8"
< N
r;t
:
Cr

1

Lr
Cr

1

#1

+

H

Tr
Cr

Gr;t
Cr

(1

)

1

A.10.

1

r;t

L

r;t

Yt

N
1
r;t Ar;t

9
=

(1

1

+

+

H)

. (A30)

;

These last two with eqs. (2), (11) and (16) yield eq. (42) for
u
r;t

H

L

.

(A31)

Proof of Propositions 7 and 8

For any outcome variable X that is isoelastic in the endowments (Lc ; Tc ; Nc;t 1 ; Gc;t 1 ), the
ratio of its sum in a …nite set of m > 1 cities to its value in a single commuting zone having
the sum of their endowments can be written
m
X
Y
"X;F
sF;c
,
(A32)
X =
c=1 F 2fL;T;G;N g

P
where sF;c denotes city c’s share of the joint endowment of factor F , such that m
c=1 sF;c = 1,
while each outcome variable is characterized by its elasticities "X;F with respect to each
factor.
Forming a single wider commuting zone thus raises the outcome variable if and only if
X < 1. If all m cities are identical, then the outcome rises if and only if
X
X
ln X = 1
"X;F ln M < 0 , X
"X;F > 1.
(A33)
F

F

If instead of the sum of the land endowments the single commuting zone has the average
endowment of land, the ratio is m"X;T X < X . Forming a single denser commuting zone
then raises the outcome variable if and only if
X

"X;T > 1.
54

(A34)

For the number of skilled entrepreneurs, the sum of elasticities is
H

H

=1+

+( +

1) (1
(1
+

+
H)

H)

(A35)

while the elasticity with respect to the land endowment is
"H;T =

(1

+

H)

.

(A36)

For the number of …rms,
N

=

+

H

+ (1 + H )
(1
+

=1+

and
"N;T = "H;T )

+ (1
(1

"N;T = 1 +

N

1

(A37)

H)

+ H) 1
.
+ H)

(A38)

For output,
Y

and
"Y;T =

"N;T

)

Y

1

N

=1+

"Y;T = 1 +

(A39)
"N;T

N

1

(A40)

so output rises if and only if the number of …rm does.
The average wage rises if and only is so does the wage bill
1

wc;t Lc =

Yc;t ,

(A41)

and thus if and only if output and the number of …rms rise.
For the housing stock,
+ (1
) Y
h =

(A42)

so the housing stock rises in a wider commuting zone if and only if so do output and the
number of …rms, while
"h;T = + (1
) "Y;T
(A43)
such that
h

"h;T = (1

)(

Y

"Y;T ) = (1

Average house prices rise if and only if
P
P
rc;t hc;t
Yc;t
c
P
=
P c 1
r;t
c hc;t
c Tc Yc;t

)

< rM;t =

1 + + (1
(1
+

1
r;t

For a wider commuting zone this condition can be written
XY "
X
Y (1 )"
Y;F
sF;c
<
sT;c
sF;c Y;F ,
c

F

c

55

F

YM;t
TM

)
H)

.

H

.

(A44)

(A45)

(A46)

and for identical cities
Y

>

+ (1

)

For a denser commuting zone it can be written
XY "
Y;F
M "Y;T
sF;c
< M +(1
c

Y

,

)"Y;T

Y

X

sT;c

c

F

(A47)

> 1.
Y

(1

sF;c

)"Y;F

,

(A48)

F

and for identical cities
(

(A49)

"Y;T ) > 0,

Y

which is always satis…ed.
Average land rents rise if and only if
P
P
Yc;t
c c;t Tc
P
= Pc
<
c Tc
c Tc

M;t

Yc;t
.
TM

=

(A50)

For a wider commuting zone they rise if and only if so does output. For a denser commuting
zone they rise if and only if
(A51)
Y < M , Y > 0,
which is always satis…ed.
Average amenities rise in a wider commuting zone if and only if
G

<M ,

G

(A52)

> 0,

and in a denser commuting zone if and only if
G

"G;T

< M1

,

G

> "G;T ,

(A53)

both of which are always satis…ed.
The average utility of unskilled workers rises if and only if so does the sum of their utilities
"
#
L
1
Tc
1
+ L
1
L
Uc;t
Yc;t
,
(A54)
wc;t Lc =
r;t
r;t Gc;t 1
which has
U

=1+

L

+ (1

+

L) (

1)

Y

=1+

L

+ (1

+

and
"U;T =

+ (1

+

L ) "Y;T

56

=

+ (1 + H )
(1
+

L)

(
(1

L)

H

+

H)

.

1
H)

(A55)

(A56)

A.11.

Proof of Proposition 9 and Corollary 3

If sT;c = 1=m for all c while the empirical distribution of (sL;c ; sG;c ; sN;c ) is described by eq.
(44) then
X

= m1

"X;T

"

!

K
X

"

fk skX;L

k=1

K
X

"

fk skX;G

k=1

K
X

fk s"kX ;N + (1

!)

k=1

K
X

"

fk skX;L

+"X;G +"X;N

k=1

#

, (A57)

0

(A58)

such that
@ X
= m1
@!

"X;T

"

K
X

"

fk skX;L

k=1

K
X

"

fk skX;G

k=1

K
X

fk s"kX ;N

k=1

K
X

"

fk skX;L

+"X;G +"X;N

k=1

#

because for any distribution S and any positive elasticities
Es"X;L Es"X;G +"X;N

Es"X;L +"X;G +"X;N

Es"X;L Es"X;G Es"X;N

(A59)

given that the covariance of a random variable and its monotone increasing transformation
cannot be negative. It follows that

X

m1

"X;T

K
X

"

fk skX;L

+"X;G +"X;N

<m

"X;T

for all "X;L + "X;G + "X;N > 1.

(A60)

k=1

Eq. (43) implies that
m1 "X;T
@ X
=
@
2
PK
P
P
"
"
1
N
fk sk m1 skX;L
fk s";
fk skX;G K
!"X;L K
k
k=1P
k=1P
k=1P
"
"
1
6
K
N
fk s";
fk sk m1 skX;G
fk skX;L K
+!"X;G K
6
k
k=1
k=1
k=1
P
6
"X;L PK
"X;G PK
"
1
1
4
+!"X;N K
skX;N
k sk
k=1 fk sk
k=1 fP
k=1 fk sk
m
"
+"
+"
1
skX;L X;G X;N
+ (1 !) ("X;L + "X;G + "X;N ) K
k=1 fk sk
m

3
1

7
7
7
5

0

(A61)

for all "X;L + "X;G + "X;N 1. Thus, either X < m1 "X;T for all and !— so the outcome X
always rises in a denser commuting zone and a fortiori in a larger one— or X is decreasing
in as well as in !.
If sT;c is also heterogeneous and the joint empirical distribution of (sT;c ; sL;c ; sG;c ; sN;c ) is
described by
Pr (sT;c = si ; sL;c = sj ; sN;c = sk ; sG;c = sl ) = !fi fj fk fl + 1i=j=k=l (1
then
X

"

=m !

K
YX
F

"
fk skX;F

k=1

+ (1

!)

K
X
k=1

57

#

f k sk X ,

!) fi ,

(A62)

(A63)

such that, as above, @

0 and

X =@!

X

m

K
X

fk sk X < 1 for all

X

> 1.

J6=F

PK

(A64)

k=1

As above,
m
@ X
=
@

"

!

P

F

"X;F

PK

k=1

"
skX;F

1
m

f k sk
+ (1

!)

X

1

PK

Q

#

"X;J
k=1 fk sk
1
sk X 1
m

k=1 fk sk

(A65)

0

for all X
1. Thus, either X < 1 for all and !— so the outcome X always rises in a
larger commuting zone— or X is decreasing in as well as in !.

A.12.

Proof of Lemma 1

Firms in city c evolve according to
ln Nc;t =

(

1) (1

+
(1

H ) ln Lc

+
H)

+

ln Tc
ln Nc;t

+

1

+ (1
(1

)
+

H

ln Gc;t
H)

1

+ ln

N
r;t

(A66)

G
r;t .

(A67)

and amenities according to
ln Gc;t =

(

1) ln Lc +
(1
+
+

ln Tc
H)
ln Nc;t

1

+ (1

)[

(1

(1

+

)] ln Gc;t
H)

1

+ ln

The idiosyncratic component of these dynamics is deterministic and converges to a steady
state if and only if the transition matrix of the di¤erence equation,
1
(1

+

(1
(1

[

H)

) H
)] (1

)

,

(A68)

has two eigenvalues within the unit circle. The characteristic polynomial is
+[

x2

(1

)] (1

(1

+

)

H)

(1

x+

(1

)
+

H)

= 0.

(A69)

Its discriminant is
2

=

f

[

(1
[

)] (1
(1

)g2 + 4
+ H )]2

(1

)

H

> 0,

(A70)

so the transition matrix has two real eigenvalues. They are both positive by Assumption 1
and less than one if and only if moreover
(1

)

> (1
58

+

H) .

(A71)

The steady-state …rms and amenities in each non-representative city c in region r are
jointly de…ned by
n
h
i o
1
+ H)
(1
+ H)
(1
(1 ) H
(A72)
L
Nc = N
N
T
G
c
r
c
c
c

and

G
r

Gc =

n

1

Nc Lc

G(1
c

Tc

)[

(1

)]

o

1
H)

(1

+

(1

+ H)

,

(A73)

whose solution is provided in the statement of the Lemma for
N
r

+ H)

(1

N
r

G
r

(1

) H

(1

)

and
(1

N
r

G
r

A.13.

(1

)

G
r

H)

+

(A74)

1
(1

+ H)

(1

)

.

(A75)

Proof of Propositions 10 and 11

By eqs. (40) the steady-state number of skilled entrepreneurs is proportional to
Hc /

Nc L c

1

1

+

H

Tc G(1
c

)

(1

+

H

H)

.

(A76)

By Lemma 1, the sum of its elasticities to the endowments of labor and land (Lc ; Tc ) is then
H

=1+

(1

)
(1

H

+( +
1) (1
)
(1
+

+
H)

H)

,

(A77)

while the elasticity to the land endowment alone is
"H;T =

(1
(1

)
(1

)

+

H)

.

(A78)

For the steady-state number of …rms from Lemma 1,
N

=1+

+ (1 +
)
(1

(1

H)

1
+

(A79)

H)

and
"N ;T =

(1

)

(1

+

H)

.

(A80)

For output, average wages, average house prices and average land rents the results are then
unchanged from Propositions 7 and 8.
As in Proposition 7, the housing stock rises in a larger city if and only if the number of
…rms does. It rises in a denser city if and only if
h

"h;T = (1

) 1+

N

"N;T

1

=
59

(1
(1

) (1
)

)(
(1

1)
> 1.
+ H)

(A81)

For steady-state amenities from Lemma 1,
G

=

(1
(1

)(

1) +

)

(1

+

> "G;T =

H)

(1

)

(1

+

H)

(A82)

> 0,

so as in Propositions 7 and 8 average amenities rise both in a larger and in a denser city.
The sum of unskilled workers’utilities is proportional to
UcL / Tc G(1
c

)

L

Yc1

+

L

,

(A83)

which has
U

=

+ (1

)

L

=

G

+ (1

+ (1

+
)

L

=1+

L)

+ (1

+

+ (1

+

G

L

Y
L)
L)

1+

(1

N

1

+ (1 +
)
(1

H)

1
+

H)

(A84)

and
"U ;T =

+ (1

=

+ (1

)

L "G;T

+ (1
1
) L "G;T +

+
+

L ) "Y ;T
L

"N ;T =

60

(1
)
(1
)

(
(1

L)

H

+

H)

. (A85)

61

Origin Metro Area

Origin’s Share
of Shipments to
Destination

Destination’s Share
of Shipments to
Origin

Industry of Largest Shipment
from Origin to Destination

Tampa-St. Petersburg, FL Seattle, WA
.507
<.001
Transportation Equipment (336)
Portland,OR
Seattle, WA
.463
.084
Transportation Equipment (336)
Memphis, TN
Seattle, WA
.430
.021
Transportation Equipment (336)
Baton Rouge, LA
New Orleans, LA
.420
.009
Petroleum (and Products) Wholesale (4247)
Virginia Beach, VA
Seattle, WA
.387
<.001
Transportation Equipment (336)
Jacksonville, FL
New York, NY
.316
.001
Chemical Manufacturing (325)
Charleston, SC
Greenville, SC
.315
.012
Transportation Equipment (336)
Savannah, GA
New Orleans, LA
.273
<.001
Raw Farm Products Wholesale (4245)
San Antonio, TX
Corpus Christi, TX
.235
.008
Petroleum Products Manufacturing (324)
Columbus, OH
Philadelphia, PA
.232
.002
Electronic Shopping and Mail Order (4541)
Notes: Value of physical shipments across the United States (Commodity Flow Survey 2012)

Destination Metro Area

Table 1 –Backward Transportation Linkages Across U.S. Metropolitan Areas

