                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TOTAL RETURNS TO SINGLE FAMILY RENTALS

                                         Andrea Eisfeldt
                                         Andrew Demers

                                       Working Paper 21804
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21804


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2015, Revised February 2018




Previously circulated as “Rental Yields and HPA: The Returns to Single Family Rentals.” We
thank Robert Richmond and Jiasun Li for research assistance, Don Brownstein and Marc Holtz
from Structured Portfolio Management, LLC, Morris Davis, Gary Painter, and participants at the
2016 UCI-UCLA-USC Real Estate & Urban Economics Research Symposium, and the 2014
SED meeting for helpful comments. Eisfeldt gratefully acknowledges the UCLA Rosalinde and
Arthur Gilbert Program in Real Estate, Finance and Urban Economics for generous funding. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21804.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Andrea Eisfeldt and Andrew Demers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Total Returns to Single Family Rentals
Andrea Eisfeldt and Andrew Demers
NBER Working Paper No. 21804
December 2015, Revised February 2018
JEL No. G0,G11,R0,R30

                                            ABSTRACT

The market value of US Single Family Rental assets is $2.3 trillion, yet we believe that we
provide the first systematic analysis of total returns to Single Family Rentals over a long time
period, in a broad and granular cross section. Analogous to the dividend yields and capital gains
that constitute total equity returns, total returns to single family rentals have two components:
rental yields and house price appreciation. It is crucial to account for both total return inputs, both
because they contribute approximately equally to returns at the national level, and because they
are negatively correlated in the cross section of US cities. While the aggregate US Single Family
Rental portfolio has historically benefitted equally from each of the two return components, high
price tier cities accrued more capital gains, while low price tier cities had higher net rental yields.
As a result, measures of returns that focus on either component individually will be
systematically biased in the cross section. Within cities, we show that lower price tier zip codes
have higher total returns as a result of both higher yields and higher house price appreciation.


Andrea Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu

Andrew Demers
Structured Portfolio Management, LLC
100 Washington Blvd.
Stamford, CT 06902
ademers@spmllc.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21804
1       Introduction
Single family rentals represent 35% of all rented housing units in the US, and have a market
value of approximately $2.3 trillion.1 Analogous to the dividend yields and capital gains
that constitute total equity returns, total returns to single family rental assets have two
components: rental yields and house price appreciation. There are many important studies of
either housing returns from house price appreciation, or rent to price ratios in the literature,
however we believe we are the first to consider total returns to single family houses accounting
for both rental yields net of expenses, and house price appreciation, in a broad and granular
cross-section, and a long time series.2 We construct a dataset containing rental yields and
house price appreciation data, for Single Family Rental assets (SFR), and study the total
returns to this large and understudied asset class over a long time period from 1986 to 2014,
and in a broad and granular cross section across US cities and zip codes.
    Including both the capital gain and rental yield components of single family rental returns
is crucial to understanding the return properties of single family housing assets. Each com-
ponent contributes approximately equally to the aggregate US portfolio of housing returns,
so excluding one component excludes half of total returns on average. This may explain why
prior studies, focusing either only on rental yields or house price appreciation, have reported
low returns to US housing assets. Moreover, we show that the cross-sectional correlation
between these two components is strongly negative at the city-level. Thus, each individual
component paints the opposite picture for the ranking of returns across the cross section of
US cities. Within cities, both net rental yields and house price appreciation are higher in
lower price tier zip codes. Finally, at both levels of aggregation, rental yields appear to be
less volatile than house price appreciation, implying that single family rental assets with a
larger return contribution from rental yields have higher measured Sharpe ratios.
    There is considerable interest in single family rentals as an asset class. We show that
which cities an investor should include in their portfolio depends on violations of capital
structure and dividend policy irrelevance.3 Since houses are illiquid and indivisible, it seems
hard to create “home made dividends” and thus to argue that the dividend “policy” of single
family rental assets is irrelevant for investors. Cities vary widely in the contribution of yields
    1
     Authors’ calculations using the 2013 American Community Survey (ACS) data from the Census Bureau.
The ACS reports 116M household/units and a homeownership rate of 63.5%. Of the approximately 42
million rental units, about 15 million are single family detached homes. The average US home is worth
approximately $200,000, and our calculations indicate that the average rental home is worth 25% less.
   2
     We will make our code and constructed gross and net yield data for 30 cities from 1986-2014 publicly
available at https://sites.google.com/site/andrealeisfeldt/. Our yield data can be combined with
publicly available or proprietary data on house price appreciation to form city-level total returns.
   3
     See Miller and Modigliani (1961) and Miller and Modigliani (1958).



                                                   2
vs. house price appreciation to their total returns, but not in the overall level of returns.
Debt investors may favor cities with higher dividend yields, and therefore higher debt service
coverage ratios. On the other hand, cities with higher house price appreciation may appeal
to private equity investors seeking larger capital gains over a shorter investment horizon.
    Up until very recently, almost all of the approximately 12 million single family rental
assets were owned by individuals or small investors. However, following the financial and
housing crisis of 2008, investment by large investors increased substantially. More recently,
three Real Estate Investment Trusts backed by single family rental assets have had their Ini-
tial Public Offering, with a current total market capitalization of over $18 billion.4 Moreover,
there are currently about $15.4 billion of single family rental backed bonds outstanding. A
sign of current growth in the institutional single family rental market is that Fannie Mae
recently offered the first guarantee for an single family rental securitization.5 Our study
provides the first comprehensive analysis of the total returns to a large asset class, with
growing instutional interest.
    Understanding the drivers of the returns to Single Family Rentals is important for hous-
ing economics more broadly. Since the financial crisis, homeownership rates have steadily
declined. The current low homeownership rate of 63.6% is a level not seen in the US since
the 1960’s.6 . Institutional ownership of single family rental properties may reduce the cost of
capital through diversification and lower operating costs through economies of scale. How-
ever, whether institutional involvement in single family rentals is sustainable depends on the
characteristics of the returns to single family rentals, and whether they are compatible in the
long run with institutional investors’ objectives and constraints. Our study describes how
the returns to single family rentals vary in the time series and cross section. The facts we
present inform investors in real single family rental assets, as well as in single family rental
asset backed securities about historical asset performance, and about variation in returns in
the cross section of cities and zip codes. A historical perspective can also help to forecast
how this asset class might be expected to perform, and to understand what challenges in-
vestors might face. Our study also aims to inform policy makers, who are concerned about
the effect of institutional investment and securitization on housing markets by shedding light
on whether attractive markets for single family rental investors are those in which invest-
ment would most benefit renters. Finally, the stylized facts we develop about rental yields
and house price appreciation in the cross section are also independently useful for informing
theories of housing valuations across cities, zip codes, and price tiers.
  4
    These are Invitation Homes (INVH), Starwood Waypoint Homes (SFR), and American Homes for Rent
(AMH). As of October, 2017, these three operators own over 125,000 homes.
  5
    http://www.fanniemae.com/syndicated/documents/mbs/remicsupp/2017-T01.pdf
  6
    https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/RHORUSQ156N


                                               3
    We construct time series data describing city-level returns for the largest 30 cities from
1986 to 2014 using data from the American Housing Survey (AHS) from the Census Bureau,
combined with Core Logic’s House Price Index data. To construct our long time series for
gross rental yields at the city level, we use the AHS data. The survey is conducted at
the house level, but contains a city identifier. Because of the relatively low representation
of single family detached rentals in the AHS data, we use a hedonic model, along with a
nonparametric adjustment for the different sample representation between owned and rented
housing units to construct our gross rental yield time series. To construct net yields from
gross yields, we use a formula which accounts for all renovation and operating costs as the
appropriate fraction of either home value, size or rent. We use time and city specific data for
real estate taxes and vacancies. We show that, on average, net yields are about 60% of gross
yields, and this is consistent with house-level data from single family rental bond annexes.
We then combine our resulting time series for net rental yields with a corresponding time
series for annual house price appreciation which we construct from Core Logic’s monthly
house price index data. Our data construction adjusts for the fact that rental homes are
more prevalent in lower price tiers within cities. We analyze what industry participants call
“Total Returns,” namely the sum of net rental yields and capital gains.7 Total Returns are
a useful measure for considering institutional participation in single family rentals, because
they are analogous to stock returns from dividends and capital gains. They represent the
return reported by institutional investors in the single family rental space.
    Our city-level results for 1986-2014 uncover some striking stylized facts. First, we show
that rental yields tend to be highest in the lowest price tier cities, and monotonically decline
with price tier.8 If rents were constant across price tiers, this would be a tautology, but
high quality houses should, all else equal, have both higher rents and higher purchase prices.
Empirically, however, rental yields are substantially higher in lower price tier cities. On
average, yields were 6.12% in the lowest price quintile across cities, and 2.92% in the highest
price quintile over the period 1986-2014. By contrast, higher price tier cities have experienced
more house price appreciation over the period we study.9 Indeed, we find that city-level house
price appreciation monotonically increases with price tier. From 1986 to 2014, house price
appreciation in the lowest tier cities averaged 3.24%, while it averaged 5.34% in the highest
tier. As a result, total eturns are more equated in the city cross-section than either individual
component is.10 Indeed, cities with higher rental yields have tended to have lower house price
   7
     See, for example Shen and Mele (2014).
   8
     We form price tiers using quintiles of prior year price levels using a procedure described in Section 3.3.
   9
     This finding is consistent, for example, with the results in Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai (2013) regarding
the so-called “Superstar Cities”.
  10
     We show in the Appendix that Internal Rates of Return (IRR’s) on single family rental investments are



                                                      4
appreciation. The lowest price tier cities display very slightly higher total returns of 9.36%
vs. 8.26% for the highest price tier. Note that including rental yields completely overturns
the popular wisdom that investing in coastal cities, which tend to have high prices and high
house price appreciation, dominates investing in the fly-over cities. Also striking is the fact
that the pooled time series cross-section averages of annual city-level net yields and house
price appreciation are almost exactly equal, at 4.5% and 4.2%, respectively. House price
appreciation appears to display higher volatility than rental yields do in our data, however.
Thus, lower price tier cities, with a larger contribution to returns from rents, seem to have
higher Sharpe ratios, with similar average returns to the rest of the country, but lower
return volatility. In addition, rental yields also display higher mean reversion than house
price appreciation, so this pattern should also hold for longer holding periods.
    We construct zip code level total returns at the monthly frequency from 2012-2016, the
period for which we have zip code level net yield data. We utilize a detailed new dataset
from Core Logic, Rental Trends, which was developed in 2012 by Core Logic to support
institutional investment in single family rental strategies.11 Rental Trends reports median
net rental yields, or “cap rates” by zip code, property type, and number of bedrooms for
11 million rental units, or about 75% of single family rental homes. Core Logic constructs
net rental yields using proprietary data from Multiple Listing Service records, tax records,
actual vacancies, tenant credit events, and Core Logic’s home price index model and reports.
For our zip-code-level house price appreciation analysis, we utilize Core Logic’s monthly zip-
code-level house price index data.
    We find that, similar to our results at the city-level, zip-code level net rental yields decline
with price tier. However, by contrast with the city-level data, we do not find that house
price appreciation increases with price tier at the zip-code-level. If anything, especially in
recent data, house price appreciation has been higher in the lower price tiers. This pattern is
consistent with theories of gentrification, as well as theories of the effects of subprime finance.
As a result of both net yields declining, and house price appreciation being flat or decreasing
with house prices, total returns clearly decline with house price tier at the zip-code-level.
Thus, our findings suggest that investors may find higher average returns from properties in
the lower price tiers within cities. However, house price appreciation in the lower tier zip
codes do tend to display higher betas on city-level house price appreciation, so these higher
returns may be compensation for higher risk. Although most zip codes load heavily on their
repsective city-level house price appreciation factor, with 90% of loadings falling between
approximately linear in net yields and house price appreciation, with each element contributing approxi-
mately equally.
  11
     We believe that ours is the first academic study to utilize this data.



                                                   5
0.76 and 1.23 using monthly data from 1985 to the present, these loadings tend to be higher
in the lower price tier zip codes. Vacancy and credit risk are likely to make rental yields
similarly more risky in lower price tiers.
    We also study variation in returns across vs. within cities. Consistent with our finding of
high loadings of zip level house price appreciation on city-level house price appreciation, we
find that there is more dispersion in house price appreciation across cities than within cities.
Each year, we compute the standard deviation of house price appreciation across zip codes,
and find that the average standard deviation is 5.6%. By contrast, the time series average of
the cross section standard deviation of zip code house price appreciation in excess of the city
level means is only 3.4%. On the other hand, the dispersion in yields displays less dispersion
at both levels. Over the shorter period for which we have zip-code-level net yield data, the
average standard deviation of of net yields is 1.3% across cities vs. 2.2% within cities.
    Finally, we discuss returns at the house level, using bond annex data from existing se-
curitizations of single family rental portfolios. House level variation allows us to study the
continuous effect of house price on net rental yields. In addition, the data from these recent
securitizations verify that the expense ratios and net yields we construct from AHS survey
data, and Core Logic data, conform to data from actual investor collateral. Finally, the
bond collateral data allow us to document the properties of existing investors’ operating
efficiencies and portfolio choice. We find evidence of a significant operator fixed effect in
collateral performance. In terms of portfolios, we show that institutional investors’ assets
are somewhat concentrated in cities which experienced greater subprime lending activity
prior to the financial crisis. However, we find little evidence that instutional investments
succeeded in capturing the greatest ex-post trough to peak gains in house prices.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2 we discuss the existing
literature which separately studies either house price appreciation, or price-to-rent ratios
(the inverse of gross rental yields). In Sections 3 and 4, we document the stylized facts
describing net rental yields, house price appreciation, and total returns at the city and zip-
code level, respectively. Section 5 integrates the findings from these two levels of cross section
aggregation. We discuss the comparison of our return data to actual investor data at the
house level in Section 6, and, finally, Section 7 concludes.


2     Related Literature
The prior literature has primarily focused separately on either rent to price ratios ( rental
yields) or house price appreciation (capital gains). Our contribution is to combine and
extend this literature in order to study total returns to single family rental homes, a $2.3

                                                6
Trillion value asset class. To this aim, we advance the literature in several ways. First, we
compute median city-level rental yields for the top 30 US cities from 1986 to 2014 using a
hedonic model, and the empirical distribution of rented units, to adjust for differences in
the characteristics of rented and owned units. Second, we compute net rents for each city,
year observation using data on gross rents along with actual data on vacancy and tax rates
that vary over time and in the cross section, as well as accounting for credit losses, property
management and leasing fees, HOA fees, insurance, repairs and maintenance. Finally, we
combine the data on net rental yields with data on house price appreciation to construct
total return series at the city-level from 1986-2014, and at the zip-code-level for the recent
period from 2013 to the present.
    The most closely related study to ours is the new paper by Jorda, Knoll, Kuvshinov,
Schularick, and Taylor (2017), which documents the total returns to housing at the country
level for developed nations over a very long sample, back to 1870. The distinct contribution
of our paper is to study variation in total returns within the US, across cities and zip codes,
rather than at the country level. Their finding that at the national level both rental yields and
house price appreciation are key inputs to total returns is consistent with our measurement
and results. To our knowledge, the only other academic study of Single Family Rentals is the
recent paper by Malloy, Mills, and Zarutskie (2017).12 Malloy, Mills, and Zarutskie (2017)
also focus on Single Family Rentals as an asset class. However, an important distinction is
that they do not study rental yields, but instead focus only on the capital gains component of
returns from house price appreciation. Including rental yields is a major benefit of our study,
because, for about half of the cities in the US, house price appreciation represents significantly
less than half of the total return. The sample of focus in Malloy, Mills, and Zarutskie (2017)
is also distinct from ours. Rather than constructing returns over a long time period or broad
cross section as we do, that paper instead focuses on the post-crisis period only, with a cross
section emphasis on locations with concentrated institutional investment. Thus, our study
is distinct from, and complementary to theirs. Their paper presents convincing evidence
that although institutional investor purchases of single family homes were concentrated in
geography and time, that their behavior was distinctly different from that of other housing
investors. In particular, they show that single family rental investors had longer holding
periods. Our findings support their conclusion that the single family rental business may
not simply be a trade based on depressed housing prices following the financial crisis, but
rather a sustainable asset class for institutional investors.
    In the housing literature, there are two broad ways of thinking about the price-to-rent
(“P/R”) ratio, which is the inverse of gross single family rental yields. The first methodology
 12
      See also the closely related working paper Malloy and Zarutskie (2013).


                                                      7
considers price-to-rent ratios as implied by imposing indifference, or no arbitrage, between
renting and owning. This method, following Poterba (1984), computes the “user cost” of
owned housing, and equates the inverse of this cost to the price rent ratio.13 Studies of the
user cost of housing typically focus on the relative cost of renting vs. buying, rather than on
the total return to buying, and then renting, a single family home. Himmelberg, Mayer, and
Sinai (2005) provides a clear description and assessment of the P/R ratio implied by inverse
user costs. They use a user cost model to impute an annual rental cost to owned properties
and to ask whether the early part of the millenium represented a bubble in house prices. The
six inputs to their user cost model are: the risk-free rate, property taxes, mortgage interest
deductions, depreciation, capital gains, and the housing risk premium. Davis, Lehnert, and
Martin (2008) construct a quarterly aggregate time series for the price-to-rent ratio of the
US owner-occupied housing stock from 1960-1995. By contrast, we construct city-level time
series for the price-to-rent ratio of single family rental homes, and combine that with data
on house price appreciation to construct city-level total return series.
    The user cost framework has also been used to study the cross section of price-to-rent
ratios. Garner and Verbrugge (2009) uses Consumer Expenditure Survey data from 2004
to 2007 to reconcile user costs and monetary rents at the house level. Consistent with our
findings, they report that monetary rents are much more stable than user costs implied by
house prices, and that user costs may be negatively correlated with monetary rents. Hill and
Syed (2016) emphasize variation in the cross section of price rent ratios within cities, and
like our study, they use a hedonic model to correct for differences in the characteristics of
owned vs. rented homes using data from 73,000 houses in Sydney, Australia. Finally, Bracke
(2015) uses data from homes in central London that were both rented and sold within six
months between 2006 and 2012 to show that higher priced homes have lower rental yields.
The findings in these three studies, using the CES data for the US from 2004 to 2007, and
from Sydney and London respectively, largely corroborate our findings in the AHS for the
US from 1986-2014.
    The second methodology treats housing analogously to more liquid financial assets, and
argues that lower discount rates imply higher valuations, and that momentum traders can
amplify house price movements in the short run, while rents are more stable. Following
Campbell’s (1991) decomposition of stock returns, Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and Martin
(2009) conduct a variance decomposition of the rent to price ratio using a dynamic Gordon
growth model. They find that there is an important role for variation in housing risk premia
in explaining house-price dynamics, and cyclical variation in the P/R ratio.
    Rental yields in the time series and cross-section may also be affected by financial con-
 13
      See also Hendershott and Slemrod (1982).


                                                 8
straints. Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009) identify the role of financial constraints in determining
the equilibrium rental rate corporations pay to lease equipment and structures. Because
leasing has a higher debt capacity due to stronger repossession rights, constrained firms are
willing to pay a higher yield in order to relax their borrowing constraint. We document
higher rental yields at lower price points both in the time series and in the cross-section,
which is consistent with a similar role for financial constraints influencing rents in housing
markets as they appear to in the market for corporate assets.
    House price appreciation has been studied extensively in the forecasting literature. While
we do not forecast house price appreciation for the purposes of this paper, we follow the
literature in conceptually considering city-level house price processes as best described by
a two-stage error correction model in which house prices grow with income, but exhibit
momentum and mean reversion. Malpezzi (1999) and Capozza, Hendershott, and Mack
(2004) are classic references.14 Realized house price appreciation has been shown to be
highly correlated with the degree of physical constraints such as water and mountains (
Saiz (2010)), as well as regulatory constraints such as zoning restrictions (Gyourko, Saiz,
and Summers (2008)). Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai (2013) documents a positive correlation
between house price appreciation and variation in amenities and productivity, and coined
the term “superstar cities” to describe the growing inequality between cities.15 Due to
this and other variation in city characteristics, the first stage of house price appreciation
forecasting models often include either city fixed effects, or interactions of population or
income with supply elasticity.16 Second stage momentum and mean reversion coefficients
also vary significantly across cities. This is consistent with the idea that because housing
pays a dividend in the form of a non-tradeable service, markets are local, as emphasized in
the assignment model literature Määttänen and Terviö (2014) and Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and
Schneider (2012) and in the sorting literature, such as Van Nieuwerburgh and Weill (2010).
Van Nieuwerburgh and Weill (2010) develop an assignment model of income and housing to
show how sorting of higher income consumers into higher productivity cities might explain
recent cross-sectional patterns in city-level house price appreciation, and lead to superstar
cities. Although city-specific effects are important, we note that recent work by Cotter,
Gabriel, and Roll (2014) shows that, empirically, house price appreciation has become more
  14
     As found in Case and Shiller (1990), the persistence of excess returns is higher for housing than for
stocks and bonds. This may be because houses are not as liquid as financial assets. More recently, Guren
(2014) studies house price appreciation across cities with an autoregression and measures a decay rate of less
than half, with the median city having an annual AR(1) coefficient of 0.60. Titman, Wang, and Yang (2014)
argue that the serial correlation is highest at one-year intervals and longer horizons display reversion.
  15
     See also Davidoff (2014).
  16
     See, for example, Shan and Stehn (2011).




                                                      9
correlated across cities in recent years.17
    Finally, recent work has attempted to model house prices, and less often rents, in gen-
eral equilibrium macroeconomic models. Davis and Nieuwerburgh (2014) and Piazzesi and
Schneider (2016) review some of these recent advances. In particular, house price apprecia-
tion within cities has been studied in the context of different patterns of development and
gentrification, as well as in the context of financial innovations such as subprime lending.
Guerrieri, Hartley, and Hurst (2013) emphasize the role of geographical spillovers in a spatial
equilibrium model of gentrification, and provide empirical evidence supporting the presence
of such spillovers.18 Using data from the 2000-2005 boom in San Diego house prices, along
with an assignment model which incorporates financial constraints, Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and
Schneider (2012) provide evidence of the effects of subprime lending on house prices at the
lower end.


3      City-level Total Returns
We focus on total returns from net rental yields and house price appreciation. These total
returns are analogous to total stock returns from dividends and capital gains. We also note
that total returns, unlike internal rates of return, are insensitive to the holding period, and
total returns summarize returns that would be reported annually by institutional investors.19
We begin by documenting gross and net rental yields and house price appreciation at the
city level from 1986 to 2014 for the top 30 cities by number of AHS observations in 1985. We
describe this data, our variable names, and empirical procedures in detail in the Appendix.
    At the city level, we construct total returns annually by summing net rental yields con-
structed using the AHS data, and annual realized house price appreciation constructed using
Core Logic’s monthly House Price Index data. We report yields and house price appreciation
in nominal terms, as is typical in the finance literature. The timing is as follows, where for
concreteness we use 2008 as an example. The typical total annual return calculation for a
stock j at t = 2008 is:

                                                Pj,2008 Dj,2007−2008
                                    Rj,2008 =           +            .                                     (1)
                                                Pj,2007   Pj,2007
We implement this calculation for Total Returns to single family rentals in city j at time
  17
     See also Giglio, Maggiori, and Stroebel (2015) and Giglio, Maggiori, and Stroebel (Forthcoming) for
studies of very long run housing discount rates using data freeholds vs. leaseholds.
  18
     Kolko (2007) studies the empirical determinants of gentrification and argues that proximity to city center
and the age of the housing stock are important observable drivers.
  19
     We demonstrate the relationship between total returns and IRR’s in the Appendix, where we also show
that IRR’s are nearly exactly linear in net yields and house price appreciation.


                                                      10
t = 2008, for example, using our two data sources as follows:

                                                                dividend yield = net rental yield
                                                                z       }|         {
                       SFR
                                  HPIj, CL June 2008            Net Rentj, AHS 2007
                      Rj,2008   =                             +                      .                  (2)
                                  HPI                             Pricej, AHS 2007
                                  | j, CL{zJune 2007}
                                    capital gain = HPA


The AHS is conducted bi-annually, in odd-numbered years, between May and September.
To match this timing, we compute annual house price appreciation each year from June to
June using Core Logic’s monthly House Price Index (HPI) data. We use the rent reported in
the beginning of period AHS survey, since this rent represents the dividend over the holding
period. This measurement timing has the added benefit of using rent and price data from
the same AHS survey, which avoids loss of data due to the sample varying over time.20 Our
resulting total return series thus covers 1986-2014, using Core Logic’s HPI data from June
1985-June 2014, and data on prices and rents from the 1985-2013 AHS surveys.


3.1     City-level Net Rental Yields
We begin with a detailed description of our measurement of the second term, representing
net rental yields bi-annually by city. Our first step is to compute gross rental yields on single
family homes by city using the AHS data. Although there are about twelve million single
family rental homes in the US, these homes constitute only a small fraction of the AHS
sample. Thus, to construct a city-level rental yield for single family homes (as opposed to
multi-family dwellings), we begin by estimating rental yields for owned single family homes,
which constitute the vast majority of the single family sample, in the AHS using a hedonic
model. We index time by t, city by j, and house observation by i. First, we estimate a
hedonic regression using all rented housing units in the AHS for the largest 30 cities to come
up with rental prices for key housing characteristics as follows:

           ln (MonthlyRenti ) = β0,j + β0,t + β1 ROOMSi + β2 BEDSi + β3 BATHSi +
                                                  β4 AIRSYSi + β5 UnitTypei + β6 Agei + i .

We include city fixed effects and year fixed effects, as captured by β0,j and β0,t . MSA is
a dummy variable for each of the cities, BEDS is the number of bedrooms, BATHS is the
number of bathrooms, AIRSYS is 1 if the unit has a central air conditioning system and 0
otherwise, UnitType is a dummy variable for housing type (attached or detached homes),
  20
    Rental contracts are typically at least annual, and, moreover, rents are slow moving. Thus, we argue
that it is reasonable to use rents reported in June of 2007 as covering the period June 2007-June 2008. Note
that this method also ensures that synchronous measurement of the denominator of each return component.


                                                         11
and Age is a categorical variable corresponding to the decade of construction. Once we
have our coefficient estimates using the rented subset of the AHS sample, we then use these
coefficients, along with the observed characteristics of owned single family units, to construct
estimated rents for each observation of the owner-occupied subset. This gives us both a price
and and an estimated rent for each owner-occupied unit in the AHS.21
    Figure 1 plots the house level distribution of price to gross rent ratios for each AHS year
from 1985 to 2013. We plot P/R because it makes it easy to see the clear cycle of prices
relative to rents as prices increased and fell dramatically during this period, while rents grew
at a fairly steady rate. One can clearly see the rightward shift in the P/R distribution in
2005 and 2007 relative to both the pre and post housing price peaks. It was popularly stated
that in 2011, home prices were back to 2003 levels and, consistent with this, our estimates
show that the distribution of P/R in 2011 closely resembles that from 2003.
    A key consideration in constructing representative total returns for single family rental
assets is the higher prevalence of rental units in lower price tiers.22 Therefore, to construct
our city-level gross rental yields, we weight each house level observation according to the
empirical price distribution of rented units. Specifically, for each city, in each year, we re-
weight the owner-occupied houses as follows. First, we order observations in increasing order
of their predicted rent. We then use 100 percentile bins to construct the empirical density
of renter-occupied homes in the predicted rent space. Finally, we compute the median rent-
to-price ratio among owner-occupied units, using the density of renter-occupied units to
take a weighted median. Note that relative to an unweighted median, this nonparametric
procedure reduces the weight on expensive homes. These expensive homes are the same
homes for which the hedonic model has the largest errors because it is estimated upon rental
homes, which are likely to be smaller homes. Without re-weighting rental yields, estimated
city-level yields are lower than those from Zillow or Core Logic for years for which we have
overlapping data. However, our re-weighted yields match these other data fairly well. Figure
2 displays a pooled city, time series average of the weight of rented units in the predicted
rent space. Figure 3 plots our estimated gross yields against those from Zillow for 2013, and
Figure 4 plots our estimated net yields against Core Logic’s cap rates in 2013. As can be
seen in these figures, our yield estimates using AHS data which we can construct over a long
sample, line up well with data from Zillow and Core Logic, which cover only recent years.
  21
     Although self reported values may be inflated slightly, Kiel and Zabel (1999) document the accuracy of
owner provided home values in the AHS data, and report that estimates are only slightly biased upwards, on
the order of magnitude of about 5%. They further argue that “the use of the owners’ valuations will result
in accurate estimates of house price indexes and will provide reliable estimates of the prices of house and
neighborhood characteristics.”
  22
     Our finding of higher rental yields in lower price tiers for the US is consistent with that of Bracke (2015)
for London.


                                                       12
    To compute net yields, we use detailed data on actual expenses, as well as some model
assumptions. We use location and time specific data on vacancy rates from the AHS survey.
We collect property tax rates by state from Emrath (2002), who reports Census implied tax
rates for 1990 and 2000, and from the National Association of Home Builders (NAHB), who
report tax rates implied by ACS data for 2005 to 2012. We also net out insurance, repairs
and capital expenditures using assumed percentages of house price, and property managment
fees and credit losses as assumed percentages of rent. We base the assumed percentages on
data from Tirupattur (2013) and Bernanke (2012), and confirm that the implied expense
ratios are consistent with the data we collect from single family rental backed bond annexes.
The Appendix contains further details on expense assumptions. Using these calculations of
expenses, Figure 5 plots the average gross and net rental yields, as well as the contribution
of net yields and expenses to gross yields over time at a national level, by weighting our
city-level estimates by population. Gross yields averaged 7.4% over the sample, reached
their highest level of 8.5% in 1999, and bottomed out at 6% in 2007. Using our population
weighed national average yields, it appears that the boom in house prices relative to rents
began around the year 2000. However, the larger boom in prices from 2003 to 2007 led
to a substantially larger fluctuation in gross yields than had been observed previously, at
least back to 1985. Figure 5 also plots the contribution of net yields, and the contribution
of expenses, to gross yields. On average, the contribution of expenses to gross yields is
41%, and this is broadly consistent with data from bond annexes for single family rental
collateralized securities. Expenses which are likely to vary with home prices rather than
gross rents are over four times as large in magnitude as expenses which are likely to be
computed as percentages of gross rents. The largest two expenses, real estate taxes and
repairs and maintenance, both vary with home prices. These costs, which are essentially
fixed costs from the perspective of moving from gross to net yields, rose in importance as
prices increased relative to rents. As a result, expenses peaked at 51% of gross yields in
2007, and reached a low of 36% of gross yields in 1999-2000. Finally, national average net
yields averaged 4.5% over our sample, peaking at 5.4% in 1999 and reaching a low of 3.2%
in 2008.


3.2    City-level House Price Appreciation
Having carefully described the drivers of gross and net rental yields, we now turn to the results
for house price appreciation. We compute annualized realized house price appreciation at the
city-level using Core Logic’s House Price Index (HPI) data, which is available at a monthly
frequency from 1976 to the present. To account for the higher representation of rental homes


                                               13
in lower price tiers, we use Core Logic’s tier 2 price index, which covers homes with price
levels beteween 75% and 100% of the city-level median house price. Our results are very
similar using Core Logic’s tier 11 index, which covers all price levels, as we show in the
Appendix Table ??. This is because, as we will show in Section 4, while net rental yields
vary substantially across price tiers, the relation between house price appreciation and price
tier is fairly weak. To approximately match the timing of the AHS survey, which is computed
between May and September, we compute house price appreciation from June to June each
year, and report, for example, 2008 house price appreciation as the realized house price
appreciation from June 2007 to June 2008. Figure 6 plots the time series of national realized
house price appreciation along with net rental yields. The much larger variation in house
price appreciation is clear from the graph. While the average house price appreciation of
4.3% is very close to the average net yield of 4.5% over the period 1986-2014, the time series
standard deviation of house price appreciation, using annualized bi-annual observations, is
6.8%, as compared to 0.5% (an order of magnitude lower) for net rental yields.


3.3     City-Level Total Returns
Next, we examine total returns at the city level, namely the sum of house price appreciation
and net rental yields. Figure 7 presents a scatter plot of the time series averages of city-level
annualized house price appreciation vs. the time series average of city-level net rental yields
from 1986 to 2014. Clearly, there is a strong, negative relationship. This relationship is
driven partly by different behavior across house price tiers. Lower price tier cities tend to
have higher rental yields, and lower house price appreciation. By contrast, higher price tier
cities tend to have lower rental yields and higher house price appreciation.
    To construct price tiers each year, we first match the House Price Index (HPI) from
CoreLogic in June 2014 with the Zillow Home Value Index from June 2014. We then con-
struct the price level in each year from 1985-2014 by appropriately deflating the Zillow price
levels using the Core Logic house price index.23 Then, each year, we sort cities into quintiles
according to their price level. Finally, we compute house price appreciation and rental yields
in the following year for each quintile, and average across years within each quintile. Figure
8 plots average annualized house price appreciation and average net rental yields, along with
implied total returns, from 1986-2014 by price quintile, from lowest to highest, and clearly
illustrates that rental yields decline in price while house price appreciation increases with
price.24 Of course, if rents were constant this would be a tautology, however, all else equal,
  23
    See the Appendix for further details on price tier formation and transition probabilities.
  24
    Due to momentum in house price appreciation, it is somewhat mechanical that higher HPI cities will
have higher house price appreciation. However, mean reversion attenuates this. Moreover, we estimated the


                                                   14
both rents and prices should be higher for more attractive housing units. Thus, there appear
to be different valuations for owning vs. renting the houses in the same price tier.
    Figure 9 shows that a similar pattern holds without aggregating by price tier, by plotting
average net rental yields and house price appreciation from 1986-2014 by city. Cities are
sorted from left to right in order of highest to lowest average net rental yields. Although
the pattern is not monotonic, clearly the (typically more expensive) cities on the right side
of the figure have the lowest net rental yields, but tended to experience higher annual house
price appreciation. Accordingly, the correlation between average net yields and house price
appreciation across cities is -0.65. We noted above that, on average over this long time series,
net rental yields and house price appreciation contributed roughly equally to total returns.
Although house price appreciation varied in the time series by a much larger amount, in the
cross-section house price appreciation and net rental yields display about the same amount
of variation. The cross section standard deviation of the time series averages of city-level
net rental yields and house price appreciation are 1.3% and 1.4%, respectively.
    The negative relationship between net yields and house price appreciation across cities
implies that the the cross-sectional dispersion in long run averages of total returns is relatively
low (1.1%). The approximate equality of total returns across cities in the long run can
possibly be understood in the context of the user cost model described in Himmelberg,
Mayer, and Sinai (2005). That paper presents a user cost model which implies that rents will
be lower in locations in which expected capital gains are higher. If consumers could forecast
that low supply elasticity, high amenity cities would have higher house price appreciation,
then buying may have been perceived as an important hedge against future price increases.
However, this explanation seems to suggest that rents should eventually catch up to price
growth. In fact, the role of home buying as a hedge against future rent increases is modeled
and emphasized in Sinai and Souleles (2005). Another explanation for high rental yields in
low price tiers is that consumers in these tiers are more credit constrained. The negative
relationship between price levels and rental yields would then naturally arise from differences
in the convenience yields rents provide by increasing renter vs. owner borrowing capacity as
in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009).
    Finally, we discuss the implications of these results for portfolio formation. We first
examine a simple portfolio objective which might be appealing to investors, namely an
objective which selects cities with higher total returns. Table 2 ranks cities in decreasing
order, and displays the cities’ corresponding ranks for average net yields and house price
appreciation.
diagonals of the empirical transition matrix across price tiers to be 0.92, 0.83, 0.89, 0.91, and 0.94, from the
lowest to highest tier, respectively.



                                                      15
    Institutional investors may also seek portfolios which enable high leverage. Under current
conditions of high and rising price levels, leverage is most constrained by the minimum debt
service coverage ratio on net rental yields relative to interest payments. The debt service
coverage ratio required to receive a bond rating is about 1.2. According to bond annex data
from single family rental securitizations, most loan to value ratios range between 60% and
70%. At a 60% loan to value ratio, and at a 6% rate of interest, which falls between individual
borrower rates and single borrower securitization rates, a yield of 4.35% is required in order
to satisfy a typical DSCR of 1.2. We highlight cities which have net yields above 4.35% with
an asterisk. While we do not address the friction that leads to different leverage constraints,
based on either loan to value, or debt service coverage ratios, we note that variation over
time or across assets in the relative importance of such constraints represent a violation of
Miller and Modigliani (1961). Thus, in the current environment, investors may prefer higher
yield assets. These assets are more prevalent in lower price tier cities.
    Next, we add a measure of the risk return tradeoff. Table 3 presents the city-level
data, sorted in decreasing order by average total returns divided by annualized total return
volatility 1986-2014. Volatility is computed using binannual data on annualized total returns.
Table ?? displays robustess checks, including using annual house price appreciation data,
and shows that results are very similar, and the conclusions are unchanged. Although total
returns are approximately equated in the cross section, Table 3 clearly shows that cities for
which rental yields contribute more to total returns have lower volatility, and hence higher
Sharpe ratios.25 Indeed, a univariate regression of city-level Sharpe ratios on the fraction
of total returns from net yields generates an adjusted R2 of 23% and a slope coefficient of
3.14 which is significant at the 1% level. Dropping the outlier of Pittsburgh generates an
adjusted R2 of 46% and a slope coefficient of 2.10 which is significant at the 1% level.
    One concern with Sharpe ratios estimated with AHS data is that Davis and Quintin
(Forthcoming) show that survey respondents tended to report lower house prices during
the boom, and higher house prices during the bust. Smoothing of house price estimates
reduces the volatility of the denominator of rental yields. This same bias should not affect
the numerator, however. This is because the AHS only reports rents for rented units, for
which rents should reflect contractual income. This finding is consistent with the findings in
Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and Martin (2009), namely that variation in housing risk premia
explain most of the variation in price-to-rent ratios, and that the covariance between expected
future housing risk premia and rents is positive in most markets. In particular, their finding
of positive covariance between expected future housing risk premia and rents implies lower
volatility in rental yields vs. house prices.
 25
      Sharpe (1966).


                                              16
City-level Stylized Facts: To summarize, the city-level stylized facts describing total
returns and their components in US data from 1986 to 2014 are as follows:

    1. Gross and net rental yields tend to decline with price.

    2. Conversely, realized house price appreciation was higher in higher price tiers.

    3. Together, these results imply that there is less cross-sectional dispersion in total returns
       than in either of its components.

    4. House price appreciation appears to be more volatile in time series data than are
       rental yields. As a result, measured Sharpe ratios are higher for cities with with higher
       contributions to returns from rental yields.


4      Zip-Code-Level Total Returns
We use Core Logic’s Rental Trends dataset to examine net rental yields at the zip-code-level
at the monthly frequency from 2013 to 2017, with the same timing convention as at the city
level, as described in Equation 2. This data contains property-level net yields (also known
as “capitalization” or “cap” rates) for 11 million units, or about 75% of single-family rental
homes.26 We use Core Logic’s House Price Index (HPI) data at a monthly frequency to
compute zip-code-level house price appreciation annually from June to June, to match the
timing of the city-level analysis using AHS data. Similarly, we use the June snapshot of net
yields from Rental Trends. Our zip code level sample includes 2,133 zip codes across the
30 largest cities. Though the sample is shorter than the AHS sample, the advantage of the
Core Logic data is the ability to compare yields within cities, across zip codes.27


4.1     Zip-Code-Level Net Rental Yields
To get an idea of how much optimization of locations within a city might improve sin-
gle family rental asset performance, we first discuss the relative amount of cross-sectional
variation in net yields within cities, across zip codes, vs. across cities. On average from
2013-2017, the cross-sectional standard deviation in net yields across zip codes, within cities
  26
     See http://www.corelogic.com/downloadable-docs/capital-markets-rentaltrends.pdfand the
Appendix for further details on the Rental Trends data.
  27
     Zillow gross yield data is also available at the zip-code level for the recent time period, but Zillow does
not have data on expenses or net yields. Moreover, Core Logic claims to have the largest dataset of MLS
rents, which they supplement with local electronic listings.




                                                      17
was 1.3%, which is slightly lower than the 1.7% dispersion across cities in the city-level data
we construct using the AHS data from 1986 to 2014.28
   Within cities, rental yields decline with zip-code price tier, which mimics the pattern
found across city-level price tiers. Figure 10 plots average zip-code-level excess yields over
their respective city-level average, by house price quintile, for the period from 2013 to 2017
over which we have overlapping Core Logic data on both components of total returns. The
declining pattern of net yields with price tier is clearly apparent in the figure.
   In sum, there is about as much dispersion in net yields within cities as across cities, and
the pattern of rental yields across zip codes within cities is declining with zip-code price tier.


4.2     Zip-Code-Level House Price Appreciation
Zip-code-level house price appreciation loads heavily on city-level appreciation, with 90%
of loadings in a univariate “industry CAPM” style regression using data from 1985-2014,
including an intercept, falling between 0.76 and 1.23.29 Similarly, we also note that if one
regresses zip-code-level house price appreciation over the period 1986-2014 on city fixed
effects only, the R2 is 71%. Adding 1990 and 2013 income (which enter negatively and
positively, respectively), the R2 increases only marginally, to 72%. Finally, adding a 1985
price quintile dummy, and the distance from city hall, the R2 becomes 75%, with both
variables entering negatively. Clearly, zip-code-level house price appreciation is tightly linked
to city-level outcomes.30 Each year from 1986 to 2014, we compute the standard deviation
of house price appreciation across zip codes, and find that the average standard deviation
is 5.6%. By contrast, the time series average of the cross section standard deviation of
zip code house price appreciation in excess of the city level means is only 3.4%. Thus,
the differences between the across and within city dispersion estimates are larger for house
price appreciation, and the difference in cross-sectional dispersion in house price appreciation
across and within cities is larger than that for rental yields. That is, rental yields display
a similar amount of dispersion within cities vs. across cities, while house price appreciation
varies more across cities than within cities. This fact seems interesting for models of housing
demand. It suggests that there is a strong city-level factor driving house price appreciation,
while rents may be driven more by neighborhood-level incomes.
  28
      Average dispersion in city level yields in the data constructed using AHS data is 2.2% for the shorter
time period 2013-2014 for which the city and zip-level data overlap. The standard deviation in net yields
across cities in Core Logic’s net yield data from 2013-2017 was 1.3% on average, equal to the average within
city dispersion estimate.
   29
      We do note, however, that Core Logic likely shrinks their noisy zip level estimates towards the city-level
mean when cleaning their data.
   30
      See Glaeser, Gyourko, Morales, and Nathanson (2014) for a model of house price dynamics consistent
with a strong city-level factor.


                                                      18
    We find that while net rental yields decline with price tier within cities, as they do across
cities, house price appreciation appears to also decline with price tier within cities. This
is in stark contrast to the pattern of increasing house price appreciation across city-level
price tiers. Since rental yields and house price appreciation both decline with price tiers
within cities, there appear to be opportunities for substantially larger total returns in the
lower price tier zip codes within US cities. This is in contrast to the city-level data, in
which the negative correlation between rental yields and house price appreciation implied a
more flat total return distribution across cities. Figure 10 plots average excess house price
appreciation over their respective city-level average, by house price quintile, for the period
from 2013 to 2017 over which we have overlapping Core Logic data on both components
of total returns. The figure shows that the lower price quintiles had higher house price
appreciation over this period. To get a longer term perspective on zip-code-level variation
in house price appreciation, Figure 11 plots average excess house price appreciation over the
city-level average by zip-code-level house price quintile for the longer period from 1986-2014.
This figure shows that there is much less dispersion in house price appreciation over longer
horizons, however the declining pattern across price tiers is still present.


4.3       Zip-Code-Level Total Returns
Summarizing how much optimization of locations within a city might improve single family
rental return profiles, Figure 12 displays the distribution of average total returns across
all zip codes for the period 2013-2017. To construct average total returns by zip code for
the purposes of this illustrative figure, we add the average house price appreciation from
1986-2014 to average net yields from June of each year 2013-2017. We present results using
only the overlapping sample in Section 5 below. Although using averages over different
time periods is imperfect, we use the longer house price appreciation sample to estimate
representative average total returns because house price appreciation from 2013-2017 was
much higher than average, however our zip-code level yield data only goes back to 2013.
Yields appear to be much more stable than house price appreciation is over time. Thus, we
argue we can approximately capture much of the relevant cross-sectional heterogeneity in net
yields using the shorter sample, however we acknowledge that our choice is driven by data
availability. Indeed, to our knowledge, zip-code-level rents are unavailable to researchers
from any electronic source outside of the recent time period, and, as noted, ours is the first
academic study to use the recent Core Logic data on net rents.31
    To summarize the findings for how total returns comprised by net rental yields and house
 31
      As noted, gross rents are also available in recent years from Zillow.



                                                       19
price appreciation vary by price tier within cities across zip codes, Figure 13 plots the ratio
of the average total returns from 2013-2017 in the lowest two price quintiles in each city,
relative to the city-level average. Almost all of these ratios are at or above 1.
    There may be several reasons why low price tier zip codes might generate higher total
returns. With respect to rental yields, it is possible that Core Logic underestimates credit
and vacancy costs in the lowest tiers, biasing net rental yields up, however we find the
same pattern of declining yields in the house level data underlying recent securitizations of
single family rental properties. Net rents in these price tiers may be more volatile over the
housing cycle, and therefore more risky. Zip code level house price appreciation certainly
appears to have more city-level risk in lower price tiers.32 The average loadings of zip-code-
level house price appreciation on city-level house price appreciation are declining with price
levels. These loadings are 1.04, 1.05, 1.00, 0.95 and 0.93, from the lowest to highest price
quintiles, respectively. Thus, lower tier zip codes do appear to be riskier. Lower tier zip
codes may also have benefited from gentrification or innovations in lending practices.33

Zip-Code-Level Stylized Facts:

    1. Net rental yields decline with house prices within cities.

    2. House price appreciation does not increase with house prices within cities.

    3. As a result, total returns decline with house prices within cities.

    4. There is more measured dispersion in house price appreciation across cities than within
       cities across zip codes. Zip-code-level house price appreciation appears to be tightly
       linked to city-level outcomes.

    5. By contrast, the dispersion in yields is of similar magnitude at the zip code and city
       levels.


5      Combining City and Zip-Code-Level Results
Figure 14 presents a visual summary of our results for total returns across and within US
cities. Each panel presents data for cities by price tier along the x-axis, and zip codes by
price tier along the y-axis. Red cells indicate higher returns, and blue cells denote lower
  32
     Hartman-Glaser and Mann (2016) find that house price appreciation is more volatile in lower income
zip codes.
  33
     See Kolko (2007) and Guerrieri, Hartley, and Hurst (2013) for evidence of gentrification effects, and
Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2012) for evidence of the impact of subprime lending.


                                                   20
returns. Starting with net rental yields, the top left panel shows that rental yields decrease
with price tier both across cities, and within cities across zip codes. The highest average
net rental yields for the period for which we have zip-code-level net yield data are found
in the lowest price tier zip codes of the lowest price tier cities. The cells are darker red
moving up and to the left, and darker blue moving down and to the right. By contrast,
the top right panel shows that over this same period for which we have zip-code level net
rental yields, the highest average house price appreciation was observed in the highest price
tiers of the highest price tier cities. The cells are darker red moving up and to the right,
and darker blue moving down and to the left. The bottom left panel of Figure 14, using
the longer house price appreciation time series, shows that, although the across city pattern
tends to consistently display higher house price appreciation in higher tier cities, over the
longer sample the cross-zip-code pattern in house price appreciation is fairly flat. That is,
while the across city pattern for house price appreciation appears robust, the within city
pattern for house price appreciation seems to depend on the sample period. The cells are
darker blue moving to the left, while the color is constant along the vertical dimension. Thus,
the dynamics of within city house price appreciation remain an interesting avenue for future
study, as neither gentrification or lending effects seem to describe the within-city pattern
over the full sample.
    Despite relatively flat house price appreciation across zip codes over the longer sample,
due to the declining pattern of net yields within cities, the bottom left panel shows that
total returns are highest in the lower tier zip codes. This plot illustrates that, while total
returns are equated across cities (the colors are constand along the horizontal dimension),
lower price tier zip codes have higher total returns (cells are more red at the top, and blue at
the bottom). Thus, we conclude that the highest total returns to single family rentals appear
to be in the lower priced zip codes. In higher price tier cities, these higher total returns are
driven by high house price appreciation. This fact seems consistent with the sorting model in
Van Nieuwerburgh and Weill (2010), however we are not aware of a model which allows for
renting and can simultaneously explain both house price appreciation and rental yeilds. This
is consistent with the strong city-level house price appreciation factor documented in Section
4.2. By contrast, in lower price tier cities, these higher total returns are driven by higher
rental yields. This fact appears to be consistent with the model of financial constraints
in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009), but again that paper fails to explain both rental yields
and capital gains together. The variation in the composition of total returns implies that
which city-level price tier an investor chooses to invest in might be driven by the capital
structure of the investment, along with violations of Miller and Modigliani (1958) capital
structure irrelevance. Investing in lower price tier cities, with higher rental yields, will


                                              21
alleviate leverage constraints from debt service coverage ratios, which tend to bind in higher
price environments. On the other hand, investing in higher price tier cities leads to higher
capital gains, which can be important for returns in private equity structures with shorter
holding periods.


6      House-Level Total Returns
The fourteen single-borrower single family rental bond issuances between November 2013
(the first such issuance) and January 2015 provide us with rich data on 53,806 single-family
rental properties backing $7.8 billion in notional bond value.34 We examine the total returns
to single family rentals at the house level in order to provide a robustness check on our net
yield estimates derived from AHS at the city level, and Core Logic data at the zip-code level,
as well as to provide evidence on investor behavior in the single family rental asset class thus
far.
     In the bond annex data, we observe underwritten gross rents, net income, and broker-
price opinions (BPOs) on each property.35 Although higher broker-price opinions increase
collateral values, they also drive down yields and future capital gains. Thus, we treat the
BPOs as an unbiased estimate of the market value. The fourteen issuances come from seven
different institutional single family rental operators.36 To provide a house-level comparison
to the AHS and Core Logic net yields, we first sum all securitized net income and divide
by the total securitized property value to arrive at 5.0% as a weighted measure of net
income from these single family rental properties.37 This seems roughly comparable to our
average estimated net yield of 4.3% from the 2013 AHS data and 6.0% from 2013 CoreLogic
RentalTrends. Recall that we compare yields from these two sources in Figure 4.
     We study the determinants of the income earned by each property. Because of the
low time-series volatility of yields, and because all property characteristics were measured
within an 18 month time span, we abstract from the time dimension. We index each house
observation by i, zip by j, and each issuance by m ∈ {1, 2, ...14}. We estimate the following
regression using the rented housing units in the bond annexes:
  34
     As described in the data appendix, each bond issuance comes with and Annex A providing property-level
detail on the collateral.
  35
     Underwritten net income accounts for vacancy and bad debts, i.e., subtracts off some cash to allot to
said categories, though all the properties in the sample are leased.
  36
     These operators have since merged to form three larger operators.
  37
     At an issuance level, this varies from 4.3% for IH 2014-SFR2, which has the highest average BPO values,
to 6.2% for AH4R 2014-SFR2.




                                                    22
                      Annual Incomei = β0,j + β0,m + β1 BPO VALUEi + i

Zip code fixed effects and issuer fixed effects are captured by β0,j and β0,m . BPO VALUE is
the property value as determined by a third-party broker at the time the property is rented.
This broker also provides the monthly rent for underwriting purposes. We annualize the
underwritten rent amount to form the variable Annual Income. We report the values of β0,m
in Table 4 and we view the similarity across separate issuances from the same single family
rental operators as evidence of the reliability of the estimates.
    We estimate β1 to be 2.5%, implying that net income increases $2,500 if property value
increases from $100,000 to $200,000. Note that this is considerably lower than the 5.0%
average net income of these properties. This is because there is a positive intercept, meaning
that a worthless house seemingly rents for a positive amount. Of course, in practice the
positive intercept is due to the indivisibility of housing. The regression Annual Incomei =
β0 + β1 BPO VALUEi yields an estimate for β0 of $4,472.38 Figures 15 and 16 provide
illustrative scatter plots of the bond annex data. Figures 15 clearly displays the positive
intercept. Figure 16 shows the resulting downward-sloping net income ratio.39
    As suggested by the heterogeneity in issuer profitability, there is considerable dispersion
in house-level expense ratios, defined as the ratio of rent minus net income to rent. The mean
expense ratio is 42%. This expense ratio is close to our estimated expense ration using AHS
data to construct city-level net yields. We demonstrate the heterogenity in Figure 17, which
plots the distribution of expense ratios. Consistent with our findings in the time series for
city-level net yields estimated using AHS data, we find that (possibly because costs which
scale with house prices act like larger fixed costs relative to rents for higher priced homes) the
expense ratio is increasing with property value. After controlling for zip code and operator
fixed effects, an increase in property value from $100,000 to $200,000 increases the expense
ratio by 1.5% (for example, from 30 to 31.5%).
    The popular press has claimed that single family rental operators have focused on dis-
tressed properties that hit the market following the subprime boom and bust. If true, this
would make sense for at least three reasons. First, from a capital structure perspective, it
makes sense to turn credit constrained owners into renters, since, as discussed, leasing has
a higher debt capacity. Second, the returns to single family rental strategies depend on the
  38
     There is certainly some nonlinearity as the value of a house approaches zero. If we estimate on only
properties with a value under $120,000, the estimate of β0 drops to $3,676 and the estimate of β1 climbs to
3.1%.
  39
     This picture reinforces the need for differentiating between the rent-to-price ratios of renter-occupied
and owner-occupied homes, as discussed in the previous section.


                                                     23
dividends from net rents, and the capital gains from house price appreciation. Purchasing
distressed homes at a discount can thus improve returns. Finally, and relatedly, foreclosure
auctions allowed institutional purchasers to buy homes in bulk, thereby substantially reduc-
ing the typically large search and brokerage costs associated with acquisitions. To assess
this popular claim empirically, we examine the geography and house price appreciation per-
formance of the portfolios of homes collateralizing single family rental backed bonds. Figure
19 plots peak to trough vs. trough to current house prices for the cities with the largest
market share of single family rental collateral, along with a comparison the other largest
cities. The CBSAs with the five largest shares of single family rental properties in securi-
tized products are Phoenix (13.9%), Atlanta (12.1%), Tampa (7.3%), Houston (5.2%), and
Las Vegas (4.7%). Figure 19 shows that cities with larger peak to trough losses have tended
to experience larger trough to present gains in home values. The figure also provides some
evidence that institutional investors in single family rentals chose locations with large peak
to trough losses and trough to peak gains.40
    Finally, we use the bond annex data to investigate the relation between single family
rental investment post-crisis and subprime lending pre-crisis. We merge the bond annex data
with Core Logic’s Loan Performace data on non-agency subprime originations by zip code
as follows: We bin the 53,806 properties in our dataset into zip codes and count the number
of properties by zip code.41 We then compute the average monthly subprime originations
(by value) between 2003 and 2008 in each zip code in the Loan Performance data. We find
some limited support for subprime borrowers being turned into single family rental renters.
The correlation between the two variables is 0.37. The two variables are plotted in Figure
18, showing that the zip codes with the highest property counts tend to have higher past
subprime originations.


7      Conclusion
In this paper, we study the returns to single family rental strategies over a long time series,
from 1986 to 2014, in order to understand the drivers of single family rental returns, and
to evaluate the sustainability of institutional investor participation. We also aim to provide
a useful set of stylized facts for models of housing markets. Importantly, we emphasize the
contribution to total returns from both net rental yields, and house price appreciation. Prior
studies typically focus on only one component of these.
  40
     Malloy et al. (2017) emphasize the related points that institutional investors focused on cities with a
large supply of homes for sale, and may have helped to support prices in the neighborhoods they operate in.
  41
     The most frequent zip code is 85037 in Phoenix, with 334 properties.



                                                    24
    At the city level, we find that net rental yields decline with price tier, while house price
appreciation increases with price tier. As a result, looking at either component in isolation
leads to the opposite ranking of cities in the cross section. At the city level, total returns are
approximately equated, despite the varying composition of returns. However, due to the fact
that net rental yields appear to be substantially less volatile than house price appreciation
is, measured Sharpe ratios are higher for lower price tier cities with a larger contribution
to total returns from rental yields. Miller Modigliani violations may also guide portfolio
formation, since leverage constraints are affected differently by dividend yields, which can
relax debt service coverage ratios, and capital gains, which can relax loan to value ratios.
Clienteles which prefer income generating assets may prefer homes in lower price tiers with
higher dividends in the form of rental yields. Private equity investors seeking shorter or
medium term capital gains may, on the other hand, prefer higher price tier cities.
    Within cities, both net rental yields and house price appreciation decline with price tier.
Thus, higher total returns are generated by the lower price tiers within cities. In terms of
dispersion, there appears to be more dispersion in house price appreciation across cities than
across zip codes within cities, indicating a strong city-level factor to house price appreciation.
Yields, on the other hand, display a similar amount of variation across and within cities.
    Single family rentals are an important asset class, constituting about $2.3 trillion in
market value. Although most all of these assets are currently owned by individual or small
investors, there has been a marked increase in institutional participation in recent years. At
present, more than $14 billion in single family rental backed bonds are outstanding. Thus,
we argue that single family rental is an interesting, large, asset class, which is new to large
institutional, and securitized, investment. The securitized single family rental market also
has considerable growth potential, in particular with the recent ratings and issuances of
multi-borrower backed bonds, and Fannie Mae’s decision to guarantee a single family rental
backed loan.
    It is also possible that the propensity of households to rent vs. buy may grow, or remain
elevated, as well, increasing the importance of single family rentals (currently about 35% of all
rental households). According to the American Community Survey, the homeownership rate
peaked in 2007 at about 67%, fell to 63% by 2014. This represents a change in housing status
from owned to rented for over 1.5 million households and about $228 billion in housing value.
Several structural (or at least persistent) factors may have contributed to the recent decline
in homeownership. Standards for mortgage lending, which got stricter during the housing
downturn, have continued to tighten. Reports by the Urban Institute document that the
median borrower FICO score at origination climbed from 700 in 2001 to 710 by 2007, and has



                                               25
since gone up to 750.42 At the same time, student debt has increased dramatically, growing
166% from 2005 to 2012, potentially reducing borrowers’ mortgage capacity.43 Notably,
there has not been an offsetting decline, but instead an increase, in auto or credit card
debt.44 Moreover, employment for the relatively large millenial generation was impacted
heavily by the recent recession, and renting has been a popular option for the age group at
which household formation previously peaked. The age at which a majority of individuals
are homeowners has increased from 32 in 1990 to 38 in 2012,45 , and the August 2014 Fannie
Mae National Housing Survey finds 32% of respondents would rent if they were going to
move.46 For these reasons, we argue that understanding the single family rental asset class
is important, and our paper aims to fill the existing gap in the literature on the total returns
to single family homes.


References
Benjamin S. Bernanke. The u.s. housing market: Current conditions and policy considera-
  tions. Technical report, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2012.

Philippe Bracke. House prices and rents: Microevidence from a matched data set in central
  london. Real Estate Economics, 2015.

Sean D Campbell, Morris A Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert F Martin. What moves housing
  markets: A variance decomposition of the rent–price ratio. Journal of Urban Economics,
  66(2):90–102, 2009.

Dennis R Capozza, Patric H Hendershott, and Charlotte Mack. An anatomy of price dy-
  namics in illiquid markets: analysis and evidence from local housing markets. Real Estate
  Economics, 32(1):1–32, 2004.

Karl E Case and Robert J Shiller. Forecasting prices and excess returns in the housing
 market. Real Estate Economics, 18(3):253–273, 1990.

John Cotter, Stuart A Gabriel, and Richard Roll. Can housing risk be diversified? a cau-
  tionary tale from the recent boom and bust. Review of Financial Studies, 2014.
 42
    http://www.urban.org/research/publication/housing-finance-glance-may-2015l
 43
    http://www.newyorkfed.org/studentloandebt/index.html.
 44
    See http://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/hhdc.html#/2014/q3.
 45
    ACS data analyzed in Kolko (2014).
 46
    http://www.fanniemae.com/portal/about-us/media/corporate-news/2014/6166.html




                                              26
Thomas Davidoff. Supply constraints are not valid instrumental variables for home prices
 because they are correlated wtih many demand factors. Working Paper, 2014.

Morris A. Davis and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. Housing, finance and the macroeconomy.
 Working Paper 20287, National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2014. URL http:
 //www.nber.org/papers/w20287.

Morris A. Davis and Erwan Quintin. On the nature of self-assessed house prices. Real Estate
 Economics, Forthcoming.

Morris A. Davis, Andreas Lehnert, and Robert F. Martin. The rent-price ratio for the
 aggregate stock of owner-occupied housing. Review of Income and Wealth, 2008.

Andrea L Eisfeldt and Adriano A Rampini. Leasing, ability to repossess, and debt capacity.
 Review of Financial Studies, 22(4):1621–1657, 2009.

Paul Emrath. Property taxes in the 2000 census. Housing Economics, 2002.

Thesia I. Garner and Randal Verbrugge. Reconciling user costs and rental equivalence:
 Evidence from the us consumer expenditure survey. Journal of Housing Economics, 2009.

Stefano Giglio, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. Very long-run discount rates.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015.

Stefano Giglio, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. No-bubble condition: Model-free
  tests in housing markets. Econometrica, Forthcoming.

Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles G. Nathanson. Housing
  dynamics: An urban approach. Journal of Urban Economics, 2014.

Veronica Guerrieri, Daniel Hartley, and Erik Hurst. Endogenous gentrification and housing
  price dynamics. Journal of Public Economics, 100:45–60, 2013.

Adam Guren. The causes and consequences of house price momentum. Technical report,
 mimeo, 2014.

Joseph Gyourko, Albert Saiz, and Anita Summers. A new measure of the local regulatory
  environment for housing markets: The wharton residential land use regulatory index.
  Urban Studies, 45:693–729, 2008.

Joseph Gyourko, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. Superstar cities. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4):167–199, 2013.

                                            27
Barney Hartman-Glaser and William Mann. Collateral constraints, wealth effects, and
  volatility: Evidence from real estate markets. Working Paper, 2016.

Patric H Hendershott and Joel Slemrod. Taxes and the user cost of capital for owner-occupied
  housing. Real Estate Economics, 10(4):375–393, 1982.

Robert J. Hill and Iqbal A. Syed. Hedonic price-rent ratios, user cost, and departures from
  equilibrium in the housing market. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2016.

Charles Himmelberg, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. Assessing high house prices:
 Bubbles, fundamentals and misperceptions. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4):
 67–92, 2005.

Oscar Jorda, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor. The
  rate of return on everything, 1870-2015. Working Paper, 2017.

Katherine A Kiel and Jeffrey E Zabel. The accuracy of owner-provided house values: The
 1978–1991 american housing survey. Real Estate Economics, 27(2):263–298, 1999.

Jed Kolko. The determinants of gentrification. Available at SSRN 985714, 2007.

Jed Kolko. The two big millennial housing myths. Technical report, Trulia presentation at
  Goldman Sachs on September 5, 2014, 2014.

Tim Landvoigt, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. The Housing Market(s) of San
  Diego. NBER Working Papers 17723, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, January
  2012. URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/17723.html.

Niku Määttänen and Marko Terviö. Income distribution and housing prices: an assignment
  model approach. Journal of Economic Theory, 151:381–410, 2014.

Raven Malloy and Rebecca Zarutskie. Business investor activity in the single-family-housing
  market. FEDS Notes, 2013.

Raven Malloy, James Mills, and Rebecca Zarutskie. Large-scale buy-to-rent investors in the
  single-family housing market: The emergence of a new asset class. Real Estate Economics,
  2017.

Stephen Malpezzi. A simple error correction model of house prices. Journal of Housing
  Economics, 8(1):27–62, 1999.

Merton Miller and Franco Modigliani. The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the
 theory of investment. American Economic Review, 1958.

                                            28
Merton Miller and Franco Modigliani. Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation of shares.
 The Journal of Business, 1961.

M. Piazzesi and M. Schneider. Chapter 19 - housing and macroeconomics. volume 2 of
 Handbook of Macroeconomics, pages 1547 – 1640. Elsevier, 2016. doi: https://doi.org/10.
 1016/bs.hesmac.2016.06.003. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
 pii/S1574004816300167.

James M Poterba. Tax subsidies to owner-occupied housing: an asset-market approach. The
  quarterly journal of economics, pages 729–752, 1984.

Albert Saiz. The geographic determinants of housing supply. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(3):1253–1296, 2010.

Hui Shan and Sven Jari Stehn. Us house price bottom in sight. Technical report, Goldman
 Sachs, 2011.

William F. Sharpe. Mutual fund performance. Journal of Business, 39:119–138, 1966.

Ying Shen and Richard Mele. Opportunity in single-family rentals.       Technical report,
  Deutsche Bank Securities, Inc., 2014.

Todd Sinai and Nicolas S. Souleles. Owner occupied housing as a hedge against rent risk.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120:763–798, 2005.

Vishwanath Tirupattur. The new age of buy-to-rent. Technical report, Morgan Stanley
  Research, 2013.

Sheridan Titman, Ko Wang, and Jing Yang. The dynamics of housing prices. Working
  Paper 20418, National Bureau of Economic Research, August 2014. URL http://www.
  nber.org/papers/w20418.

Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh and Pierre-Olivier Weill. Why has house price dispersion gone up?
  The Review of Economic Studies, 77(4):1567–1606, 2010.




                                           29
Figures and Tables:                                                                Please view in color


  Figure 1: Price-to-Rent Ratios, Owned Homes: AHS data and Hedonic Model 1985-2013.

                                                                                   P/R distribution of owned homes


                   0.05




                   0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      as.factor(year)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1985
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1991

                   0.03                                                                                                                                                                                                   1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1995
       Frequency




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2003
                   0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2013

                   0.01




                   0.00


                          0       10                                                         20                                          30                                         40                           50
                                                                                                     Price to rent ratio




 Figure 2: Average fraction of rented homes in each percentile of predicted rents in the AHS.
 We non-parametrically re-weight homes within cities to adjust weighted median net rental
 yields. The re-weighted distribution more accurately represents the actual distribution of rented
 homes across the distribution of rent levels. This figure plots average of the city-year specific
 non-parametric weights, pooled over cities and years.
                                                        3.5




                                                         3




                                                        2.5
                              in predicted rent space
                                 Density of renters




                                                         2




                                                        1.5




                                                         1




                                                        0.5




                                                         0
                                                              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
                                                                                                                     Percentile by projected rent




                                                                                                                           30
                                                                  Figure 3: Gross yields estimated from AHS vs. Zillow gross yields 2013.                                                              1


                                                                                           Our gross yield from AHS data vs. Zillow R/P (2013)
               Gross Yield from our methods applied to AHS data   0.14                                                                                                             Miami

                                                                                                                                                                                            Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                            Houston
                                                                  0.12                                                                                                              Tampa
                                                                                                                                                             Atlanta
                                                                                                                                                                           Pittsburgh
                                                                                                                                                                            Cleveland
                                                                  0.10
                                                                                                                                                                             Dallas
                                                                                                                                                           Kansas City

                                                                                                                                                     St. Louis
                                                                                                                                Minneapolis                           Chicago
                                                                  0.08
                                                                                                                Newark                         Philadelphia           Oklahoma City
                                                                                                                                       Baltimore
                                                                                                         Phoenix Riverside

                                                                  0.06                                       Boston       Virginia Beach
                                                                                                                          Nassau-Suffolk
                                                                                          San Diego
                                                                                           Los Angeles                 Washington
                                                                                                             Seattle
                                                                                  San Jose                                New York
                                                                                                Anaheim
                                                                  0.04           Oakland
                                                                                         San Francisco

                                                                         0.04                  0.06                      0.08                      0.10                           0.12
                                                                                                                       Gross Yield from Zillow




Figure 4: Net yields estimated from AHS vs. Core Logic cap rates (net yields) 2013.
                                                                                 2


                                                                                Our net yield from AHS data vs. CoreLogic capitalization rate (2013)
                                                                  0.10
                                                                                                                                                                Miami
  Net Yield from our methods applied to AHS data




                                                                                                                                                                 Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                         Houston
                                                                  0.08
                                                                                                                                                              Atlanta
                                                                                                                                      Pittsburgh                            Tampa

                                                                                                                                                          Cleveland
                                                                  0.06
                                                                                                                                              St. Louis           Kansas City
                                                                                                                                 Minneapolis                   Dallas

                                                                                                                                  Riverside                    Oklahoma City

                                                                  0.04                                          Phoenix                                                  Philadelphia
                                                                                                                                     Chicago
                                                                                   Los Angeles
                                                                                     Boston San Diego Virginia Beach                 Baltimore
                                                                                  Anaheim         Washington
                                                                              Nassau-Suffolk    Newark
                                                                  0.02        San Jose
                                                                                             Oakland
                                                                           San Francisco New York Seattle

                                                                                   0.04               0.05                 0.06                    0.07                    0.08                 0.09
                                                                                                  Net Yield (aka cap rate) from CoreLogic RentalTrends




                                                                                                                           31
Figure 5: Gross yields, net yields, and expense rates. A national average is computed by
taking a city population weighted average of the city-level weighted medians of gross yields,
net yields, and expense rates from 1986-2014.
                                                                                                net yield               expenses                  gross yield

            9%



            8%



            7%



            6%



            5%



            4%



            3%



            2%



            1%



            0%
                 1986



                               1988



                                              1990



                                                            1992



                                                                           1994



                                                                                           1996



                                                                                                            1998



                                                                                                                               2000



                                                                                                                                               2002



                                                                                                                                                              2004



                                                                                                                                                                            2006



                                                                                                                                                                                           2008



                                                                                                                                                                                                           2010



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2014
Figure 6: Net Rental Yields and house price appreciation. National averages 1986-2014.
House price appreciation is Junet+1 on Junet , recorded at Junet+1 . See Equation (2) for timing
details.
                                                                                                                Net Rental Yield                 HPA

                 20%




                 15%




                 10%




                  5%




                  0%




                 -5%




              -10%




              -15%




              -20%
                        1986

                                1987

                                       1988

                                              1989

                                                     1990

                                                            1991

                                                                   1992

                                                                          1993

                                                                                  1994

                                                                                         1995

                                                                                                  1996

                                                                                                         1997

                                                                                                                 1998

                                                                                                                        1999

                                                                                                                                 2000

                                                                                                                                        2001

                                                                                                                                                2002

                                                                                                                                                       2003

                                                                                                                                                              2004

                                                                                                                                                                     2005

                                                                                                                                                                            2006

                                                                                                                                                                                   2007

                                                                                                                                                                                          2008

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                                2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2014




                                                                                                                        32
Figure 7: Annualized average city-level net rental yields vs. house price appreciation 1986-
2014.

                      0.08


                      0.07                                        Houston
                                                                        Pittsburgh

                                          Dallas                          Tampa                       Miami
                      0.06          Oklahoma City
                                                                                Kansas City
                                        Detroit
                                                  Atlanta                       Minneapolis
                      0.05                                  St. Louis                      Philadelphia
                                                                                                    Baltimore
                                                                                                         Nassau-Suffolk
                                                                              Phoenix
          Net Yield




                                            Cleveland
                                                                                         VirginiaRiverside
                                                                                                  Beach
                                                                                                                      Washington
                                                                                                                        San Diego
                      0.04                                                     Chicago
                                                                                                                            Seattle
                                                                                                                              Oakland
                                                                                                                              Anaheim
                                                                                                   Newark                    Los Angeles
                      0.03
                                                                                                        Boston                                   San Jose
                                                                                                           New York
                                                                                                                                           San Francisco
                      0.02


                      0.01
                             0.01    0.02                     0.03                0.04                   0.05                0.06              0.07             0.08
                                                                                              HPA



Figure 8: Annualized average city-level house price appreciation, net rental yields, and total
returns 1986-2014 by house price quintile, lowest (1) to highest (5).
    10%
                                                                        HPA      Net Rental Yield            Total Return

     9%



     8%



     7%



     6%



     5%



     4%



     3%



     2%



     1%



     0%
                               1                        2                                     3                                 4                           5




                                                                                         33
Figure 9: Annualized average house price appreciation and net rental yields 1986-2014, top
30 cities.

     8%

                                                    Net Yield    HPA

     7%



     6%



     5%



     4%



     3%



     2%



     1%



     0%




Figure 10: Zip-code-level net yields and house price appreciation relative to city-level averages,
from 2013-2017, by house price quintile.

                             1.5%
                                                                                      return_component
                                                                                          excess_hpa
                                                                                          excess_yield
                             1.0%



                             0.5%
             Excess return




                             0.0%



                             -0.5%



                             -1.0%



                             -1.5%
                                     1.0   2.0                  3.0             4.0          5.0
                                            Zip price rank within MSA (prior year)




                                                       34
Figure 11: Zip-code-level house price appreciation relative to city-level average, from 1986-
2016, by house price quintile.

                         0.40%
                                                                                                                   return_component
                                                                                                                        excess_hpa

                         0.30%



                         0.20%
            Excess HPA




                         0.10%



                         0.00%



                         -0.10%



                         -0.20%
                                                    1.0          2.0               3.0                4.0                 5.0
                                                                  Zip price rank within MSA (prior year)




         Figure 12: Zip-code-level distribution of total returns from 2013 to 2017.

                                       200




                                       150
                           Frequency




                                       100




                                        50




                                         0
                                             0.00         0.05    0.10          0.15          0.20          0.25           0.30
                                                                            Total return




                                                                            35
                                                                                          2013-2017.
                                                   Ratio of returns




                                                         0.8


                                                 0.6




                               0.0
                                           0.4


                                     0.2
                                                                                    1.6




                                                                  1.0
                                                                              1.4


                                                                        1.2
                 New York
                    Newark
            Virginia Beach
                     Detroit
                     Seattle
                  St. Louis
                     Boston
                 San Jose
            Oklahoma City
                     Tampa
                  Anaheim
            San Francisco
              Los Angeles
                San Diego




36
                 Pittsburgh




     City
               Minneapolis
                   Chicago
                   Phoenix
                 Cleveland
                    Atlanta
                  Riverside
                   Oakland
                      Miami
                   Houston
              Kansas City
                 Baltimore
                      Dallas
              Philadelphia
               Washington
            Nassau-Suffolk
                                                                                          Figure 13: Average of lowest two price quintile total returns to overall city-level average
                                                               Figure 14: Heat maps of rental yields and house price appreciation across city and zip-
                                                               code-level price tiers. All panels except the bottom left focus on the period for which we have
                                                               zip-code-level rental yield data, 2013-2017. The bottom left panel plots house price appreciation
                                                               from 1985-2016.

                                           Net yield (2012-2016) at zip level, by zip and MSA price rank (1 low, 5 high)                                                      HPA (2012-2016) at zip level, by zip and MSA price rank (1 low, 5 high)
                                                                                                                           0.08
                                                1.0




                                                                                                                                                                            1.0
                                                       8.11%        8.21%            7.45%          5.77%   5.04%                                                                  5.18%         7.96%        7.14%          8.30%       7.69%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.078
       Zip price rank within MSA (prior year)




                                                                                                                                   Zip price rank within MSA (prior year)
                                                                                                                           0.07
                                                       7.49%        7.07%            6.56%          5.15%   4.24%                                                                  5.41%         7.41%        6.86%          7.09%       7.13%
                                                2.0




                                                                                                                                                                            2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.072

                                                                                                                           0.06
                                                3.0




                                                                                                                                                                            3.0
                                                       6.62%        6.33%            6.07%          4.59%   3.95%                                                                  4.99%         7.10%        6.34%          6.81%       7.22%          0.066


                                                                                                                           0.05
                                                       6.00%        5.98%            5.48%          4.21%   3.64%                                                                  4.91%         6.56%        5.75%          6.69%       6.67%          0.060
                                                4.0




                                                                                                                                                                            4.0
                                                                                                                           0.04                                                                                                                         0.054
                                                5.0




                                                                                                                                                                            5.0
                                                       5.31%        5.01%            4.79%          3.64%   3.28%                                                                  4.91%         5.92%        5.02%          6.67%       7.02%


                                                        1.0           2.0              3.0            4.0     5.0                                                                    1.0          2.0           3.0           4.0         5.0
                                                                           MSA price rank (prior year)                                                                                              MSA price rank (prior year)

                                                 HPA (1986-2016) at zip level, by zip and MSA price rank (1 low, 5 high)                     Total returns (2012-2016) at zip level, by zip and MSA price rank (1 low, 5 high)
                                         1.0




                                                                                                                                                                            1.0




                                                      3.29%         3.87%            4.39%         5.95%    5.24%                                                                  13.38%       16.33%        14.63%        14.81%      14.71%
                                                                                                                           0.055
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.150
Zip price rank within MSA (prior year)




                                                                                                                                   Zip price rank within MSA (prior year)




                                                      3.15%         3.54%            4.18%         5.66%    4.75%                                                                  13.19%       14.47%        13.59%        13.25%      13.18%
                                         2.0




                                                                                                                                                                            2.0




                                                                                                                           0.050

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.135
                                                                                                                           0.045
                                         3.0




                                                                                                                                                                            3.0




                                                      3.01%         3.52%            4.16%         5.57%    4.75%                                                                  11.87%       13.38%        12.43%        12.39%      12.58%


                                                                                                                           0.040                                                                                                                        0.120
                                                      3.04%         3.51%            4.07%         5.53%    4.68%                                                                  11.15%       12.37%        11.29%        11.85%       11.59%
                                         4.0




                                                                                                                                                                            4.0




                                                                                                                           0.035
                                         5.0




                                                                                                                                                                            5.0




                                                      3.15%         3.52%            3.88%         5.46%    4.68%                                                                  10.26%       10.94%        9.89%         11.23%      10.92%          0.105

                                                        1.0          2.0              3.0            4.0     5.0                                                                     1.0          2.0           3.0           4.0         5.0
                                                                        MSA price rank (prior year)                                                                                                 MSA price rank (prior year)




                                                                                                                             37
Figure 15: Underwritten net income is an increasing function of BPO value in single family
rental bond collateral.




Figure 16: Underwritten net income ratio is a decreasing function of BPO value in single
family rental bond collateral.




                                           38
Figure 17: Single family rental securitized assets: house-level expense ratios demonstrate
substantial heterogeneity.




Figure 18: Subprime activity in 2003-2008 is positively related to single family rental presence
today.




                                              39
Figure 19: Peak to trough vs. Trough to current HPI. Blue cities have the largest share of
properties in securitized products as of January 2015. The four cities with the highest trough
to 2014 gains in home values are, from top to bottom, Oakland, Phoenix, Detroit, and Miami.
The four cities with the largest peak to trough losses in home values are, from left to right,
Detroit, Phoenix, Riverside, and Miami.




                                             40
Table 1: Average Net Rental Yields, house price appreciation, and Total Returns by pooled
time series, cross-section annual city Price Quintile from 1986-2014.

     Price Quintile Net Rental Yield     House Price Appreciation     Total Return
     1              6.12%                3.24%                        9.36%
     2              5.48%                3.55%                        9.03%
     3              4.54%                4.31%                        8.85%
     4              3.64%                5.23%                        8.87%
     5              2.92%                5.34%                        8.26%




                                           41
Table 2: cities ranked in decreasing order by Total Return, along with their respective Net
Yield and house price appreciation rank. Cities marked with an asterisk have Net Yields greater
than 4.35%, the yield which satisfies a Debt Service Coverage Ratio of 1.2 under baseline
assumptions.

                                 Total Return      Net Yield Rank HPA Rank
                    ∗
             Miami                      12.0%                   3        8
             Tampa∗                     10.2%                   4       21
             Houston∗                   10.2%                   1       24
             Pittsburgh∗                10.2%                   2       23
             San Jose                    9.9%                  28        1
             Oakland                     9.8%                  23        3
             San Diego                   9.8%                  20        7
             Seattle                     9.7%                  22        5
             Anaheim                     9.4%                  24        6
             Baltimore∗                  9.3%                  13       12
             Riverside∗                  9.3%                  17       10
             Los Angeles                 9.3%                  25        4
             Washington                  9.3%                  19        9
             Kansas City∗                9.3%                   7       22
             San Francisco               9.1%                  30        2
             Nassau-Suffolk∗             9.1%                  15       14
             Minneapolis∗                9.1%                  10       16
             Philadelphia∗               8.8%                  12       18
             Dallas∗                     8.8%                   5       28
             Phoenix∗                    8.7%                  14       19
             Detroit∗                    8.3%                   8       25
             Virginia Beach              8.2%                  18       17
             Oklahoma City∗              8.0%                   6       30
             Atlanta∗                    8.0%                   9       26
             Chicago                     7.8%                  21       20
             St. Louis∗                  7.7%                  11       27
             Cleveland∗                  7.2%                  16       29
             Newark                      7.2%                  26       15
             New York                    7.1%                  29       11
             Boston                      7.1%                  27       13




                                              42
Table 3: Average Net Rental Yields, House Price Appreciation, and Total Returns by city
from 1986-2014, sorted in declining order by observed biannual Sharpe Ratio.

City Name        Net Yield    House Price Total Return               % of Standard Sharpe
                             Appreciation                    Total Return Deviation Ratio
                                                           from Net Yield
Pittsburgh           6.8%           3.5%          10.2%             66.2%     2.0%   5.19
St. Louis            5.0%           2.7%           7.7%             64.7%     3.9%   1.98
Kansas City          5.5%           3.7%           9.2%             60.3%     4.8%   1.93
Houston              7.0%           3.2%          10.2%             68.6%     5.3%   1.91
Dallas               6.1%           2.6%           8.7%             70.4%     4.7%   1.86
Oklahoma City        5.9%           2.1%           7.9%             73.8%     4.8%   1.66
Cleveland            4.8%           2.5%           7.3%             65.7%     4.5%   1.62
Philadelphia         4.9%           3.9%           8.8%             55.7%     6.5%   1.35
Atlanta              5.2%           2.7%           7.9%             65.5%     6.3%   1.26
Minneapolis          5.1%           3.9%           9.0%             56.6%     7.2%   1.26
Seattle              3.6%           6.0%           9.6%             37.2%     7.8%   1.24
Baltimore            4.8%           4.5%           9.4%             51.7%     7.9%   1.19
Nassau-Suffolk       4.7%           4.3%           9.0%             52.1%     7.8%   1.15
Virginia Beach       4.3%           3.9%           8.2%             52.5%     7.2%   1.14
Chicago              4.0%           3.9%           7.8%             50.5%     7.5%   1.05
Tampa                6.4%           3.8%          10.2%             63.0%     9.8%   1.03
Washington           4.0%           5.2%           9.2%             43.8%     9.6%   0.96
Miami                6.4%           5.5%          11.9%             54.0%    12.9%   0.92
San Francisco        2.3%           6.8%           9.1%             25.1%    10.0%   0.91
Boston               2.7%           4.3%           7.1%             38.9%     8.0%   0.88
San Diego            4.0%           5.6%           9.7%             41.6%    11.0%   0.88
San Jose             2.7%           7.1%           9.9%             27.7%    11.8%   0.83
Anaheim              3.3%           5.9%           9.2%             36.2%    11.3%   0.82
Detroit              5.4%           2.9%           8.3%             65.5%    10.6%   0.79
Newark               3.1%           4.0%           7.1%             43.2%     9.5%   0.75
New York             2.5%           4.6%           7.1%             35.3%     9.4%   0.75
Oakland              3.4%           6.3%           9.7%             35.2%    13.2%   0.74
Los Angeles          3.2%           6.0%           9.2%             34.5%    12.8%   0.72
Phoenix              4.7%           3.8%           8.5%             55.7%    12.2%   0.70
Riverside            4.4%           4.8%           9.2%             47.6%    14.6%   0.63
Average              4.5%           4.3%           8.9%             51.2%     8.5%   1.27
Stddev               1.3%           1.4%           1.1%            118.0%     3.2%   0.84




                                           43
Table 4: Single family rental bond issuer net income dummies

                          issuance      β0,m
                 AH4R 2014-SFR2       $2,644
                 AH4R 2014-SFR1       $2,577
                 AH4R 2014-SFR3       $2,193
                    IH 2013-SFR1      $1,958
                     SWAY 2014-1      $1,734
                    IH 2014-SFR1      $1,394
                    IH 2014-SFR3      $1,196
                    IH 2014-SFR2        $996
                    IH 2015-SFR1        $994
               Progress 2014-SFR1       $720
                  ARP 2014-SFR1         $602
                      CAH 2014-1        $519
                      CAH 2014-2        $364
                       SBY 2014-1          0




                            44
A      Appendix: Data Description

A.1     Net Yield Panel Data Instructions
In this section, we describe how to produce the net yield panel from publicly-available data.47

Data files The Census conducts the American Housing Survey, which is sponsored by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The data files can be downloaded
from their website at http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ The survey has been
conducted in every odd-numbered year since 1973. The codebook for 1997-2013 can be
found at http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ahs/data/2013 We use all of the
odd-numbered years since 1985. Prior to 1985, the value of the home is a categorical variable,
so we do not use those data.
   Download the flat files and place them into folders to which you then need to point the
code supplementing this data appendix, found in the file named “[TBD]”.

Data selection We remove datapoints without an MSA identifier, as we will be building
a panel by city. We remove units in housing projects, those with bars on the windows, and
those that are rent stabilized. We remove datapoints missing data (such as tenure status,
i.e., owner occupied or renter occupied).
     We further clean the observations before the hedonic regression as follows:

    • Delete if the ratio of household income to house value is greater than 2 (This identifies
      data errors in the house value field)

    • Delete if the ratio of household income to annual rent is greater than 100 (This identifies
      data errors in the annual rent field)

    Throughout the rest of the analysis, we restrict the sample to the top 30 cities by data-
points (after cleaning) in 1985, the first year in the sample.
    After cleaning, we still have over 5,000 houses in the sample for each year, as listed in
Table A.1. The sample is larger in some years because the Census chose to sample certain
cities more intensely. For example, the sample size of Minneapolis in 2007 is 1,662.

Imputing rents with a hedonic model We employ a hedonic model (as in Malpezzi
2002) to project the log rent of a home upon

    • Metropolitan statistical area (MSA) fixed effect

    • Year fixed effect

    • Unit type fixed effect (i.e., detached, attached, condo, or apartment)
  47
     We do not supply the CoreLogic data used to compute house price appreciation (and total returns)
because of licensing agreements. Public-use house price appreciation data from FHFA for the 100 largest
metros are available at http://www.fhfa.gov/DataTools/Downloads/Documents/HPI


                                                  45
                         Table A.1: AHS sample size after cleaning

                                                     N

                                       1985       6,958
                                       1987       6,051
                                       1989       7,410
                                       1991       6,027
                                       1993       7,899
                                       1995       8,578
                                       1997       5,263
                                       1999       7,692
                                       2001       5,594
                                       2003       7,968
                                       2005       5,669
                                       2007      12,443
                                       2009       6,560
                                       2011      27,715
                                       2013       8,471
                                       Total    130,298


   • Number of rooms

   • Number of bathrooms

   • Dummy for central air

   • Year unit built categories (by decade to 1970, then every 5 years)

    We use categories for unit age because it is a categorical variable before 1995. We do not
use square feet because of the large number of missing observations.
    The hedonic model is estimated upon renter-occupied homes. It enables us to compute
a rent for each owner-occupied home using its characteristics. We then have an estimate of
a rent-to-price ratio for each owned home. The model estimates are presented in Table A.2.

                    Table A.2: Hedonic regression coefficients (N=34,960)

                                               coefficient t value
                                  Intercept           8.87    80.5
                                   ROOMS              0.05    13.6
                                     BEDS             0.02     4.7
                                   BATHS              0.18    30.0
                                   AIRSYS             0.15    19.9
                            Detached home             0.05     7.7



                                               46
Aggregating rent-to-price ratios with nonparametric weights We wish to find the
median rent-to-price of rental homes, but our dataset has rent-to-price ratios computed on
owned homes. To account for sample selection in our dataset of rent-to-price ratios, we
weight the owned homes in a city to the distribution of rental homes. (We do not use the
alternate methodology – to estimate the hedonic coefficients on owned homes, and then
compute rent-to-price ratios on rental homes directly – because there are not enough rental
homes for a meaningful sample in some city-year bins. Indeed, the very same cities that are
less populated are the ones with a low ratio of rental homes.) This procedure is similar to
the nonparametric approach used in Barsky et al (2002).
    Sample selection is an issue because rent-to-price ratios are decreasing in house prices
(and in house rents), as discussed in the section on house level data in the main text.
    For each city in each year, we re-weight the owner-occupied houses as follows. First,
line up all the houses by predicted rent. Then bin by percentile of predicted rent. Next
determine the density of renter-occupied in the predicted rent space. Finally, compute the
median rent-to-price ratio among owner-occupied, using the density of renter-occupied to
take a weighted median.
    Note that relative to an unweighted median, this nonparametric procedure reduces the
weight on expensive homes, which are the same homes for which the hedonic model has
the largest errors (because it is estimated upon rental homes, which are likely to be smaller
homes).

Vacancy data To compute net yields from gross yields, we need to know the percentage
of rental homes that sit vacant. We can get this information from the AHS as well. We
use the same dataset (including removing units in housing projects, those with bars on the
windows, those that are rent stabilized, and those missing data). We label a home as a
vacant rental if the survey identifies it as for rent only, for rent or for sale, or rented but not
yet occupied. The vacancy rate is the ratio of this number to this number plus the number
of renter-occupied homes. For those city-year cells without enough datapoints, we use a
projection from the rest of the dataset.

Tax rates We also need a panel of tax rates to compute net yields. Our sources are Emrath
(2002) for 1990 and 2000 tax rates from Census data, and the National Association of Home
Builders (NAHB) for 2005 to 2012 tax rates from ACS data. The tax rate data are available
by state.

Interpolating missing years As the survey is biannual and the tax rates are from Census,
we linearly interpolate the rent-to-price ratios, vacancy rates, and tax rates to even-numbered
years and other missing years (in the case of the tax data).

Net yields Starting from gross yields, we compute net yields using the follow costs, some of
which are expressed as a percentage of rent and some of which are a percentage of home value.
We use expense ratios from Morgan Stanley, “The New Age of Buy-To-Rent,” July 31, 2013.
Similar, but less comprehensive, assumptions appear in Bernanke (2012) “The US Housing
Market: Current conditions and policy considerations.” The assumptions underlying Core

                                                47
Logic’s Rental Trends, discussed below, are also broadly consistent with ours, however some
of their cost estimates rely on direct proprietary data rather than ratios of rent or house
price.
   • Insurance: 0.375% of price
   • Repairs: 0.6% of price
   • Capex: 1.15% of price
   • Property manager: 5.9% of rent
   • Credit loss: 0.73% of rent
   • Tax: on price
   • Vacancy: on rent
   We now have a panel dataset of net yields for N=30 cities for T=29 years.

Data quality cross checks We use the following alternate sources to check the quality
of our data, namely:
   • Gross yields: We have Zillow rent-to-price ratios from their own hedonic model
     applied to both rented and owned homes in their database. These data start in 2011.
   • Vacancy rates: We have national vacancy rates for rental homes from Census, who
     use the Current Population Survey (CPS) and Housing Vacancy Survey (HVS). We
     also have vacancy rates from CoreLogic, who use the USPS.
   • Net yields: We have CoreLogic cap rates (defined in the main text) starting in 2013.

A.2     Other Data Sources
In addition to the net yield panel at the city-level, we employ several other data sources at
the MSA, zip, and house level to describe net yields, capital gains, and leverage.

House price appreciation from CoreLogic To determine total returns at the city-level,
we pair an house price appreciation value for each city-year cell with its net yield.
    We have monthly House Price Indices (HPI) by core-based statistical area (CBSA) from
CoreLogic for 1976-present. We use Tier 11 (all homes, including distressed) to determine
city-level price tiers. To match the higher representation of rental homes in lower price tiers,
and to be consistent with the weighting scheme for rental yields from the AHS data, we
use CoreLogic’s Tier 2 index for our main time series for city-level house price appreciation.
CoreLogic’s Tier 2 HPI focuses on homes with prices between 75% and 100% of the city-level
median. Because the AHS is conducted each year between May and September, we set the
HPI in each year to equal the HPI in June of that year. The house price appreciation is then
the June-to-June percentage increase in HPI.
    We created a translation table from MSA to CBSA using data from the Missouri Census
Data Center.

                                              48
House price tiers We match the HPI from CoreLogic in June 2014 with the Zillow Home
Value Index from June 2014.48 We can then determine the price level in each year from
1985-2014 by appropriately deflating with the house price index.
    The house price tier assigned to each MSA and each zip code is dynamic, with transition
matrix diagonals varying from 83% to 96%. The highest tier-to-same-tier transition rate is
found at the highest-priced tier. At the city-level, the probability of staying in the highest
tier is 94%, and at the zip level, the probability is 96%.

Gross Yields from Zillow We use Zillow’s characteristic-adjusted rent-to-price ratios to
sanity check our own calcuations of gross yields in appendix subsection A.1.

Net Yields from CoreLogic At the city-level, we use CoreLogic’s net yields to sanity
check our own calculations of net yields in appendix subsection A.1. At the zip level, we
use CoreLogic’s net yields as our primary data source. Their RentalTrends database tracks
median rents of 1, 2, 3, and 4 bedroom homes back to 2011 in 10,146 zip codes. The database
calculates net yields, which are also referred to as capitalization rates, as depicted in Figure
A.1.
            Figure A.1: Net yield (or capitalization rate) calculation, source: CoreLogic




Subprime Originations In the section on house price appreciation at a zip code-level,
we discuss observables correlated with house price appreciation. One such observable is
subprime origination. We get this data from CoreLogic’s LoanPerformance dataset. It
covers nonagency loans at origination and in subsequent performance. It enables us to study
associations to subprime origination levels by zip code.

Zip-level covariates from the Census Bureau When discussing observables correlated
with house price appreciation in the section on zip-code-level, we look at age of housing stock
by zip code. We also get this and other demographic data from the Census Bureau. They
 48
      Zillow data are publicly-available at http://www.zillow.com/research/data/


                                                  49
provide zip-level demographic data from the 1990 and 2000 Census. They also provide 5-year
American Community Survey (“ACS”) estimates from 2011-2013.

AHS from Housing and Urban Development Our primary data provides us with the
cost of rent for rental units and an estimated home value for owner-occupied units. This
home value is based upon the home owner estimating what they could sell the home for
when surveyed. Although this variable is a subjective estimate, Kiel and Zabel (1999) show
that it is actually quite reliable. Specifically, they find that the value is inflated by 5.1% on
average and that, “the use of the owners’ valuations will result in accurate estimates of house
price indexes and will provide reliable estimates of the prices of house and neighborhood
characteristics.”
    Using the sample described above, we divide the sample into owner occupied and renter
subsamples. The two subsets of housing are significantly different. For example, the mean
number of bedrooms in an owner occupied home is 3.2, while it is 2.0 in a renter occupied
home. In appendix subsection A.1, we use the AHS for a hedonic regression to calculate
characteristic-adjusted rent-to-price ratios.

House level data from the bond markets In the section on house-level data, we ex-
amine the houses operated by large single family rental institutions. We have collected data
from the bond markets on the fourteen single family rental issuances as of January 2015.
Each issuance comes with an appendix listing every property in the collateral, its acquisi-
tion prices, its net rent, and other characteristics. We also reference the reports on these
issuances produced by Kroll Brothers Rating Agency.

A.3     Robustness Checks
We provide several versions of Table 1 in order to show the small effects from several data
choices. In the main text, we use annual observations of house price appreciation when
computing city-level averages, since we have annual data for house price appreciation, but
not for rental yields. House price appreciation is more volatile, so using more data is more
informative. The Panel A of Table ?? shows that the results are nearly identical using
biannual data for house price appreciation. We also match the house price appreciation data
to the yield data by using CoreLogic’s Tier 2 house price index, which focuses on homes with
prices between 75% and 100% of the median. Panel B of Table ?? shows that, unlike for
yields, house price appreciation is not substantially affected by price tier. We weight lower
price tier homes more heavily in the main analysis for yields and house price appreciation
because of the much greater representation of rental homes in lower price tiers.
    Panels C and D address the volatility of house price appreciation using annual vs. biannual
observations. Panel C reports annualized return volatility using annual Tier 2 CoreLogic
HPA observations, and annual yield estimates from AHS, where even years use interpolated
data. Panel D reports annualized return volatility using biannual observations of Tier 2
CoreLogic HPA observations, and the biannual yield estimates from the AHS. Comparing
Panel C, which uses annual house price appreciation observations, and Panel D, which uses
biannual observations, confirms that the effect of using biannual observations, as we do in


                                               50
Table 3, yields very similar results to using annual observations. The volatility of yields is
slightly lower using annual observations with interpolated data for even years. The volatility
of HPA is slightly higher using annual observations. However, these differentces are small
and the overall conclusion that returns are less volatile in price tiers in which returns have
a larger contribution from net yields robustly holds.

  Table A.3: Average Net Rental Yields, house price appreciation, and Total Returns by pooled
  time series, cross-section annual city Price Quintile from 1986-2014 Robustness Checks

 Price Quintile Net Rental Yield House Price Appreciation Total Return
               A: Avarage Returns: Biannual HPA observations
 1               6.1%               3.3%                      9.4%
 2               5.5%               3.9%                      9.4%
 3               4.5%               3.9%                      8.4%
 4               3.7%               5.3%                      8.9%
 5               2.9%               5.3%                      8.2%
             B: Average Returns: Tier 11 HPA data (all homes)
 1               6.1%               3.1%                      9.2%
 2               5.5%               3.5%                      9.0%
 3               4.5%               3.9%                      8.5%
 4               3.6%               5.1%                      8.8%
 5               2.9%               5.5%                      8.4%
     C: Return Volatility: Tier 2 Annual HPA, interpolated annual yields
 1               1.2%               5.7%                      6.0%
 2               1.2%               7.6%                      8.0%
 3               1.3%               9.1%                      9.8%
 4               1.6%               10.4%                     10.8%
 5               1.4%               11.1%                     11.6%
         D: Return Volatility: Tier 2 binnual HPA and annual yields
 1               1.3%               5.0%                      5.5%
 2               1.3%               6.9%                      7.5%
 3               1.4%               8.1%                      9.0%
 4               1.8%               9.7%                      10.1%
 5               1.4%               10.3%                     11.0%




                                              51
B      Additional Appendix: For Online Publication Only
B.1      Single family rental IRR example
Although we mainly focus on Total Returns comprised by net rental yields and house price
appreciation, we present an internal rate of return calculation for a representative single
family rental investment in order to illustrate the typical composition, timing and magnitudes
of cash inflows and outflows. Figure B.1 presents our spreadsheet model and the associated
assumptions for the purchase and sale of a typical BTR home over a five year horizon.
    The key assumptions for our spreadsheet model are the home’s square footage, price
per square foot, and gross rental yield. We use parsimonious but representative values of
2,000 square feet at $100 per square foot, and a gross yield of 9%. Upon purchase, the
home must be renovated, cleaned, and leased. Thus, expenses in the first year are higher
than in subsequent years. We assume that the home is purchased and renovated in year
zero, and leased at the beginning of year one. At that time, leasing fees and vacancy costs
are paid, and for simplicity we do not account for turnover within the five year investment
period. This omission is offset by our assumption that renovation takes one year, which is
substantially longer than is typical. Credit losses, property management fees, taxes, HOA,
insurance, repairs, and capital expenditures are paid annually.
    The bottom panel of Figure B.1 highlights that some expense assumptions are a fraction
of rent (vacancy and credit losses, property management and leasing fees), while others are
more suitably assumed to be a fraction of the capital investment, or subsequent home value
(property taxes, HOA fees, insurance, repairs and maintenance).49 Looking at the rows
describing the expenses in the top panel of Figure B.1, one can see that expenses linked to
home value are on average over four times the magnitude of those linked to rents. Most of the
variation in rental yields is driven by variation in house prices, as carefully documented in
Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and Martin (2009). Because rents are smoother than house prices,
when house prices increase substantially, such as in 2006, net yields decline considerably as
a fraction of gross yields. This is because costs which vary as a fraction of house prices act
somewhat like fixed costs when applied to gross rents.
    In our example, net yields and house price appreciation contribute approximately equally
to annual total returns. Total returns are, on average, also close to the annualized internal
rate of return implied by setting the net present value of the annual cash flows equal to
zero. However, this clearly depends on assumptions, including the investment horizon. We
systematically compare IRR’s to total returns under reasonable assumptions in Figure B.2.
We use three sets of assumptions, detailed in Table B.1. In particular, we use an all equity
investment, an example small investor investment from a multiborrower backed single family
rental bond, and an example large investment from a single borrower backed single family
rental bond, defined by their leverage ratios and borrowing constraints as detailed in the
caption to Figure B.2. Importantly, note that all IRR’s are approximately (and undetectably
different from) linear in the two inputs into total returns, namely net yields and house price
appreciation, and that each element contributes about equally to the total IRR.
  49
     Our assumptions closely follow those in Tirupattur (2013), however we note that these are similar to
other sources, such as Bernanke (2012), and Core Logic Rental Trends. See the Appendix for a description
of Rental Trends.


                                                   52
   We also note that the fact that our example net yields are approximately sixty percent of
gross yields is consistent with the ratio of net to gross yields on securitized single family rental
homes.50 In sum, our example closely represents the actual collateral owned by institutional
investors, and the either assumed or incurred expenses associated with them. We use similar
assumptions when computing net yields in our city-level analysis.




  50
     See, for example Shen and Mele (2014). To have their bonds rated, issuers must detail these cost
assumptions.


                                                 53
                        Figure B.1: Pro Forma Example: All Equity Single Family Rental Investment.
Years out                                                                                                         0                         1                          2                       3              4           5

Capital Invested                                                                              $      215,700

Revenue
   Gross Rent                                                                                                         $         19,413 $                   19,995 $                    20,595 $         21,213 $     21,850
   Gross yield (=R/(P+capex) ratio)                                                                                               9.0%                       9.3%                        9.5%             9.8%        10.1%
Expenses
  Expenses linked to gross rent                                                                                                  (2,142)                    (1,326)                    (1,366)           (1,407)     (1,449)
  Expenses linked to home value                                                                                                  (5,608)                    (6,355)                    (6,704)           (6,999)     (6,899)
  Total Expenses                                                                                                      $          (7,750) $                  (7,681) $                  (8,071) $         (8,407) $   (8,348)


Operating Free Cash Flow                                                                                                       $11,663                    $12,314                      $12,525          $12,806      $13,501
  Net Yield = Operating ROA                                                                                                      5.4%                       5.7%                         5.8%             5.9%         6.3%

Home Value                                                                                    $      215,700 $                227,132 $                 239,624 $ 252,804 $                             263,927 $ 260,136
  House Price Appreciation (HPA)                                                                                                 5.3%                      5.5%      5.5%                                  4.4%      4.3%

Total Return: Net Rental Yield + HPA                                                                                              10.7%                      11.2%                      11.3%            10.3%        10.6%

Total Free Cash Flow                                                                          $ (215,700) $                     11,663 $                   12,314 $                    12,525 $         12,806 $ 273,637

Unlevered IRR:                                                                                           9.2%

                                                                                                                              Assumptions
                                                                                                             Assumptions       or Implied
                                                                                                              highlighted     Percentages
                       House Characteristics
                                                                  Bedrooms                                              3
                                                                  Bathrooms                                             2
                                                                  Square Feet                                       2,000                   For calculations per square foot.
                                                                  Price per square foot                            $100.00                  Key purchase price input.
                       Year 1 Assumptions:
                       Capital Investment
                                                                  Purchase Price                         $      200,000.00                  Implied by square feet and price/sq. ft.

                                                                  Renovation
                                                                    Paint                                $        2,400.00           $1.20 Cost per square foot
                                                                    Floor                                $        2,800.00           $1.40 Cost per square foot
                                                                    Appliances                           $        4,000.00                 Assume directly
                                                                    Landscaping                          $        2,000.00                 Assume directly
                                                                    Cleaning                             $          500.00           $0.25 Cost per square foot
                                                                    General Repairs                      $        4,000.00           $2.00 Cost per square foot
                                                                  Total Renovation                       $       15,700.00            7.9% Implied % renovation cost/purchase price

                                                                  Total Invested Capital                 $      215,700.00

                       Baseline First Year Income and Expesnses
                                                                  Revenue
                                                                    Gross Rent                           $       19,413.00          9.00% Gross yield from the data

                                                                     Vacancy                             $         (485.33)           2.5% % of gross rent ( Vacancy rate of 10% once every 4 years)
                                                                     Credit Loss                         $         (142.49)       0.7340% % of gross rent
                                                                  Effective Gross Rent                   $       18,785.18         96.77% Implied % effective gross rent

                                                                  Expenses
                                                                    Property Management                  $        1,145.37         5.900%   % of gross rent
                                                                    Leasing Fees                         $          368.85         1.900%   % of gross rent
                                                                    Property Taxes                       $        2,696.25         1.250%   % of capital investment
                                                                    HOA Fees                             $          808.88         0.375%   % of capital investment
                                                                    Insurance                            $          808.88         0.375%   % of capital investment
                                                                    Repairs and Maintenance              $        1,294.20         0.600%   % of capital investment
                                                                  Total Expenses                         $        7,122.41         3.302%   Implied % total expenses/capital investment
                       Annual Assumptions:
                                                                  Gross rent growth rate                                            3.00% annually
                                                                  Credit loss                                                       0.73% % of gross rent
                                                                  Property Management                                               5.90% % of gross rent
                                                                  Property taxes+HOA+insurance+repairs                              2.00% % of home value
                                                                  Cap Ex                                                            1.15% % of home value
                                                                                                                                          Core Logic Jan./Jan. forecast for the years 2015‐2020 as of
                                                                  HPA                                                                     03/19/2015
                                                                  Closing costs in year 5                                           5.50% % of home value




                                                                                                             54
              Table B.1: Assumptions and Sources for IRR Examples.

                            Unlevered   Small Investor         Large Investor

Length of investment        5           5                      5
LTV                         0.0%        39.5%                  66.3%
Implied Leverage            1.00        1.65                   2.97
Financing rate                          6.82%                  4.59%
Closing costs (% of sale)   5.50%       5.50%                  5.50%
DSCR                                    1.2                    1.2

Source                                  Loan ID 115 B2R Bond   AH4R 2014-SFR3




                                         55
Figure B.2: Internal Rates of Return are Approximately Linear in Yields and House Price
Appreciation.
                                                                          IRR isoquants with horizon 5 years,
                                                          financing 0%, LTV 0%, DSCR constraint 0, and disposition costs 5.5%
                                       0.08




                                                             0.




                                                                                     0.




                                                                                                                                                                0.
                                                               06




                                                                                     08




                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                       0.07




                                                                                                                                                                                                0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                                                                           0.
                                                                                                                             1
                                       0.06




                                                                                                                                                          0.
                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                               0.
                                                                 04




                                                                                          0.




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.
                   Net Rental Yield




                                                                                                                   0.
                                       0.05




                                                                                           06




                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                    08
                                       0.04




                                                                                                                                                               0.
                                                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                           0.
                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                    0.




                                                                                           0.
                                       0.03
                                                                      02




                                                                                              04




                                                                                                                         0.




                                                                                                                                                  0.
                                                                                                                           06




                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                       8
                                       0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                       0.01
                                                                                                  0.




                                                                                                                           0.
                                                                                                   02




                                                                                                                              04
                                                  -0




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.
                                                                                                                                                              0.
                                                    .0




                                                                                                                                                                                      08
                                                                                                                                                               06
                                                      2




                                                                                0




                                          0
                                         -0.02                        0                    0.02                        0.04                     0.06                           0.08                      0.1
                                                                                      House Price Appreciation (HPA)
                                                                      IRR isoquants with horizon 5 years,
                                                  financing 6.82%, LTV 39.5%, DSCR constraint 1.2, and disposition costs 5.5%
                                       0.08



                                       0.07




                                                                                                                                                                                                0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                           0.
                                                                           05




                                                                                                                                                         0.
                                                                                                               0.




                                       0.06
                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                   1
                    Net Rental Yield




                                       0.05



                                       0.04
                                                                                                       0.




                                                                                                                                                                                           0.
                                                                    0




                                                                                                        05




                                                                                                                                                0.




                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                  1




                                       0.03



                                       0.02



                                       0.01



                                           0
                                          -0.02                       0                    0.02                        0.04                     0.06                           0.08                      0.1
                                                                                      House Price Appreciation (HPA)
                                                                     IRR isoquants with horizon 5 years,
                                                 financing 4.59%, LTV 66.3%, DSCR constraint 1.2, and disposition costs 5.5%
                                       0.08



                                       0.07
                                                                                                                                                       0.
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                        0.




                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                          05




                                                                                                                                                                                           0.
                                                                                0.




                                                                                                   0.




                                                                                                                                   0.                                                           3
                                                                                1




                                                                                                       15




                                                                                                                                     2
                                       0.06
                 Net Rental Yield




                                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.
                                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                              -0




                                                                  0




                                                                                     0.
                                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                                         0.
                                                                                                                                         0.
                                                                                                             0.
                                                                                      05




                                       0.04                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                               1




                                       0.03



                                       0.02



                                       0.01                                                                   56

                                          0
                                         -0.02                        0                    0.02                     0.04                        0.06                           0.08                      0.1
                                                                                     House Price Appreciation (HPA)
