NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCERTAINTY AND BUSINESS CYCLES:
EXOGENOUS IMPULSE OR ENDOGENOUS RESPONSE?
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Sai Ma
Serena Ng
Working Paper 21803
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21803

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015, Revised May 2018

The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal
Reserve Board or the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Sydney C. Ludvigson, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous Impulse or Endogenous Response?
Sydney C. Ludvigson, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 21803
December 2015, Revised May 2018
JEL No. E00,E32,E44,G01,G12
ABSTRACT
Uncertainty about the future rises in recessions. But is uncertainty a source of business cycles or
an endogenous response to them, and does the type of uncertainty matter? We propose a novel
SVAR identification strategy to address these questions via inequality constraints on the
structural shocks. We find that sharply higher macroeconomic uncertainty in recessions is often
an endogenous response to output shocks, while uncertainty about financial markets is a likely
source of output fluctuations. But the findings also suggest that macroeconomic uncertainty plays
an important role in recessions, by substantially amplifying downturns caused by other shocks.

Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
Sai Ma
Federal Reserve Board
C Ave & 20th Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
sai.ma@frb.gov

Serena Ng
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Serena.Ng@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

A large literature in macroeconomics investigates the relationship between uncertainty and
business cycle ‡uctuations. Interest in this topic has been spurred by a growing body of
evidence that uncertainty rises sharply in recessions. This evidence is robust to the use of
speci…c proxy variables such as stock market volatility and forecast dispersion as in Bloom
(2009), or a broad-based measure of macroeconomic uncertainty, as in Jurado, Ludvigson, and
Ng (2015) (JLN hereafter). But while this evidence substantiates a role for uncertainty in
deep recessions, the question of whether uncertainty is an exogenous source of business cycle
‡uctuations or an endogenous response to economic fundamentals is not fully understood.
Existing results are based on convenient but restrictive identifying assumptions and have no
explicit role for …nancial markets, even though uncertainty measures are strongly correlated with
…nancial market variables. This paper considers a novel identi…cation strategy to disentangle
the causes and consequences of real and …nancial uncertainty.
The question of causality and the identi…cation of exogenous variation in uncertainty is a
long-standing challenge of the uncertainty literature. The challenge arises in part because there
is no single uncertainty model, hence no theoretical consensus on whether the uncertainty that
accompanies deep recessions is primarily a cause or e¤ect (or both) of declines in economic
activity. In fact, theory is even ambiguous about the sign of the e¤ect, as we discuss below.
A separate challenge of the uncertainty literature pertains to the origins of uncertainty. Classic theories assert that uncertainty originates from economic fundamentals such as productivity,
and that such real economic uncertainty, when interacted with market frictions, discourages real
activity. But some researchers have argued that uncertainty dampens the economy through its
in‡uence on …nancial markets (e.g., Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek (2010)) or through sources
of uncertainty speci…c to …nancial markets (e.g., Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009)). Moreover, as surveyed by Ng and Wright (2013), all the post-1982 recessions have origins in …nancial
markets, and these recessions have markedly di¤erent features from recessions where …nancial
markets play a passive role. From this perspective, if …nancial shocks are subject to time-varying
volatility, …nancial market uncertainty–as distinct from real economic uncertainty–could be a
key player in recessions, both as a cause and as a propagating mechanism. Yet so far the literature has not disentangled the contributions of real versus …nancial uncertainty to business
cycle ‡uctuations.
Econometric analyses aimed at understanding the role of uncertainty for business cycle
‡uctuations face their own challenges. Attempts to identify the “e¤ects”of uncertainty shocks
in existing empirical work are primarily based on recursive schemes within the framework of
vector-autoregressions (VAR).1 While a recursive structure is a convenient starting point, it is
1

See Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013), Bloom (2009), Bloom (2014), Bekaert, Hoerova, and Duca (2013),

1

ultimately unsatisfactory as an identi…cation strategy for a study on uncertainty and business
cycles. Not only do the existing studies di¤er according to whether uncertainty is ordered
ahead of or after real activity variables in the VAR, there is no compelling theoretical reason
to restrict the timing of the relationship between uncertainty (a second moment variable) and
real activity (a …rst moment variable). Uncertainty could comove contemporaneously with
real activity both because it is an exogenous impulse driving business cycles and because it
responds endogenously to …rst moment shocks. Recursive structures explicitly rule this out,
since they presume that some variables respond only with a lag to others. Other commonly used
VAR identi…cation strategies, such as sign restrictions, long-run restrictions, and instrumental
variables estimation, are likewise problematic, as we discuss further below.
It is with these challenges in mind that we return to the questions posed above: is uncertainty
primarily a source of business cycle ‡uctuations or a consequence of them? And what is the
relation of real versus …nancial uncertainty to business cycle ‡uctuations? The objective of this
paper is to establish a set of stylized facts that addresses these questions econometrically. To
do so, we take a two-pronged approach. First, we explicitly distinguish macro uncertainty UM t ,
from …nancial uncertainty UF t and force their e¤ects to be orthogonal. These data are included
together in a structural vector autoregression (SVAR) along with a measure of real activity Yt
to evaluate their possibly distinct roles in business cycle ‡uctuations. Second, we propose a
novel identi…cation strategy that allows for simultaneous feedback between uncertainty and real
activity using what we shall refer to as shock-based restrictions. Whereas SVARs are typically
identi…ed using a priori restrictions on the structural parameters, we acheive identi…cation by
using inequality constraints on the structural shocks to reinforce and interpret what the data
already suggest.
More precisely, we impose two sets of shock-based restrictions. The …rst is a set of “event
constraints” that require the identi…ed shocks to have defensible properties during special
episodes of history for which a broad historical understanding of the events of the time would
suggest a certain behavior of the structural shocks. We augment this understanding by using
the data itself, i.e., the set of solutions consistent only with the standard reduced-form covariance restrictions, to locate distinguishing characteristics of the two di¤erent types of uncertainty
shocks. The second is a set of “external variable constraints”that require the identi…ed uncertainty shocks to exhibit a non-zero absolute correlation with certain variables external to the
VAR that should be informative about uncertainty shocks. While our shock-based restrictions
do not in general permit point identi…cation, the moment inequalities generated by these constraints, along with the reduced-form covariance restrictions, yield identi…ed sets that paint a
fairly clear picture regarding the role of …nancial and macro uncertainty during recessions.
The empirical exercise additionally requires that appropriate measures of macro and …nanGilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek (2010), and JLN.

2

cial uncertainty be available. Our measures of uncertainty quantify the magnitude of unpredictability about the future. As in JLN, the macro uncertainty index UM t measures a common
component in the time-varying volatilities of h-step ahead forecast errors across a large number
of macroeconomic series that include variables from three categories: real activity (the most
numerous), price, and …nancial. The same approach is used here to construct a broad-based
index of …nancial uncertainty UF t that is based solely on …nancial market data and has never
been used in the literature. We also study the Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) economic policy
uncertainty (EPU) index, an alternative to the JLN macro uncertainty measure that is arguably
relevant for real activity based macro uncertainty.
Our main results may be stated as follows. First, positive shocks to …nancial uncertainty are
found to cause a sharp and persistent decline in real activity, lending support to the hypothesis
that heightened uncertainty is an exogenous impulse that causes recessions. In contrast to
preexisting empirical work that uses recursive identi…cation schemes (e.g., Bloom (2009), JLN),
we trace the source of this result speci…cally to …nancial market uncertainty. However there is
little evidence that negative shocks to real activity have adverse e¤ects on …nancial uncertainty.
Second, the results suggest that sharply higher macro and policy uncertainty in recessions is
best characterized as an endogenous response to business cycle ‡uctuations. That is, negative
economic activity shocks are found to cause increases in both macro and policy uncertainty, but
there is less evidence that positive shocks to macro or policy uncertainty cause lower economic
activity. Indeed, in most estimations the opposite is true: exogenous shocks to macro and
policy uncertainty are found to initially increase real activity, consistent with “growth options”
theories discussed below.
Third, the results indicate that variation in macro uncertainty is likely to be an important
force for amplifying recessions even if it doesn’t cause them. An analysis that hypothetically
restricts to zero the endogenous responses of macro uncertainty to adverse shocks elsewhere in
the system (in contrast to our estimates), points to a substantial role for macro uncertainty in
magnifying and propagating the e¤ects of other shocks.
Fourth, an inspection of our identi…ed solution sets shows that the admissible SVARs re‡ect
a non-zero contemporaneous correlation between UF t and Yt , as well as between UM t and Yt ,
something that is inconsistent with any recursive ordering. Tests of the validity of a recursive
structure are easily rejected by the data.
Finally, all three estimated shocks systematically exhibit strong non-Gaussian features such
as skewness and excess kurtosis. This is of interest because structural economic modeling and
most Bayesian estimation techniques typically assume Gaussianity.
Looking across con…guration of variables and restrictions considered, the …nding that most
stands out is the strong repercussions for real activity of …nancial uncertainty shocks. And,
while we …nd little evidence that macro uncertainty is a cause of lower economic growth as
3

hypothesized by many theoretical models, our results suggest that macro uncertainty plays a
crucial role in amplifying the contractionary e¤ects of other adverse shocks. In other words,
uncertainty shocks are not all alike. Distinguishing between the two types of uncertainty thus
appears necessary for understanding the roles that uncertainty plays in economic ‡uctuations.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related literature. Section 3
discusses the econometric framework and identifying assumptions, and compares our approach
to other methodologies. Section 4 discusses the data and Section 5 the implementation. Section
6 presents the main results. Section 7 reports estimations of several additional cases and extensions. Section 8 summarizes and concludes. A number of additional results and information are
reported in the Online Appendix. Shock-based restrictions are likely to have promise in other
applications. A paper with greater detail on the methodology proposed here with additional
applications can be found in Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2016).

2

Related Literature

A large literature addresses the question of uncertainty and its relation to economic activity.2 Besides the evidence cited above for the U.S., Nakamura, Sergeyev, and Steinsson (2017)
estimate growth rate and volatility shocks for 16 developed countries and …nd that they are
substantially negatively correlated. Theories for which uncertainty plays a key role di¤er widely
on the question of whether this correlation implies that uncertainty is primarily a cause or a
consequence of declines in economic activity.
One strand of the literature proposes uncertainty as a cause of lower economic growth. This
includes models of the real options e¤ects of uncertainty (Bernanke (1983), McDonald and
Siegel (1986)), models in which uncertainty in‡uences …nancing constraints (Gilchrist, Sim,
and Zakrajsek (2010), Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe (2011)), or precautionary saving (Basu and
Bundick (2017), Leduc and Liu (2016), Fernández-Villaverde, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, and
Uribe (2011)). These theories almost always presume that uncertainty is an exogenous shock
to the volatility of some economic fundamental. Some theories presume that higher uncertainty
originates directly in the process governing technological innovation, which subsequently causes
a decline in real activity (e.g., Bloom (2009), Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten,
and Terry (2018)). According to these theories, positive macro uncertainty shocks should cause
declines in real economic activity. But while this theoretical literature has focused on uncertainty originating in economic fundamentals, the empirical literature has typically evaluated
those theories using uncertainty proxies that are strongly correlated with …nancial market variables. This practice raises the question of whether it is real economic uncertainty or …nancial
market uncertainty (or both) that is the driver of recessions, a question of interest to our
2

This literature has become voluminous. See Bloom (2014) for a recent review of the literature.

4

investigation.
A second strand of the literature postulates that higher macro uncertainty arises solely
as a response to lower economic growth. In these theories there is no exogenous uncertainty
shock at all and all uncertainty variation is endogenous. Some theories presume that bad times
incentivize risky behavior (Bachmann and Moscarini (2011), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012)),
or reduce information and with it the forecastability of future outcomes (Van Nieuwerburgh
and Veldkamp (2006), Fajgelbaum, Schaal, and Taschereau-Dumouchel (2017), Ilut and Saijo
(2016)), or provoke new and unfamiliar economic policies with uncertain e¤ects (Pástor and
Veronesi (2013)), or create a greater misallocation of capital across sectors (Ai, Li, and Yang
(2015)), or generate endogenous countercyclical uncertainty in consumption growth because
investment is costly to reverse (Gomes and Schmid (2016)).
And yet a third literature has raised the possibility that some forms of uncertainty can
actually increase economic activity. “Growth options” theories of uncertainty postulate that
a mean-preserving spread in risk generated from an unbounded upside coupled with a limited
downside can cause …rms to invest and hire, since the increase in mean-preserving risk increases
expected pro…ts. Such theories were often used to explain the dot-com boom. Examples
originate in early work by Oi (1961), Hartman (1972), and Abel (1983), and more recently
Bar-Ilan and Strange (1996), Pastor and Veronesi (2006), Kraft, Schwartz, and Weiss (2018),
Segal, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2015).
As this brief literature review makes plain, there is no single uncertainty theory or allencompassing structural model that we can use to link with data. Put simply, the body of
theoretical work does not provide precise identifying restrictions for empirical work. Instead,
what the literature presents is a wide range of theoretical predictions about the relationship
between uncertainty and real economic activity that are also ambiguous about the sign of the
relationship. The absence of a theoretical consensus on this relationship, along with the sheer
number of theories and limited body of evidence on the structural elements of speci…c models,
underscores the extent to which the question of cause and e¤ect is fundamentally an empirical
one.
Of course, all empirical studies of this nature require identifying assumptions. But commonly
used SVAR identi…cation schemes appear ill equipped to address the empirical questions at
hand. Recursive identi…cation schemes are inappropriate because, by construction, they rule
out the possibility that uncertainty and real activity could in‡uence one another within the
period. Sign restrictions on impulse responses are inappropriate, since theory is ambiguous
about the sign of the relationship. Zero-frequency restrictions are di¢ cult to motivate as the
long-run e¤ects of uncertainty shocks have not been theorized. Instrumental variable analysis is
challenging, since instruments that are credibly exogenous are di¢ cult if not impossible to …nd
for this application. All of these considerations motivate the alternative identi…cation strategy
5

proposed in this paper.

3

Econometric Framework

We consider a baseline system with n = 3 variables: Xt = (UM t ; Yt ; UF t )0 ; where UM t denotes the
JLN index of macro uncertainty, Yt denotes a measure of real activity, and UF t denotes the index
of …nancial uncertainty. We suppose that Xt has a reduced-form …nite-order autoregressive
P
representation Xt = pj=1 Aj Xt j + t , t (0; );
= PP0 where P is the unique lowertriangular Cholesky factor with non-negative diagonal elements. The reduced form parameters
0
are collected into = vec(A1 )0 : : : vec(Ap )0 ; vech( )0 . The reduced form innovations
t

=(

M t;

Y t;

0
F t)

are related to the structural shocks et = (eM t ; eY t ; eF t )0 by an invertible

matrix H:
t

where B

H , and

= H et

Bet ;

(0; IK );

et

diag (H) = 1;

is a diagonal matrix with variance of the shocks in the diagonal entries.

The structural shocks et are mean zero with unit variance, serially and mutually uncorrelated.
We adopt the unit e¤ect normalization that Hjj = 1 for all j.
The goal of the exercise is analyze the dynamic e¤ects of et on Xt . Let “hats” denote
estimated variables. Since the autoregressive parameters Aj can be consistently estimated
under regularity conditions, the sample residuals ^ ( ^ ) are consistent estimates of . The
t

t

empirical SVAR problem reduces to …nding B from ^ . But there are 9 parameters in B and
the covariance structure of ^ t only provides n(n + 1)=2 = 6 restrictions in the form
gZ (B) = vech( ^ )

vech(BB0 ) = 0:

Thus the model is under-identi…ed as there can be in…nitely many solutions satisfying the
covariance restrictions gZ (B) = 0. Let these uncountably many solutions be collected into the
^ : Q 2 On , diag(B) 0; gZ (B) = 0g; where On is the set of n n orthonormal
set B^ = fB = PQ

matrices. We shall refer to B^ as the unconstrained set for short, with the understanding that it is
not completely unconstrained given the imposition of the reduced-form covariance restrictions.
To simply notation, the dependence of B^ on Q and ^ is suppressed.

Point identi…cation requires restrictions beyond the ones implied by the covariance structure
to reduce B^ to a singleton. As discussed above, the theories reviewed in previous section do
not lend support to identi…cation schemes commonly used in the literature. One possibility is
to turn to external variables. An example relevant to our work is Stock and Watson (2012),

in which either stock market volatility or the EPU index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016)
are used as external instrumental variables (IV) to identify the e¤ects of uncertainty shocks.
Our analysis di¤ers not only because we have two types of uncertainty and are interested in
the dynamic e¤ects of all shocks in the model. The main di¤erence is that our procedure
6

explicitly recognizes that macro uncertainty, policy uncertainty, and …nancial uncertainty are
all endogenous variables. As such, valid instruments, which must be exogenous, are hard to
…nd.
We address these challenges by putting restrictions on the behavior of the structural shocks.
Although the unconstrained set can be uncountably large, our proposed identifying restrictions
explicitly recognize that not every solution in B^ is equally credible. We refer to these as shock-

based restrictions since we use features of the shocks to decide if a solution in the unconstrained
set should be kept. Even though the stated goal of any SVAR exercise is to identify et , it is
somewhat surprising that little attention is paid to the shocks themselves. Before turning to
the restrictions, we …rst discuss some facts that motivate them.

3.1

Motivating Facts

Since we are interested in understanding the possible role of di¤erent types of uncertainty in
economic ‡uctuations, it is useful to isolate episodes of heightened …nancial and macro uncertainty. Consider …rst …nancial uncertainty. In the sample we study, the two largest …nancial
uncertainty episodes are the 1987 stock market crash, and the Great Financial Crisis/Great
Recession of 2008-2009.
On Monday October 19, 1987, the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 22.6 percent, the
largest one-day stock market decline in history. Popular explanations include the rapidly rising
globalization of …nancial markets and …nancial innovations associated with index futures and
portfolio insurance. A belief that such …nancial innovations played a predominate role in the
crash was su¢ ciently widespread that new regulations for exchange trading, such as “circuit
breakers,”and an overhaul of trade clearing protocols were developed in the aftermath.3
In October of 2008, the Dow Jones Industrial average began a pronounced decline and
subsequently fell more than 50% over a period of 17 months. The collapse in the market over
this period has been associated with a broad-based Great Financial Crisis (GFC) that is often
cited as a “trigger”of the Great Recession (GR).4 Many possible contributors to the crisis have
been noted, including problems with subprime lending and a preceding housing boom. But
at least some of the variation in …nancial uncertainty appears to have its origins in securities
markets. Financial intermediaries played a large role in the crisis, primarily because they hold
vast portfolios of …nancial securities. Speculative trading activities by large …nancial institutions
such as AIG, Lehman Brothers, and Bear Stearns, possibly spurred by a mistaken pricing of
risk, have been placed at the center of the crisis by some analyses (e.g., Glaeser, Santos, and
Weyl (2017)). Several highly leveraged …nancial institutions (BNP Paribas, Northern Rock)
experienced a total collapse in liquidity that began August of 2007, preceding the recession. And
3
4

See for example, https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/stock_market_crash_of_1987
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_crisis_of_2007-2008

7

uncertainty about the value of new products of …nancial innovation have been cited as pertinent
to the …nancial crisis, including the securitization of mortgages and other debt obligations, and
the rapid growth in credit default swaps.5 In short, a de…ning feature of both the 1987 crash and
the Great Financial Crisis is that factors originating speci…cally in …nancial markets appeared
to play an important role in heightened …nancial uncertainty.
With this in mind, we ask what can be said about the uncertainty shocks themselves before
imposing any identifying restrictions. To address this question, we construct the unconstrained
^ which is based on the reduced-form covariance restrictions alone, and then study when big
set B,

shocks in this set have occurred over the course of …fty years in our sample, by searching across
the unconstrained set B^ for the month in which the uncertainty shocks eF t (B) and eM t (B) are
largest.

^ we initialize B to be the unique lowerTo construct the unconstrained solution set B,
^ and then rotate it by
triangular Cholesky factor of ^ with non-negative diagonal elements, P,
K = 1:5 million random orthogonal matrices Q. Each rotation begins by drawing an n n
matrix M of NID(0,1) random variables. Then Q is taken to be the orthonormal matrix in the
^
QR decomposition of M. Since B = PQ,
the procedure imposes the covariance restrictions
vech( ) =vech(BB0 ) by construction. Let et (B) = B 1 ^t be the shocks implied by a B 2 B^
for given ^t . The moments implied by the covariance structure alone give us 1.5 million values
of B, and thus 1.5 million unconstrained values of et (B) for t = 1; :::T .
Searching over the 1.5 million rotations, we …nd that the date in our sample with the most
maxima in eF t (B) (31% of them) is 2008:09, which happens to be the month when Lehman …led
for bankruptcy and when the stock market fell nearly 800 points. The date with the second
most maxima in eF t (B) (25% of them) is 1987:10, the month of the stock market crash. Looking
at the 1.5 million values of eF t (B) obtained for 2008:09, we …nd that its distribution is right
skewed with few negative values: 30% of the eF t (B) in 2008:09 have a value of 4 (standard
deviations) or larger, 20% have a value of 5 or larger, while 5% of them take on a value of
6 or larger. For the 1.5 million values of eF t (B) obtained in 1987:10, we …nd similarly that
25% of the eF t (B) in 1987:10 have a value of four (standard deviations) or larger, while 5% of
them take on a value of 5 or larger. Thus, the covariance structure of the data alone provides
overwhelming evidence of a large positive …nancial uncertainty shock in the months of the 1987
crash and the 2008 Lehman collapse.
We repeat this exercise for the macro uncertainty shocks. The date with the most maxima
in eM t (B) across all 1.5 million rotations in B^ (32% of them) is again 2008:09, the month of
the Lehman collapse, while the date with the second most maxima is 1970:12. Looking at the
1.5 million values of eM t (B) obtained for 2008:09, we …nd a distribution that is very close to
that of eF t (B): 33% have a value of 4 or larger, 20% have a value of 5 or larger, and 5% have
5

"FT Martin Wolf –Reform of Regulation and Incentives". Financial Times. June 23, 2009.

8

a value of 6 or larger. For the 1970:12 date, we …nd that 25% of the 1.5 million values of
eM t (B) have a value of 4 or larger, while 10% of them take on a value of 5 or larger. Thus,
the covariance structure of the data alone provides overwhelming evidence of a large positive
macro uncertainty shock in the month of the 2008 Lehman collapse and in December of 1970.
What might be the signi…cance of the last month in 1970 for macro uncertainty? Unlike
2008:09, this date is not associated with a single salient event such as the Lehman collapse.
But further inspection shows that the big macro uncertainty shocks found in 1970:12 have their
origins in uncertainty about real economic activity.6 The late 1960s and early 1970s were a
time of rising anxieties on a number of fronts given the twin wars in Vietnam and Cambodia
and accelerating in‡ation. But, arguably, the single most relevant source of real economic
uncertainty at the end of 1970 involved the likelihood and consequences of a collapse of the
Bretton Woods system. By December of 1970, it was evident that the large U.S. balance of
payments de…cit of the time was incompatible with the gold standard, an acknowledgement that
prompted periodic runs on the dollar and growing unease over the possible policy response. By
the time of the so-called Nixon “shock” in August of 1971, a little over six months after our
identi…ed big real uncertainty shock, it was widely recognized that the $35-per-ounce of gold
conversation rate was unsustainable, and that the collapse of Bretton Woods was inevitable.
Thus a historical reading of the times would place the period of genuine uncertainty surrounding
the collapse of Bretton Woods sometime earlier than August 1971, when there was still room for
reasoned speculation. From an inspection of the unconstrained set, it is apparent that the date
with the biggest shock in the twelve month run-up to the abandonment of the gold standard
is 1970:12. Evidently, this date represents a big shock episode for the real activity component
of UM t , one that appears to be relatively unimportant for …nancial uncertainty. Conversely,
the month of the 1987 stock market crash represents a big shock episode for UF t , one that is
relatively unimportant for macro/real uncertainty. We use these facts below to help discern the
possibly distinct roles of macro and …nancial uncertainty for real activity.
We argue that other major economic events in our sample, even if they are not big shock
^ still justify weaker restrictions on the signs of the uncertainty shocks during speci…c
events in B,

months. On October 6, 1979, Paul Volcker announced the results of an unscheduled FOMC
meeting in which it was decided that a new nonborrowed reserves instrument approach to the
implementation of monetary policy would supersede the federal funds rate instrument approach
used for years prior, in an e¤ort to bring down accelerating in‡ation. In July/August of 2011,
the U.S. House of Representatives broke with long-standing precedent to demand that the U.S.
President negotiate over de…cit reduction in exchange for an increase in the debt ceiling. We
6

When we replace UM t with a sub-index based only on the real activity variables in the macro index, we
…nd that 1970:12 is the date with the greatest number of maxima in the shocks to real activity uncertainty. We
investigate this sub-index further below.

9

argue that a credible identi…cation scheme would not identify October 1979 or the months
associated with the 2011 debt ceiling crisis as periods of below average uncertainty shocks.
Similarly, a credible identi…cation scheme would not identify the Great Recession–the most
protracted economic downturn of the post-war period–as an episode in which real activity
shocks were above average.
Our restrictions also employ variables external to the SVAR to help identify uncertainty
shocks. What type of external variables are likely to encode information about uncertainty
shocks? We argue that both the stock market and price of safe-haven assets such as gold are
two such variables. Empirically, it has long been understood that periods of high stock market
volatility coincide with movements downward in the aggregate stock market.7 The correlation
between the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) and the log excess stock market return on the CRSP
value-weighted stock market index is -0.40 from January 1990 (when the standard VIX series
begins) to the end of our sample. This correlation is also relevant for UF t , since its behavior is
dominated by the volatility of equity returns.8 Such a negative correlation between uncertainty
shocks and the ex-post stock return is implied by a large body of extant macro and …nance
theories. For example, the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner
(1965) implies a perfect negative correlation since the stock market risk premium (which moves
inversely to the ex-post return) is perfectly correlated with shocks to …nancial uncertainty. More
recent asset pricing theories that emphasize the importance of uncertainty shocks, such as those
in Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009) and Campbell, Giglio, Polk, and Turley (2018), argue
that the volatility of volatility in …nancial markets creates an additional source of negative
correlation between uncertainty shocks and ex-post stock market returns. Likewise, the value
of gold is likely to contain information about uncertainty shocks, including macroeconomic
uncertainty with origins outside of equity markets. Examples of these forms of uncertainty are
natural disasters, terrorist attacks, political coups and revolutions, as considered in Baker and
Bloom (2013), but also unpredictable in‡ation, interest rates, or energy prices. Our premise is
that plausibly exogenous increases in uncertainty of this nature have typically been associated
with increases in returns on quintessential safe-haven assets, the archetypal example being
gold.9
7

See, for example, French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987); Schwert (1989); Nelson (1991); Campbell and
Hentschel (1992); Engle and Ng (1993), and Whaley (2000).
8
The correlation between the VIX and UF t is 0.85 in the sample that starts in 1990. The correlation between
the VXO volatility index (which goes back to the beginning of our sample) and UF t is 0.75.
9
Pi¤er and Podstawski (2017) suggest using variation in the real price of gold around speci…c events as an
instrumental variable to identify uncertainty shocks. We instead use it as an informative external variable for
macro uncertainty shocks, without requiring it to be a valid instrument.

10

3.2

Shock-Based Constraints

Motivated by the historical facts just discussed, we now consider two types of shock-based
restrictions to help with identi…cation: event constraints, and external variables constraints.
A. Event Constraints Event constraints are unusual episodes of history in which a broadbased (historical and statistical) reading of the times would suggest a speci…c feature of the
structural shocks. The idea is that a credible identi…cation scheme should produce shocks that
are not grossly at variance with our ex-post understanding of events, at least during periods of
special interest. Speci…cally, we require that any et (B) formed from B 2B^ satisfy the following
event constraints:
i gE1 : eF

k1 at

1

ii gE2 : eF
iii gE3 : eM
iv gE4 : 0

2

3

P

1 =1987:10.

k2 _ eM
k4 at
t=

3

2

k3 at

2 =2008:09.

3 =1970:12.

eY t for

4

2 [2007:12, 2009:06].

v gE5 : eM

4

0 and eF

5

0 at

5 =1979:10

vi gE6 : eM

5

0 and eF

6

0 at

6

2 [2011:07, 2011:08]

The …rst three constraints pertain to the big shock events discussed above. Condition
(i) requires that the …nancial uncertainty shock found in period

1

of October 1987 (black

Monday) be large and exceed k1 standard deviations above the mean. Condition (ii) requires
that either the …nancial uncertainty shock or the macro uncertainty shock (or both) found
in period

2

of September 2008 (the month of the Lehman collapse) be large and exceed k2

and k3 standard deviations above the mean, respectively. Condition (iii) requires that the
macro uncertainty shock found in period 3 of December 1970 be large and exceed k4 standard
deviations above the mean. Condition (iv) requires that the cumulation of real activity shocks
in

4

2 [2007:12,2009:06], corresponding to the Great Recession, be nonpositive, which is to say

their sum may not be above average.10 Conditions (v) and (vi) are sign restrictions on both
types of uncertainty shocks that require they be non-negative during the month 5 of October
1979 (Volcker experiment), and during the months 6 2 [2011:07, 2011:08], corresponding to
the 2011 debt-ceiling crisis. This latter episode spills over into two months because the House
of Representatives of the U.S. congress did not agree to raise the debt ceiling until July 31 of
10

The dates 2007:12-2009:06 are NBER recession dates, which are taken to be coincident with Great Financial
Crisis.

11

2011, two days prior to when the Treasury estimated the borrowing authority of the United
States would be exhausted.
The six event constraints gE1 ; :::; gE6 can be represented by a system of inequality constraints
on B:
gE (et (B); ; k)
where k = k 1 ; k 2 ; k 3 ; k 4

0

> 0 are parameters and

0
= ( 1;

2;

3;

4;

5)

0

are event dates. The

choice of the k parameters will be discussed below.
It is important to be clear about what the big shock constraints gE1 , gE2 ; and gE23 do and
do not assume. The restriction gE1 stipulates that at least some of the forecast error variance
in Xt in 1987:10 must be attributable to a large eF t , while gE3 stipulates that at least some
of the forecast error variance in 1970:12 must be attributable to a large eM t . Restriction gE2
likewise assumes that at least one of eM t or eF t needs to have been large in the month of the
Lehman collapse. What the restrictions do not require is that all or even most of the variation
in these episodes be attributable to the speci…c shocks named in the restriction. In particular,
they do not rule out large adverse roles for the other shocks, which are left unrestricted by the
constraint. As we shall see below, the Great Financial Crisis/Great Recession was characterized
by large adverse shocks in all three variables, even though the second constraint only requires
a large role for at least one uncertainty shock in a single month of this episode.
Event constraints put restrictions on the sign and the magnitude of et (B) rather than on
the signs of impulse responses (IRFs), as is common in some SVAR approaches. Restrictions on
the shocks turn out to be valuable for identi…cation because, although two feasible structural
~ T with equivalent …rst and second
~ will generate shocks fet (B)gT and f~
et (B)g
models B and B
t=1

t=1

~ are not necessarily the same at any given t. It is not hard to see
~t (B)
moments, et (B) and e
~ 0 P 1 ^ t = Qe
~ t , then e
~ 6= Q.11
~t 6= et at any given t when Q
that if et = Q0 P 1 ^ t and ~
et = Q
Put di¤erently, two series with equivalent properties “on average”can still have distinguishable
features in certain subperiods.
B. External Variable Constraints Variables external to the VAR can also facilitate identi…cation when theory or economic reasoning imply they should be informative about the shocks
of interest. We use correlations between the external variables and uncertainty shocks to generate additional inequality constraints.12 Let St = (S1t ; S2t )0 denote a vector of external variables,
B11 B12
e1t
: Solving for e1t gives e1t = jBj 1 (B22 1t B12 2t );
B
B
e2t
21
22
2t
where jBj = B11 B22 B12 B21 is the determinant of B. The values of 1t and 2t are given by the data. Hence,
a restriction on the behavior of e1t1 at speci…c time t1 is a non-linear restriction on B, or equivalently, on Q.
12
Other researchers have used information in special variables to identify certain e¤ects of uncertainty. Berger,
Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2016), while not providing an explicit identi…cation of uncertainty shocks, use options
data and …nd that bad times are associated with higher realized volatility but not higher expected volatility,
a result that they interpret as consistent with the hypothesis that higher uncertainty is a consequence rather
11

Consider the n = 2 case:

1t

=

12

where here S1t denotes a measure of the aggregate stock market return and S2t denotes the log
di¤erence in the real price of gold. The external variable constraints require that any et (B)
formed from B 2B^ satisfy the following restrictions:
i gC1 : 0

corr(ejt (B); S1t ), j = M; F

ii gC2 : corr(ejt (B); S2t )

0, j = M; F ;

The …rst constraint requires that uncertainty shocks be negatively correlated with stock
market returns, and the second requires that they be positively correlated with the log change
in the real price of gold. Taken together, the two constraints gC1 and gC2 can be formulated as
a system of inequality constraints:
gC (e(B); S)

0:

The external variable constraints provide cross-equation restrictions on the parameters in B.
An important aspect of these constraints is that correlations are not invariant to orthonormal
rotations. That is to say, correlations generated by B will in general be di¤erent from those
~ = BQ0 .
generated by B
Two points are worthy of emphasis. First, although the external variables are used to help
with identi…cation, they are not required to be valid exogenous instruments, as in the proxyVAR or external IV literature. We discuss this further below. Second, neither gold nor stock
market returns are themselves real activity or uncertainty indicators and we are not interested in
their behavior per se. This is essential because a central question of our empirical investigation
is whether uncertainty shocks are a cause of economic downturns. Identifying restrictions that
force this to be true by construction (for example, a requirement that uncertainty shocks be
positively related to S3t where S3t is the unemployment rate) are not useful because they would
require economic downturns characterized by rising unemployment to be at least partly driven
by uncertainty shocks.

3.3

Comparison With Other Methodologies

The idea of using speci…c events and/or external variables to identify shocks is not new. Many
important studies have used a narrative approach to construct shock series from historical readings of political and economic events to be used as an external IV. The resulting oil price shocks
based on timing of wars, tax shocks from …scal policy announcements, and monetary policy
shocks from a reading of FOMC meetings are typically used as though they were exogenous
and accurately measured. But as noted in Ramey (2016), both assumptions are questionable. To deal with possible measurement errors, Mertens and Ravn (2014) uses the narrative
than a cause of negative economic shocks.

13

tax changes as an external instrument. Similarly, Baker and Bloom (2013) use disaster-like
events as instruments for stock market volatility with the aim of isolating exogenous variation
in uncertainty. More generally, a prominent proxy-VAR/external IV literature, pioneered by
Mertens and Ravn (2013) and Stock and Watson (2008), proposes using variables external to
the VAR as instrumental variables to identify SVARs. In all of these papers, point identi…cation is achieved by assuming that the instruments have a zero correlation with some shocks
(an exogeneity assumption) and a non-zero correlation with others (a relevance assumption).
Like this literature, a maintained assumption of our external variables constraints is that the
random processes behind the external variables are determined outside of the VAR system. But
unlike this literature, neither our external variables nor our event episodes are presumed to be
valid exogenous instruments that have zero correlations with certain shocks. Instead, we only
require the weaker assumption that the events and external variables be driven at least in part
by one or more of the shocks, thereby allowing us to narrow the set of solutions but not achieve
point identi…cation.
Our event constraints di¤er from the narrative approach in other ways. First, they are data
driven rather than being solely based on a narrative reading of history. We use features of the
shocks during selected episodes to determine whether a possible solution is admissible. This is
tantamount to creating dummy variables from the timing of speci…c events, and then putting
restrictions on their correlation with the identi…ed shocks. Second, the same SVAR is used to
identify all shocks simultaneously; it is not a two-step procedure that identi…es some shocks
ahead of others.
It is worth contrasting the frequentist approach taken here with recent work on signrestricted SVARs in Bayesian contexts. Rubio Ramírez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010) point out
that choosing Q according to the QR decomposition amounts to drawing Q from a uniform
distribution over the space of orthogonal matrices. Baumeister and Hamilton (2015) note that
an uninformative prior over Q can be informative for the posterior over the structural impact
matrix and impulse responses in sign-restricted SVARs. We di¤er from these papers in two important ways. First, these papers focus speci…cally on restrictions placed on the sign of impulse
response functions, whereas our restrictions are on timing, magnitude, and correlation, of the
shocks. Second, our approach is frequentist in the spirit of the moment inequality framework of
Andrews and Soares (2010), with moment conditions given by the inequalities from the event
and correlation constraints, and equalities provided by the covariance structure. We use the
QR decomposition merely to generate candidate values of B, and check if the resulting et (B)
satis…es the constraints. Importantly, the shocks that result from our moment inequality restrictions exhibit signi…cant departures from Gaussianity (see discussion below), an outcome
that would greatly complicate any Bayesian estimation, but that is straightforward to handle
using the frequentist approach of this paper.
14

After earlier versions of this paper were circulated, we became aware of work by Antolín-Díaz
and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) who, like us, suggest using restrictions on the shocks during certain
episodes of history to help identi…cation. They propose several di¤erent types of restrictions,
including sign restrictions on the shocks at certain dates, as in some of our event constraints
above. But there are also several substantive di¤erences. They entertain restrictions that play
up the role of some shocks while simultaneously playing down the role of others. (See, for
example, their “Type B” restrictions, in which for a particular period or periods the absolute
value of one shock’s contribution to the unexpected change in a variable is assumed to be larger
than the sum of the absolute value of the contributions of all other structural shocks.) This
type of restriction di¤ers from the event constraints proposed above because some shocks are
presumed to play large roles while others must play smaller or negligible roles, more in the spirit
of the traditional narrative-IV approach. By contrast, the event constraints above only require
the weaker assumption that the events be driven at least in part by one or more of the shocks;
they do not require the remaining shocks to play smaller roles. For example, our restrictions
require that there be a large …nancial uncertainty shock or a large macro uncertainty shock
or both in 2008:09, but they do not rule out a large role for the real activity shock during
this episode. Other di¤erences are that Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) do not use
external variables at all, and their focus is on methodology in a Bayesian context at a general
level. While our focus here is to use event and external variable constraints to help understand
the role of macro or …nancial uncertainty in the aggregate economy, the use of shock-based
restrictions is not limited to this particular application.
A number of studies have now followed our work to consider macro and …nancial uncertainty
as possibly distinct drivers of ‡uctuations in real activity. We comment brie‡y on two here:
Carriero, Clark, and Marcellino (2018) and Angelini, Bacchiocchi, Caggiano, and Fanelli (2018).
Before doing so, we emphasize that neither of these papers show the shocks implied by their
identi…cation schemes. A premise of this paper is that the shocks themselves are important
objects of interest, and provide a crucial information for assessing the credibility of any given
identi…cation scheme. For example, a scheme that did not imply a fairly large …nancial uncertainty shock during the 1987 stock market crash is unlikely to be credible, given how isolated
this episode was to the stock market.
Carriero, Clark, and Marcellino (2018) specify VARs with uncertainty variables and identify
shocks by imposing a parametric speci…cation for their time-varying heteroskedasticity. They
include either the JLN macro uncertainty measure UM t or the VIX in a VAR along with several
macro variables and conclude that the VIX can arise at least partly as an endogenous response
to some macroeconomic events, while macro uncertainty “can be considered exogenous.” Numerous di¤erences in modeling assumptions, identi…cation restrictions, and data likely explain
our constrasting results. First, our approach doesn’t require the imposition of potentially re15

strictive econometric structure on the conditional moment behavior of the shocks. Instead, all
implications ‡ow organically from our constraints, which are straightforward to interpret. For
example, our identi…ed shocks are both heteroskedasitic and non-Gaussian, being more volatile
in some episodes than others. But this form of heteroskedasticity and non-normality is unlikely
to be well captured by any parametric econometric speci…cation of heteroskedasticity. Second,
Carriero et. al., place the di¤erent uncertainty variables in the VAR one at a time. By contrast, we include them in the VAR together, which forces their e¤ects to be orthogonal. This
is important given that the two types of uncertainty are strongly correlated.13
Angelini, Bacchiocchi, Caggiano, and Fanelli (2018) use the very same system of variables
used here but identify shocks based on zero restrictions in the B matrix. These restrictions
amount to timing restrictions on the dynamics of the variables, which are allowed to vary
across subsamples. In particular, they assume that, in subsamples prior to 2008:01 (a break
date that is exogenously chosen), UF t shocks could neither contemporaneously a¤ect, nor have
been a¤ected by, real activity, i.e., the elements BF Y and BY F of B must be jointly zero. They
justify these zero restrictions by arguing that …nancial regulation slowed down the response of
…nancial markets to non…nancial shocks up to 2008:01. This is an interesting restriction, given
that …nancial markets are typically presumed to respond quickly to news (even in samples
prior to 2008), whereas macro variables are comparatively slower moving (e.g., Gertler and
Karadi (2015) and Lettau, Ludvigson, and Steindel (2002)). When we apply our procedure on
data up to 2008:01, there is no solution in the identi…ed set that satis…es the joint restriction
BF Y = BY F = 0.
An additional point about the procedure is worth mentioning. The structural shocks we
identify do not necessarily correspond to primitive shocks of any particular model, as this is not
our goal. Our real activity shocks are ‘…rst moment’shocks that could originate from technology,
monetary policy, preferences, or government expenditure innovations. Financial uncertainty, a
type of ‘second moment’shock, could arise because of expected volatility in …nancial markets
such as fear of a bank run or fear of bankruptcy. Another type of second moment shock,
macro uncertainty, could arise because of expected volatility in the macro economy, such as
an expectation of greater di¢ culty in predicting future productivity, future monetary policy
or future …scal policy. An objective of this study is to disentangle whether it is shifts to …rst
or second moments (or both) that drive economic ‡uctuations. Disentangling the two types
of uncertainty is a worthy exercise because the theoretical macro literature on uncertainty has
focused on exogenous changes in real activity induced (macro) uncertainty, while the empirical
literature has used proxies for macro uncertainty that are highly correlated with volatility in
13

Results (available upon request) show what happens if we apply our procedure to two bivariate VARs where
UM t or UF t are included one at a time. Under this estimation, the two measures have very similar dynamic
relationships with industrial production, in contrast to our …ndings when they are simultaneously included in
the VAR.

16

…nancial markets.
To have con…dence in this implementation, we use a simulation to take into account sampling error and study the properties of the estimator. In the Online Appendix, we describe a
numerically intensive Monte Carlo simulation that bootstraps from the et (B) shocks for the
Xt system to create con…dence bands for impulse responses. The resulting error bands are
reported below for the base case impulse responses.
To summarize, set identi…cation is predicated on three core economic assumptions. First,
the identi…ed shocks must be consistent with a priori economic reasoning in a small number
of events whose interpretation is relatively incontrovertible. Second, information about uncertainty shocks must be encoded in stock market returns and the real gold price, as speci…ed by
the external variable constraints. Third, a maintained assumption of the analysis is that the
dynamic responses of interest can be captured without explicitly modeling the random processes
behind the external variables.

4

Data

We study VAR systems for three systems of data. Our main system is Xt = (UM t ; ipt ; UF t )0 ,
where UM t and UF t are statistical uncertainty indices constructed using the methodology of
JLN. Financial uncertainty UF t is new to this paper. In all cases, we use the log of real
industrial production, denoted ipt , to measure Yt . Industrial production is a widely watched
economic indicator of business cycles. Subsequent sections consider additional systems that use
either policy uncertainty indices in place of UM t , or a real activity sub-index of UM t in place of
UM t . For S1t we use the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) value-weighted stock
market index return.14 For S2t we use the log di¤erence in the gold price level, de‡ated using
the Consumer Price Index (CPI) with Jan. 2018 as the base month.15
Our statistical measures of uncertainty are constructed following the framework of JLN,
which aggregates over a large number of estimated uncertainties constructed from a panel
C
C
C
of data. Let yjt
2 YtC = (y1t
; : : : ; yN
)0 be a variable in category C. Its h-period ahead
Ct

uncertainty, denoted by UjtC (h), is de…ned to be the volatility of the purely unforecastable
component of the future value of the series, conditional on all information available. Speci…cally,
s
UjtC (h)

C
E (yjt+h

C
E[yjt+h
jIt ])2 jIt

(1)

where It denotes the information available. Uncertainty in category C is an aggregate of
14

The CRSP index is a value-weighted return of all stocks in NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ.
The data source for the CPI-delfated gold price is https://www.macrotrends.net/1333/historical-gold-prices100-year-chart, derived from the London Bullion Market Association (LBMA) measure of daily auction prices
of gold, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
15

17

individual uncertainty series in the category:
UCt (h)

NC
X
1 C
plimNC !1
U (h)
NC jt
j=1

EC [UjtC (h)]:

(2)

If the expectation today of the squared error in forecasting yjt+h rises, uncertainty in the
variable increases. As in JLN, the conditional expectation of squared forecast errors in (1)
C
jIt ]
is computed from a stochastic volatility model, while the conditional expectation E[yjt+h
is replaced by a di¤usion index forecast, augmented to allow for nonlinearities. These are

predictions of an autoregression augmented with a small number of common factors estimated
from a large number of economic time series xit assumed to have factor structure. Nonlinearities
are accommodated by including polynomial terms in the factors, and factors estimated from
squares of the raw data. The use of large datasets reduces the possibility of biases that arise
when relevant predictive information is ignored.
In this paper, we consider two categories of uncertainty, macro M and …nancial F . Hence
there are two datasets, both covering the sample 1960:07-2015:04. For macro uncertainty UM t ,
we use a monthly macro dataset, XtM , consisting of 134 mostly macroeconomic time series taken
from McCracken and Ng (2016). For …nancial uncertainty UF t , we use a …nancial dataset XtF

consisting of 148 measures of monthly …nancial indicators.16 We also use two measures of policy
uncertainty taken from Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) in lieu of the statistical measure of
macro uncertainty UM t .
The 134 macro series in X m are selected to represent broad categories of macroeconomic

time series. The majority of these are real activity measures: real output and income, employment and hours, real retail, manufacturing and trade sales, consumer spending, housing starts,
inventories and inventory sales ratios, orders and un…lled orders, compensation and labor costs,

and capacity utilization measures. The dataset also includes commodity and price indexes and
a handful of bond and stock market indexes, and foreign exchange measures. The …nancial
dataset X f is an updated monthly version of the of 148 variables comprised solely of …nancial
market time series used in Ludvigson and Ng (2007). These data include valuation ratios such
as the dividend-price ratio and earnings-price ratio, growth rates of aggregate dividends and
prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of di¤erent ratings grades, yields
on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry, size, book-market, and
momentum portfolio equity returns.17 The indexes UM t and UF t lend themselves to di¤erent
interpretations because they are constructed from di¤erent variables. In a subsequent section,
we investigate the sub-index of UM t that is constructed only from the real activity variables.
16

Both datasets were previously used in Ludvigson and Ng (2007) and JLN, but they are updated to the
longer sample.
17
A detailed description of the series is given in the Data Appendix of the online supplementary …le at
www.sydneyludvigson.com/s/ucc_data_appendix.pdf

18

The top panel of Figure 1 plots the estimated h = 1 month-ahead macro uncertainty,
denoted simply UM t , in standardized units along with the NBER recession dates. The horizontal
bar corresponds to 1.65 standard deviation above unconditional mean of each series (which
is standardized to zero). As is known from JLN, the macro uncertainty index is strongly
countercyclical, and exhibits large spikes in the deepest recessions. The updated data UM t
series shows much the same. Though UM t exceeds 1.65 standard deviations 48 times, they are
clustered around the 1973-75 and 1981-82 recessions, as well as the Great Recession of 2007-09.
Macroeconomic uncertainty has a correlation of -0.65 with the 12-month moving-average of the
growth in industrial production.
The middle panel of Figure 1 plots the estimated h = 1 month-ahead …nancial uncertainty
series, denoted UF t , over time, which is new to this paper. UF t is a broad-based measure of time
varying …nancial uncertainty using data from the bond market, stock market portfolio returns,
and commodity markets. As seen from Figure 1, UF t is also countercyclical, though less so than
UM t . Its correlation with industrial production is -0.39. The series often exhibits spikes around
the times when UM t is high. However, UF t is more volatile and spikes more frequently outside
of recessions, the most notable being the 1987 stock market crash. Though observations on UF t
exceed the 1.65 standard deviation line 33 times, they are spread out in seven episodes, with
the 2008 and 1987 episodes being the most pronounced.
As is clear from Figure 1, both indicators of macro and …nancial uncertainty are serially
correlated and hence predictable. They have comovements but also have independent variations
as the correlation between them is only 0.58. However, this unconditional correlation cannot be
given a structural interpretation. To the extent that our uncertainty variables measure expectations about future volatility, the heightened uncertainty measures can respond endogenously
to events that are expected to happen, but they can also be exogenous changes to expected
volatility. We use a VAR to capture the predictable variations, and then identify uncertainty
shocks from the VAR residuals using the restrictions described above. We now turn to the
implementation issues.

5

Implementation

Estimates of B that satisfy the reduced form covariance restrictions, the event constraints, and
the external variable constraints together give the identi…ed solution set denoted
^ : Q 2 On ;
B(B; k; ; S) = fB = PQ
gZ (B) = 0; gE (B; ; k)

diag(B) > 0;
0; gC (B; S)

0g:

To simplify notation, we simply write B(B; k; ; S) as B. The unconstrained set B^ is constructed
using random rotations, as discussed above. A particular solution can be in both B^ and B only
19

if all the event and external variable constraints are satis…ed.
Though no one solution in B is any more likely than another, we sometimes use what will
be referred to as the ‘maxG’solution as reference point:

Bmax G arg maxgC (B)0 gC (B):

(3)

B2B

This is the single solution in the identi…ed set for which the inequalities pertaining to the
external variable constraints are collectively maximized, as measured by an equally-weighted
quadratic norm. One may consider this the solution for which the external variables are maximally relevant/informative for the shocks of interest.
Construction of the identi…ed solution necessitates choice of the big shock constraint para0

meters k = k1 ; k2 ; k3 ; k4 . It should be clear that if the values for these parameters are overly
restrictive, the identi…ed solution set will be empty. If they are too unrestrictive, the constraints
will have no identifying power. Shock-based restrictions are also not invariant to the system
being analyzed because the data may have di¤erent variability, as well as di¤erent skewness,
kurtosis, and cross-moments. Thus the parameters for one system of data could be too restrictive for another. We therefore set baseline values for k using a data dependent procedure for
the system Xt = (UM t ; ipt ; UF t )0 so they are consistent with the economic reasoning behind the
constraints, and then investigate the sensitivity of results to changes in this parameterization.
These parameters can then be adapted to other systems. We now discuss the parameterization
for the system Xt = (UM t ; ipt ; UF t )0 .
The event constraints gE1 , gE2 , and gE3 require …nancial and/or macro uncertainty shocks
to be large in the month October of the 1987 crash, the month September of the 2008 Lehman
collapse, and in the month December of high real uncertainty shocks in 1970. But what constitutes a large shock in this system? To address this question, we return to the unconstrained
set B^ for the system Xt = (UM t ; ipt ; UF t )0 . In our sample, the largest shocks to UF t in B^ using

h = 1 month uncertainty are typically above four standard deviations, and similarly for UM t .

The 775th-percentile value of eF t in 1987:10 is 4.16, and is 4.57 in 2008:09. The 75th-percentile

value of eM t in 1970:12 is 4.05 and is 4.73 in 2008:09. If shocks were Gaussian, the probability
of a shock of these magnitudes would be less than 1.3e-4. But as we show below, the identi…ed shocks are non-Gaussian and exhibit substantial excess skewness and leptokurtosis. As
a baseline, we set k = k1 ; k2 ; k3 ; k4

0

equal to their respective 75th percentile values, thereby
requiring a “big”shock to be in the top 25% of all shocks in B^ during those episodes. Estimates

for the baseline system Xt = (UM t ; ipt ; UF t )0 using these values will be referred to as our base
case. Below we assess the sensitivity of the results to this parameterization by requiring big

shocks for these episodes to merely exceed their respective median values in the unconstrained
set.
It is worth noting that both 1970 and 1987 event constraints alone eliminate 75% of the
20

solutions, while the Lehman event constraint alone eliminates 90%. These event constraints
together with the constraint that the cumulative sum of real activity shocks in the Great
^ Of course one
Recession should not be above average eliminate 99% of the solutions in B.
percent of 1.5 million draws is still a non-trivial number. But when all event constraints are

combined with the correlation constraints, we are left with 169 accepted draws, which is 25%
of the sample size.

6

Results

This section presents our main results. The …rst subsection considers the base case empirical
model, which uses the macro uncertainty index UM t ; the next subsection considers a VAR in
which policy uncertainty is used in place of the macro uncertainty index UM t . The subsequent
section discusses additional analyses and sensitivity checks pertaining to the parameterization
of the base case. We focus in this section on studying one-month-ahead uncertainty h = 1,
the horizon over which uncertainty displays the most variability (see LMN). Longer horizon
uncertainty will be considered in a subsequent section. We use p = 6 lags in the VARs, noting
that using 12 lags makes no di¤erence to the results.
Before getting into the main results, its worth commenting on the second event constraint,
which requires either a large …nancial uncertainty shock or a large macro uncertainty shock (or
both) in

2

= 2008:09, the month of the Lehman collapse. An examination of the unconstrained

solution set shows that no solutions have large values for both eF 2 and eM 2 in 2008:09, where
large is de…ned as being in the top 25% of their respective distributions in that period. Thus
any identi…ed subset of B^ can only contain solutions in which one or the other is large in that

month. The estimation procedure must therefore choose which uncertainty shock was large.

Among all solutions in the base case identi…ed set, 100% of them place the big uncertainty
shock in UF t , rather than UM t in 2008:09. That is, the estimation always choose eF 2 to be big
(in the top 25% of all eF
the values for eM

2

2

in the unconstrained set, or at least 4.6 standard deviations), while

are estimated to range from 0.43 to 2.1 standard deviations. As we shall see

below, however, other months of the GFC had values for eM t that were large, many greater than
4 standard deviations, so the episode as a whole is characterized by large uncertainty shocks of
both types.

6.1

Systems with Macro Uncertainty

This subsection considers the baseline system Xt = (UM t ; ipt ; UF t )0 under with the base case
parameter values.
To get a sense of the behavior of the shocks in this system, the left panel of Figure 2
presents the time series of the standardized shocks (eM ; eip ; eF ) for the maxG solution. All
21

three types of shocks display strong departures from normality with excess skewness and/or
excess kurtosis. The largest of the positive eip shocks is recorded in 1971:01 followed by 2005:10,
while the largest of the negative eip shocks is recorded in 2008:09, followed by 1980:04. There
also appears to be a moderation in the volatility of the ip shocks in the post-1983 period.
For this particular solution, the largest positive eM shock is in 1970:12 (run-up to Bretton
Woods collapse), followed by the shock in 2008:10 (the month after the Lehman collapse). The
largest positive eF shock is recorded in 2008:09 (month of the Lehman collapse) followed by
1987:10 (Black Monday). For eF , the extreme but transitory nature of the 1987 stock market
crash leads to a very large spike upward in eF in the month of the crash, followed by a very
large spike downward in the month following the crash as the market recovered strongly and
quickly. While this episode magni…es the spike in eF in 1987, it is largely orthogonal to real
activity and macro uncertainty. Observe that the large ip shock in 2005:10 is not associated
with a contemporaneous spike in uncertainty, while there are several spikes in both types of
uncertainty that do not coincide with spikes in eip .
We now focus on large “adverse”shocks, namely large positive uncertainty shocks and large
negative real activity shocks recovered by the econometric methodology. The right panel of
Figure 2 displays the date and size of all eM t and eF t shocks in the identi…ed set that are
at least two standard deviations above the mean and all negative eipt shocks exceeding two
standard deviations. In view of the non-normality of the shocks, the …gure also plots horizontal
lines corresponding to three standard deviation of the unit shocks, which is used as the reference
point for “large.”
The right panel of Figure 2 shows that the solutions identify big …nancial uncertainty shocks
in October 1987 and in one or more months of 2008. Such solutions are selected as part of
the identi…cation scheme. The middle panel shows that large negative real activity shocks
are in alignment with all post-war recessions with one exception: the negative real activity
shock in 2005 is not immediately associated with a recession, but it could be the seed of the
Great Recession that followed. It’s clear that parts of the real economy were showing signs of
deterioration prior to the onset of the recession as dated by the NBER. For example, it is known
that the housing market led the 2007-2009 recession (e.g., see Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van
Nieuwerburgh (2017) for a discussion). Indeed, all 10 housing series in X M (most pertaining

to housing starts and permits series) exhibit sharp declines starting in September 2005 and
continuing through 2006, thereby leading the Great Recession.
The right panel of Figure 2 shows that the dates of large increases in eM are less clustered.
They generally coincide with, or occur shortly after, the big real activity shocks and the …nancial
uncertainty shocks. Large macro uncertainty shocks occurred more frequently in the pre-1983
than the post 1983 sample, consistent with a Great Moderation occurring over the period ending
in the Great Recession.
22

Although our event restrictions require that large …nancial uncertainty shocks play an important role in the 1987 crash and in 2008 in the month of the Lehman collapse, they by no
means rule out large adverse roles for the other shocks in the GR/GFC. In particular, our restrictions do not require that all or even most of the variation in these episodes be attributable
to shocks that originated in …nancial markets. The right panel of Figure 2 shows many large
adverse values of eM t and eipt in the Great Financial Crisis/Great Recession episode. Indeed,
all of the solutions in the identi…ed set under the baseline parameters have an eM t greater than
three standard deviations above the mean and an an eipt less than -3 standard deviations below
the mean in at least one month of the 2007-09 Great Recession/…nancial crisis. It is a result of
the analysis that there were big shocks everywhere in this episode. These big shock episodes
are partly responsible for the non-Gaussian aspects of the shocks. It would be desirable for
dynamic equilibrium models that wish to study the e¤ects of uncertainty to incorporate shocks
with such non-Gaussian features.
6.1.1

Impulse Response Functions

We now use impulse response functions to better understand the dynamic causal e¤ects and
propagating mechanisms of the shocks. Figure 3 shows, for our base case system, the identi…ed
set of dynamic responses, or impulse response functions (IRFs), of each variable in the SVAR
to a one standard deviation increase in each of structural shocks. The solid lines report the
impulse responses for all solutions in the identi…ed set B. The dotted line show 95% con…dence
sets for the identi…ed set of responses. Several results stand out.

First, positive shocks to …nancial uncertainty eF (center plot, bottom row) lead to a sharp
decline in production that persists for many months. All solutions that satisfy the identi…cation
restrictions have this pattern and the identi…ed set of responses is bounded well away from zero
as the horizon increases. Positive perturbations to eF t also cause UM t to increase sharply (third
row). These results lend support to the hypothesis that heightened …nancial uncertainty is an
exogenous impulse that causes declines in real activity. However, there is little evidence that
heightened …nancial uncertainty is a result of lower economic activity. Instead, positive shocks
to production increase …nancial uncertainty.
The IRFs show responses to one standard deviation shocks in …nancial uncertainty. But
the identi…cation strategy uses big shock events in …nancial uncertainty to identify the shocks.
It is worth emphasizing that, for the many eF t in these episodes that are identi…ed to be four
or more standard deviations above zero, the e¤ects of the shocks shown in Figure 3 would be
many times larger than that shown. A one-standard deviation increase in eF t reduces ip by
1% after 60 months, according to the median response at that horizon. This decline represents
about a 1.3 standard deviation change in monthly ip growth. So a four standard deviation
shock would reduce ip by 4%, which represents a 5.2 standard deviation change in monthly ip
23

growth. Infrequent big shocks, when they hit, can have large e¤ects.
Second, while we …nd no evidence that high …nancial uncertainty is a consequence of lower
economic activity, the results for macro uncertainty are quite di¤erent. Macro uncertainty falls
sharply in response to positive ip shocks. Alternatively stated, negative ip shocks cause macro
uncertainty to increase sharply. These endogenous movements in macro uncertainty persist
for about …ve years after the real activity shock, a result that is strongly apparent in all the
solutions of the identi…ed set.
Third, there is little evidence that the observed negative correlation between macro uncertainty and real activity is the result of positive macro uncertainty shocks that drive down
production. The top middle panel shows that all solutions in the identi…ed set imply that positive macro uncertainty shocks increase real activity in the short run, consistent with growth
options theories discussed above. All solutions in the identi…ed set imply that production is reduced in the long-run, though the con…dence set widens as the horizon extends. These …ndings
suggest that higher macro uncertainty in recessions is a response to lower economic activity
rather than a causal factor in recessions.
The …nding that UM responds endogenously to other shocks implies that macro uncertainty
could be an important ampli…cation factor in recessions even if it doesn’t cause them. Figure
3 shows that UM rises sharply in response to either a negative ip shock or a positive UF shock.
The impact of these adverse shocks on the economy might be far less if UM didn’t respond to
them in the …rst place.
To investigate this possibility, we consider a set of IRFs where BM Y = BM F are restricted
to 0 (in contrast to our estimates) while all other elements of B are maintained at the base case
estimated values. This experiment shuts o¤ the impact e¤ect on UM of the other shocks in the
system, implying that recessions caused by a negative …rst moment shock or a positive second
moment shock to …nancial uncertainty are presumed, hypothetically, to have no e¤ect initially
on macro uncertainty. Figure 4 shows the set of hypothetical IRFs, juxtaposing them against
the set of base case responses. Comparing just the median values of the set of hypothetical IRFs
with those for the base case, we …nd that the e¤ect of adverse shocks on industrial production
is much smaller under the hypothetical than under the base case estimates. Speci…cally, the
e¤ect of an adverse ip shock on ip …ve years out is dampened by 68% under the hypothetical
compared to the base case, while the e¤ect of an adverse UF shock on ip …ve years out is
dampened by 28%. These …ndings suggest that higher macro uncertainty in recessions plays
an important role in amplifying adverse …rst-moment shocks as well as second-moment shocks
with origins in …nancial markets.

24

6.1.2

Decomposition of Variance

To give a sense of the historical importance of these shocks, we perform a decomposition of
variance for each solution in the identi…ed set. We report the fraction of s-step-ahead forecast
error variance attributable to each structural shock eM t ; eipt ; and eF t for s = 1, s = 12, s = 1,

and smax , where smax is the horizon at which the fraction of forecast error variance is maximized.

Because we have a set of solutions, we have a range of forecast error variances for each s. The
left panel of Table 1 reports the range of values for the Xt system. The right panel of Table 1
are results for an alternative measure of uncertainty and will be discussed below.
According to the top row, real activity shocks eipt have sizable e¤ects on macroeconomic
uncertainty UM , with the fraction of forecast error variance ranging from 0.52 to 0.72 at the smax
horizon. But according to the bottom row, these same shocks have small e¤ects on …nancial
uncertainty UF t , with a range of forecast error variance from 0.02 to 0.10 at horizon smax .
The middle row shows that positive macro uncertainty shocks eM , which increase rather than
decrease real activity, explain a surprisingly large fraction of production, with e¤ects at smax
horizon ranging from 0.37 to 0.62.
Though …nancial uncertainty shocks eF t have a small contribution to the one-step-ahead
forecast error variance of ipt , their relative importance increases over time so that they account
for 0.38 to 0.54 of the forecast error variance in ip at the smax horizon. Financial uncertainty is
unlike macro uncertainty or real activity in that its variation is far more dominated by its own
shocks. As seen from Table 1, eF t shocks explain between 0.84 and 0.94 of the s = 1 step-ahead
forecast error variance in UF t , and between 0.70 and 0.86 at the s = 1 horizon. At the smax

horizon, the range of forecast error variance is 0.84 to 0.94.
To summarize, positive real activity shocks eipt have quantitatively large persistent and
negative e¤ects on macro uncertainty UM t . In turn, positive macro uncertainty shocks eM t
have positive e¤ects on production, especially in the short-run. By contrast, positive …nancial
uncertainty shocks eF t have large negative e¤ects on production, especially in the long run.
Across all VAR forecast horizons, the forecast error variance of …nancial uncertainty is the least
a¤ected by shocks other than its own, implying that UF t is quantitatively the most important
exogenous impulse in the system.

6.2

Systems with Policy Uncertainty

The results above suggest that the dynamic relationship between macro uncertainty and real
activity may be quite di¤erent from the relation between …nancial uncertainty and real activity. However, given the composition of our macro data, macroeconomic uncertainty itself can
be due to uncertainty in real activity variables such as output and unemployment, to price
variables, and to …nancial market variables. The theoretical uncertainty literature has focused
25

on modeling exogenous uncertainty shocks that arise speci…cally in measures of real economic
fundamentals, rather than in prices or …nancial markets. To better evaluate the implications
of these theoretical models and to examine robustness to alternative measures of macro or real
economic uncertainty, we repeat our analysis using the economic policy uncertainty (EPU) indices of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) (BBD), in place of the macro uncertainty index UM t .
BBD …nd that …rms with greater exposure to government expenditures reduce investment and
employment growth when policy uncertainty rises, suggesting that the EPU indices are well
characterized as measures of real economic uncertainty.
BBD compute two EPU indices, a “baseline” EPU index that has three components, and
a news-only index that is a subindex and one component of the baseline EPU index. We
denote these the EP U and EP N index, respectively. These indices are available from 1987:01
U
to 2017:06. We then repeat the analysis for two systems: XEP
= (EP Ut ; ipt ; UF t )0 ; and
t
N
XEP
(EP Nt ; ipt ; UF t )0 .
t

The left panel of Figure 5 plots the EP U and EP N indices over time. We observe that
the two largest spikes upward in the baseline index are in and just after the debt ceiling crisis
resolution, which correspond to the dates 2011:07 and 2011:08. For news index, there is an
additional spike upward that rivals these in size: that for September 11, 2001. An inspection
of the unconstrained set for these systems reveals that both episodes, but especially the debt
ceiling crisis of 2011, were far bigger uncertainty events for policy uncertainty shocks than for
either macro or …nancial uncertainty shocks. In other words, the debt ceiling crisis is the big
shock event for policy uncertainty, akin to the 1987 crash and the Lehman collapse for …nancial
uncertainty. We use these events to help with identi…cation in the policy uncertainty systems.
To facilitate comparability with the baseline system, we normalize EP Ut and EP Nt to have
the same mean and standard deviation as UM t . The constraints gE1 ; gE2 ; gE3 , used above on
eF t (B) and eipt (B) are maintained in these systems, while the external variable constraints gC1
and gC2 are now maintained for eF t (B) as well as for the policy shocks eEP U t (B) and eEP N t (B).
The parameters for these constraints are set as described above for the base case. The previous
event constraints gE4 (Volcker policy announcement) is not contained in the sample for this
system, so it is dropped and replaced by an inequality constraint for September 11th, 2001.
The new event constraints for this system are parameterized as follows:
U
Constraint
XEP
t
gE4 :
–
gE5 :
eEP U 5 (B) 2

eEP N
0 eEP N

N
XEP
t
0
4 (B)
2
5 (B)

0

for
for

4
5

= 2001:09
= [2011:08, 2011:09]

Constraint gE4 requires the news uncertainty shock to merely be above average in the month
of 2011 terrorist attacks. Constraint gE5 requires both types of policy shocks to be large, i.e.,
bounded away from zero, in the months of the debt ceiling crisis. An inspection of the unconstrained set for these systems shows that a two standard deviation policy uncertainty shock in
26

N
U
systems is roughly comparable to a non-negative macro uncertainty shock
and XEP
the XEP
t
t
in the base case system. That is, two standard deviations corresponds to the 65th percentile

value in the unconstrained set of the minimum eEP N

4

(B) over the two months in the debt

ceiling crisis, while zero standard deviations corresponds to same percentile value for eM t (B)
in the debt ceiling crisis in the base case system.
U
N
and XEP
systems.
The right panel of Figure 5 shows the dynamic responses for the XEP
t
t
The character of the responses is similar to those for the systems based on the JLN uncer-

tainty measures. Policy uncertainty falls sharply in response to positive production shock.
Alternatively stated, negative shocks to production increase policy uncertainty sharply. These
endogenous movements in policy uncertainty are more transient than those to macro uncertainty, however, and are eliminated in about two years. Financial uncertainty shocks in this
system continue to be a driving force for real activity, with positive shocks driving down ipt
sharply and persistently. But there is no evidence that positive shocks to ipt drive down …nancial uncertainty; in fact such shocks drive …nancial uncertainty persistently upward. There is
no evidence based on the either system that positive policy uncertainty shocks drive down real
activity; the opposite is found, with positive shocks to policy uncertainty driving up production
even more persistently than in the Xt system. These …ndings reinforce the previous results that
countercyclical increases in real economic uncertainty are often well characterized as endogenous responses to declines in real activity, rather than exogenous impulses driving real activity
downward, while the opposite is true for …nancial uncertainty. Interestingly, positive shocks to
policy uncertainty drive …nancial uncertainty down, suggesting that markets may view times
of high policy uncertainty as upside rather than downside risk.
U
system (the
To complete the analysis, we present variance decompositions for the XEP
t
N
are similar). These results, presented in the right panel of Table
results for the system XEP
t

1, share some similarities with the Xt system shown in the left panel, but there are at least
two distinctions. First, …nancial uncertainty shocks that decrease real activity in both systems
U
explain a smaller fraction of the forecast error variance in production in the XEP
system at
t
all but the s = 1 forecast horizon. The ranges for these numbers at the s = smax horizon across
U
all solutions in the identi…ed set are [0:27; 0:39] in the XEP
system compared to [0:38; 0:54]
t

in the Xt system. Second, compared to the Xt system, greater fractions of the forecast error
variance in UF t are explained by ip shocks. That is likely because positive shocks to production
U
have more persistent e¤ects on …nancial uncertainty in the XEP
system.18
t
18

It is worth noting that the results for the EPU systems are very similar even if no correlation constraints
with St are imposed. For these systems, the event constraints alone appear to be su¢ cient for identifying the
dynamic relationships in the system.

27

7

Alternative Speci…cations

This section considers several alternative speci…cations, including alternative parameterizations
of the base case big shock constraints, alternative identifying restrictions, a system that uses
uncertainty in real activity variables rather than that for all macroeconomic series, an evaluation
of the validity of recursive identi…cation restrictions, and longer horizon uncertainty.

7.1

Alternative Parameterization of Big Shock Events

In the base case speci…cation, we set k = k1 ; k2 ; k3 ; k4
of eF t and/or eM t
2;

and

3,

equal to the 75th-percentile values
implied by the 1.5 million values of B in the unconstrained set B^ in dates

respectively, thereby requiring a “big”shock to ejt ; j = M; F to be in the top
25% of all observed ejt in B^ for that date. We now slacken the these constraints by setting k
so that a large shock in these episodes needs to merely exceed their respective median values,
1;

2,

0

while keeping all other parameters at their base case values. Under this parameterization a
“large” …nancial uncertainty shock need be only be 2.8 rather than 4.2 standard deviations
above the mean in 1987:10, and need be only 1.9 standard deviations above the mean rather
than 4.6 in 2008:09. Likewise a “large”macro uncertainty shock need be only be 2.3 rather than
4 standard deviations above the mean in 1970:12, and need be only 1.9 standard deviations
above the mean rather than 4.7 in 2008:09.
The left panel of Figure 6 shows the IRFs when k1 and k4 , the parameters governing the
size of big shock events in 1987:10 (stock market crash) and 1970:12 (run-up to Bretton Woods
^ while all other
collapse), are simultaneously slackened to their respective median values of B,

parameters are held …xed at their baseline values. The right panel of Figure 6 shows the IRF
when k2 and k3 , the parameters governing the size of the big shock event for UF t and/or UM t in
^
2008:09 (Lehman collapse) are simultaneously slackened to their respective median values of B,
while all other parameters are held …xed at their baseline values. In both panels, the identi…ed
set under the baseline parameterization is superimposed on the …gure for comparison.
Figure 6 shows that, while the bounds of the identi…ed set are inevitably wider given the
weaker constraints, they nevertheless remain informative, with the qualitative results e¤ectively
the same as for the base case. Thus, the …ndings reported above for the base case are not highly
sensitive to the de…nition of what constitutes “big”in the big shock constraints. In fact, …xing
other parameters, the bounds remain informative if the “big” shock in the Lehman episode is
required to be just 1.7 standard deviations, while those in 1987:10 and 1970:12 are required to
be merely non-negative.
It is worth noting that we do not …nd any alternative parameterizations for these parameters
in which clear conclusions emerge that are of an entirely di¤erent nature from those of the base
case. Either the constraints are slackened to a point where they have little identifying power,
28

leaving the bounds uninformative, or the constraints are tightened to a point where they are
incompatible with the data, leaving the identi…ed set empty, or the qualitative results are
the same as reported for the base case. No matter what the parameters, there is little basis
under these identifying restrictions for concluding that positive macro uncertainty shocks cause
declines in production, at least initially. By contrast, the evidence that macro uncertainty
ampli…es the economic consequences of adverse shocks is robust to a range of parameterizations
of the base case constraints.

7.2

Alternative Restrictions

A key …nding from the base case system is that macro and …nancial uncertainty have very
di¤erent dynamic causal relationships with production, a result that is especially evident from
the opposite-signed impact responses of production to the two types of uncertainty shocks. A
positive …nancial uncertainty shock drives down production, while a positive macro uncertainty
shock drives it up. These impact responses may be read o¤ from the o¤-diagonal elements
of our estimated B matrices, where BY M denotes the impact response or Y to an eM shock,
and BY F denotes the impact response of Y to an eF shock. We now investigate which of our
identifying restrictions are responsible for these results.
The left panel of Figure 7 displays the distribution of values for BY M and BY F under three
di¤erent sets of identifying restrictions: (i) for all values in the unconstrained set, which imposes only the reduced form covariance restrictions (blue histogram), (ii) for all values in an
identi…ed set that only imposes the covariance restrictions and event constraints but not the
external variable constraints (red histogram), and (iii) for all values in the base case identi…ed
set, which imposes all constraints, including covariance, event and external variable constraints
(black histogram). Notably, the covariance/event-only constrained solutions for BY F are all
negative while those for BY M are all positive, as they are for the base case. By contrast, in
the unconstrained set the distributions for both parameters contain both positive and negative
values. Thus, the event constraints alone are enough to pin down the di¤ering signs of these
parameters. Once we add the external variable constraints to the event and covariance restrictions, the distribution of BY M , with all positive values, is shifted more toward zero, while the
distribution of BY F , with all negative values, is shifted more away from zero. Thus, the external
variables constraints prevent the response of production to a positive macro uncertainty shock
from being too positive, and prevent the response of production to a positive …nancial uncertainty shock from being too small in absolute value. In short, the event constraints restrict the
signs of BY F and BY M , while the external variable constraints restrict their magnitudes.
The right panel of Figure 7 shows analogous histograms under another alternative set of
restrictions: (i) that for the unconstrained set (blue histogram), (ii) that for an identi…ed set

29

if we impose all base case constraints except the Lehman event constraint (red histogram),
and (iii) that for the identi…ed set under all base case constraints (black histogram). What
is clear from this plot is that the Lehman event is crucial for obtaining informative bounds
for the impact response of production to a …nancial uncertainty shock. Without the Lehman
event constraint, the distribution of values for BY F contains both positive and negative values.
The distribution of values for BY M , however, continues to contain only positive values even
without the Lehman event constraint, though the range of positive values is much wider than
for the base case. A premise of this paper is that the 2007-09 …nancial crisis and Lehman
collapse was an important rare event that can help distinguish the transmission of …nancial
versus real uncertainty shocks. This maintained assumption is supported by these results and
those for the alternative parameterizations of k displayed in the previous subsection. Taken
together, they show that, if the identi…ed set includes solutions for which the Lehman collapse
is not accompanied by at least a modestly sized uncertainty shock of one type or another,
the estimation cannot distinguish their separate roles. Such solutions are ruled out by our
identifying assumptions.

7.3

Systems with Real Activity Uncertainty

As noted, UM t can ‡uctuate due to uncertainty in real activity variables such as output and
unemployment, or due to price variables or …nancial market variables. In this sub-section we
replace UM t with the sub-index of macro uncertainty that ‡uctuates only as a result of the
uncertainty in the 73 real activity variables of the macro dataset X M . The h = 1 month-ahead
0
uncertainty in real activity variables is denoted URt . We study the system XR
t = (URt ; ipt ; UF t )

using the same identifying restrictions applied above to the system with UM t .
This system is interesting because it puts the spotlight on real activity uncertainty as the
source of the large macro uncertainty shock found in the unconstrained set in 1970:12. We
^
search (now for the XR
t system) across all observations in the unconstrained set B for the

month in which the shock to URt , denoted eR (B), is largest. Doing so for each of the 1.5 million
rotations, we …nd that the date with the greatest number of maxima across all 1.5 million
rotations (27% of them) is 1970:12, while the date with the second greatest is the month of the
Lehman collapse, 2008:09.
The left panel of Figure 8 displays the time series plot of URt , which unlike UM t , exhibits a
big spike upward in 1970:12. The right panel shows the identi…ed set of IRFs for this system
when the 75th-percentile value of eRt (B) in B^ is again used to parameterize a large shock.
The 75th-percentile value is equal to 4.7 in 1970:12 and 4.9 in 2008:09. Although this value

is smaller in 1970:12 than in 2008:08, the former episode has more extreme large shocks than
latter, which explains why it is the episode with more maxima in the unconstrained set. (The

30

99th-percentile value for eRt (B) is 6.6 in 1970:12 compared to 6.3 in 2008:09.) The IRFs are
qualitatively similar to the base case system that uses UM t , with positive …nancial uncertainty
shocks driving down production sharply and persistently, real (but not …nancial) uncertainty
rising sharply in response to a negative …rst moment shock to production, and positive real
uncertainty shocks driving up production, rather than down. The main di¤erence from the
system with UM t is that production now rises more sharply and more persistently in response
to a positive real uncertainty shock than it did to a macro uncertainty shock.

7.4

Recursive Identi…cation and Longer Horizon Uncertainty

The assumptions in our event and correlation constraints do not rule out the possibility of a
recursive structure. If such a structure is consistent with the data, our identifying restrictions
are free to recover it. With three variables in the SVAR, there are six possible recursive
orderings corresponding to six di¤erent 3

1 vectors of elements of B that must be jointly zero.

It is straightforward to assess whether our identi…ed solutions are consistent with a recursive
structure by examining the distribution of solutions in the constrained set for four elements of
^Y F ; B
^Y M ; B
^M Y , and B
^F M . None of the distributions contain any values near
the B matrix: B
zero. The minimum absolute values in the identi…ed for each are 0.002, 0.004, 0.007, and 0.005,
respectively. These correspond to the smallest (in absolute terms) impact responses in the
identi…ed set reported in Figure 3, subplots (3,2), (1,2), (2,1) and (1,3), respectively. For each
case, the 95% con…dence interval for the identi…ed set of impact responses also dose not include
zero, showing that, although small in absolute terms, the responses di¤er signi…cantly from zero
once we take into account sampling variability in the data. The implication is that the recursive
structure is inconsistent with any recursive ordering across all solutions in the identi…ed set.
The …nding underscores the challenges of relying on convenient timing assumptions to sort out
cause and e¤ect in the relationship between uncertainty and real activity.
The dynamic responses reported for the base case are similar to an SVAR that imposes
BF Y and BM F to be zero, or close to zero, while restricting BY F to be in the range (-0.02, 0).
If, in addition, either BY M (giving the impact response of Y to an eM shock) or BY F (giving
the impact response of Y to an eF shock) were estimated to be zero under our constraints, our
estimates would recover a recursive structure. But our event and external variable restrictions
rule this out. The left panel of Figure 7 above showed why: the event constraints restrict BY F
to be negative and BY M to be positive. The external variable constraints restrict the magnitude
of these parameters.
Finally, we examine longer horizon uncertainty. Figure 9 presents the IRFs when we use a
system with h = 12 month-ahead macro and …nancial uncertainty, along with ipt : This system is
(12)

denoted Xt

= (UM t (12) ; ipt ; UF t (12))0 ; where UM t (12) denotes twelve-month-ahead macro

31

uncertainty, and likewise for UF t (12). The same identifying restrictions are used as for the
h = 1 month-ahead base case system. These results are similar to those for the base case that
uses h = 1 month ahead uncertainty.

8

Conclusion

A growing body of research establishes uncertainty as a feature of deep recessions but leaves
open two key questions: is uncertainty primarily a source of business cycle ‡uctuations or an
endogenous response to them? And does the type of uncertainty matter? The objective of this
paper is to address both questions econometrically using small-scale structural VARs capable
of nesting a range of theoretical possibilities.
The macro literature on uncertainty has primarily focused on real activity induced macro
uncertainty as a driver of economic ‡uctuations. Using a novel identi…cation approach that
imposes economic assumptions on the behavior of the shocks, we …nd from a variety of parameterizations and speci…cations that macro uncertainty rises endogenously in response to real
activity shocks, contributing to strongly its countercyclical behavior. It is shocks to …nancial
uncertainty, rather than macro uncertainty, that are found to be a driver of economic ‡uctuations. But macro uncertainty is found to substantially amplify downturns caused by other
shocks, indicating that it may magnify recessions even if it doesn’t cause them. An implication of these …ndings is that dynamic equilibrium models should allow for broad-based macro
uncertainty to respond endogenously to a variety of shocks, while entertaining the notion that
occasional large shocks to uncertainty originating in …nancial markets may be a source of deep
recessions.
Our …ndings call for a need to better understand how uncertainty in …nancial markets is
transmitted to the macroeconomy, and why the two types of uncertainty have a distinct relationship with economic activity. A burgeoning business cycle literature has begun to postulate
theoretical linkages between …nancial market uncertainty, real/macro uncertainty, and real activity.19 Although these models are currently too stylized to be confronted with actual data,
they appear capable of generating implications that are consistent at least qualitatively with our
…nding that positive shocks to …nancial uncertainty are a driving force of declines in productive
activity, while real uncertainty responds endogenously to …rst moment shocks to productive
activity.
19

For example. Benhabib, Liu, and Wang (2017) studies self-ful…lling surges in …nancial and real uncertainty in
a model of informational interdependence and mutual learning; Adrian and Boyarchenko (2012), Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2014), and He and Krishnamurthy (2012) study production economies with …nancial intermediaries that give rise to time-varying GDP vulnerabilities (downside real risk) as a function of time-varying
…nancial frictions; hence …nancial uncertainty drives both GDP and its volatility.

32

Acknowledgements Ludvigson acknowledges …nancial support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics at NYU. Ng acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation under grant SES-0962431 and SES-1558623. We thank seminar participants at the 2016
ME, EFFE, and EF&G group meetings at the NBER, the CEPR-DRG-SAFE Conference on
Banking, Monetary Policy, and Macroeconomic Performance in Frankfurt May 2016, the New
Developments in Business Cycle Analysis conference in Rome June 2016, the 2016 Econometric
Society meetings, the Joint Central Bankers Conference November 2017, the T2M Macro conference in Paris March 2018, the FRBNY and BOG Developments in Empirical Macroeconomics
Conference May 10-11, 2018, Collegio Carlo Alberto, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, HEC Montreal, Johns Hopkins Carey School, MIT Sloan, NYU,
SSE Swedish House of Finance, the University of Zurich/Swiss Finance Institute, UC Davis,
UNC Kenan-Flagler, Washington University in St. Louis, and Yale for helpful comments. We
are grateful to Ian Dew-Becker, Laurent Ferrara, John Leahy, Kurt Lunsford, Jóse Luis Montiel
Olea, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, Jim Stock, and Stephen Terry for many valuable discussions.

References
Abel, A. B. (1983): “Optimal Investment under Uncertainty,” American Economic Review,
73(1), 228–233.
Adrian, T., and N. Boyarchenko (2012): “Intermediary leverage cycles and …nancial stability,”Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Ai, H., K. Li, and F. Yang (2015): “Financial Intermediation and Capital Misallocation,”
Unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota.
Andrews, D. W. K., and G. Soares (2010): “Inference for parameters de…ned by moment
inequalities using generalized moment selection,”Econometrica, 78(1), 119–157.
Angelini, G., E. Bacchiocchi, G. Caggiano, and L. Fanelli (2018): “Uncertainty
across volatility regimes,”Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Antolín-Díaz, J., and J. F. Rubio-Ramírez (2018): “Narrative sign restrictions for
SVARs,”American Economic Review, 108(10), 2802–29.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. Kehoe (2011): “Financial Markets and Fluctuations in
Uncertainty,”Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Sta¤ Report 466.
Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. R. Sims (2013): “Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
Evidence from Business Survey Data,”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(2),
217–49.
Bachmann, R., and G. Moscarini (2011): “Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty,”
Discussion paper, Society for Economic Dynamics.
Baker, S. R., and N. Bloom (2013): “Does Uncertainty Reduce Growth? Using Disasters
as Natural Experiments,”National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19475.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016): “Measuring economic policy uncertainty,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1593–1636.
33

Bar-Ilan, A., and W. C. Strange (1996): “Investment lags,” The American Economic
Review, 86(3), 610–622.
Basu, S., and B. Bundick (2017): “Uncertainty shocks in a model of e¤ective demand,”
Econometrica, 85(3), 937–958.
Baumeister, C., and J. D. Hamilton (2015): “Sign restrictions, structural vector autoregressions, and useful prior information,”Econometrica, 83(5), 1963–1999.
Bekaert, G., M. Hoerova, and M. L. Duca (2013): “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary
Policy,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(7), 771–88.
Benhabib, J., X. Liu, and P. Wang (2017): “Financial Markets, the Real Economy, and
Self-Ful…lling Uncertainties,”Unpublished manuscript, NYU.
Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, and S. Giglio (2016): “Contractionary volatility or volatile
contractions?,”Unpublished paper, Northwestern University.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983): “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98(1), 85–106.
Bloom, N. (2009): “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,”Econometrica, 77(3), 623–85.
(2014): “Fluctuations in Uncertainty,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp.
153–175.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2018):
“Really uncertain business cycles,”Econometrica, 86(3), 1031–1065.
Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen, and H. Zhou (2009): “Expected stock returns and variance
risk premia,”Review of Financial Studies, 22(11), 4463–4492.
Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov (2014): “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
Sector,”American Economic Review, 104, 379–421.
Campbell, J. Y., S. Giglio, C. Polk, and R. Turley (2018): “An intertemporal CAPM
with stochastic volatility,”Journal of Financial Economics, 128(2), 207–233.
Campbell, J. Y., and L. Hentschel (1992): “An Asymmetric Model of Changing Volatility
in Stock Returns,”Journal of Financial Economics, 31, 281–318.
Carriero, A., T. E. Clark, and M. Marcellino (2018): “Endogenous Uncertainty,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Papers, (WP 18-05).
Engle, R. F., and V. K. Ng (1993): “Measuring and testing the impact of news on volatility,”
The journal of …nance, 48(5), 1749–1778.
Fajgelbaum, P. D., E. Schaal, and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2017): “Uncertainty
traps,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1641–1692.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2017): “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance and Limited Risk Sharing in General
Equilibrium,”Journal of Political Economy, 125(1), 140–223.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., J. F. R.-R. Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, and M. Uribe
(2011): “Risk Matters: The Real E¤ects of Volatility Shocks,”American Economic Review,
6(101), 2530–61.

34

Fostel, A., and J. Geanakoplos (2012): “Why does bad news increase volatility and
decrease leverage?,”Journal of Economic Theory, 147(2), 501–525.
French, K., G. W. Schwert, and R. F. Stambaugh (1987): “Expected Stock Returns
and Volatility,”Journal of Financial Economics, 19, 3–30.
Gafarov, B., M. Meier, and J. M. Olea (2015): “Projection Inference for Set-Identi…ed
SVARs,”Unpublished paper, New York University.
Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2015): “Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic
activity,”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 44–76.
Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2010): “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and
Investment Dynamics,”Society for Economic Dynamics 2010 Meeting Papers No.1285.
Glaeser, E. L., T. Santos, and E. G. Weyl (2017): After the Flood: How the Great
Recession Changed Economic Thought. University of Chicago Press.
Gomes, J. F., and L. Schmid (2016): “Equilibrium Asset Pricing with Leverage and Default,”
http://…nance.wharton.upenn.edu/ gomesj/Research/CreditMarkets.pdf.
Hartman, R. (1972): “The e¤ects of price and cost uncertainty on investment,” Journal of
economic theory, 5(2), 258–266.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2012): “A Model of Capital and Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 735–777.
Ilut, C. L., and H. Saijo (2016): “Learning, con…dence, and business cycles,” Discussion
paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015): “Measuring Uncertainty,”The American
Economic Review, 105(3), 117–1216.
Kilian, L., and H. Lutkepohl (2016): Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis. Cambridge
University Press.
Kraft, H., E. Schwartz, and F. Weiss (2018): “Growth options and …rm valuation,”
European Financial Management, 24(2), 209–238.
Leduc, S., and Z. Liu (2016): “Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 82, 20–35.
Lettau, M., S. Ludvigson, and C. Steindel (2002): “Monetary policy transmission
through the consumption-wealth channel,”FRBNY Economic Policy Review, 5, 117–133.
Lintner, J. (1965): “Security Prices, Risk and Maximal Gains from Diversi…cation,”Journal
of Finance, 20, 587–615.
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma, and S. Ng (2016): “Shock Restricted Structural VectorAutoregressions,”Manuscript, New York University.
Ludvigson, S. C., and S. Ng (2007): “The Empirical Risk-Return Relation: A Factor
Analysis Approach,”Journal of Financial Economics, 83(1), 171–222.
McCracken, M. W., and S. Ng (2016): “FRED-MD: A monthly database for macroeconomic research,”Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 34(4), 574–589.
McDonald, R., and D. Siegel (1986): “The Value of Waiting to Invest,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 101(4), 707–728.
35

Mertens, K., and M. O. Ravn (2013): “The dynamic e¤ects of personal and corporate
income tax changes in the United States,” The American Economic Review, 103(4), 1212–
1247.
(2014): “A reconciliation of svar and narrative estimates of tax multipliers,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 68, S1–S19.
Moon, H. R., and F. Schorfheide (2012): “Bayesian and frequentist inference in partially
identi…ed models,”Econometrica, 80(2), 755–782.
Moon, H. R., F. Schorfheide, and E. Granziera (2013): “Inference for VARs Identi…ed
with Sign Restrictions,”Unpublished Paper.
Nakamura, E., D. Sergeyev, and J. Steinsson (2017): “Growth-rate and uncertainty
shocks in consumption: Cross-country evidence,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(1), 1–39.
Nelson, D. B. (1991): “Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach,”
Econometrica, 59(2), 347–70.
Ng, S., and J. H. Wright (2013): “Facts and Challenges from the Great Recession for
Forecasting and Macroeconomic Modeling,” Journal of Economic Literature, 51(4), 1120–
1154.
Oi, W. Y. (1961): “The desirability of price instability under perfect competition,”Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 58–64.
Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi (2006): “Was There A Nasdaq Bubble in the Late 1990s?,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 81, 61–100.
Pástor, L., and P. Veronesi (2013): “Political uncertainty and risk premia,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 110(3), 520–545.
Piffer, M., and M. Podstawski (2017): “Identifying uncertainty shocks using the price of
gold,”The Economic Journal, 128(616), 3266–3284.
Ramey, V. A. (2016): “Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation,”in Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 2, pp. 71–162. Elsevier.
Rubio Ramírez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010): “Structural vector autoregressions: Theory of identi…cation and algorithms for inference,” The Review of Economic
Studies, 77(2), 665–696.
Schwert, G. W. (1989): “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change over Time,”Journal of
Finance, 44(5), 1115–53.
Segal, G., I. Shaliastovich, and A. Yaron (2015): “Good and bad uncertainty: Macroeconomic and …nancial market implications,” Journal of Financial Economics, 117(2), 369–
397.
Sharpe, W. (1964): “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions
of Risk,”Journal of Finance, 19, 425–444.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2008): “NBER Summer Institute Minicourse 2008:
What’s New in Econometrics: Time Series, Lecture 7: Structural VARs,”Cambridge, Mass.:
National Institute for Economic Research. www. nber. org/minicourse_2008. html.
(2012): “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-09 Recession,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, p. 81.
36

Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp (2006): “Learning asymmetries in real business
cycles,”Journal of monetary Economics, 53(4), 753–772.
Whaley, R. E. (2000): “The investor fear gauge,” The Journal of Portfolio Management,
26(3), 12–17.

Figure 1: Macro and Financial Uncertainty Over Time

Aggregate Macro Uncertainty UM
6

UM , corr with IP = -0.65
5
4
Financial Crisis

3
2

1.65 std

1
0
−1
−2

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
Aggregate Financial Uncertainty UF
4

UF , corr with IP = -0.39
3

Financial Crisis
Black Monday

2

1.65 std

1
0
−1
−2

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

The panels plot the time series of macro uncertainty UM and …nancial uncertainty UF expressed in standardized
units. Shaded areas correspond to NBER recession dates. The horizontal line corresponds to 1.65 standard
deviations above the unconditional mean of each series (which has been normalized to zero); the black dots are
months when uncertainty is at least 1.65 standard deviations above the mean. Correlations with the 12-month
moving average of IP growth are reported. The data span the period 1960:07 to 2015:04.

Figure 2: Structural Shocks e
Time Series of e Shock from Base Case

Large Shocks

eM

Positive eM exceeding 2 standard deviations

Skewness = 0.47 and Kurtosis = 5.73

4

5

2
4

0
3

−2

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2

Year

1965

1970

eip

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

Negative eip exceeding 2 standard deviations

Skewness = −0.30 and Kurtosis = 5.50
5

2
0

4

−2

3

−4
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2

Year

1965

1970

eF

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Positive eF exceeding 2 standard deviations

Skewness = −1.54 and Kurtosis = 17.22

4

5

2
0

4

−2
−4

3

−6
−8
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year
The left panel reports the time series of the structural shocks e = B 1 t for maxG solution of the base case. The horizontal line corresponds to 3
standard deviations above/below the unconditional mean of each series. The right panel exhibits all shocks in the identi…ed set that are at least 2
standard deviations above the unconditional mean for eM and eF and at least 2 standard deviations below the mean for eip . The parameters k1 , k2 , k3
and k4 are at 75th-percentile of the unconstrained set. The sample spans the period 1960:07 to 2015:04.

Figure 3: SVAR (UM ; ip; UF )0

The solid lines report the identi…ed set of impulse response to positive, one standard deviation shocks in units
of percentage points for the base case system. The dashed lines report 95 percent con…dence intervals (CI) for
the identi…ed set. The sample spans the period 1960:07 to 2015:04.

Figure 4: SVAR (UM ; ip; UF )0 : Hypothetical BM Y = 0 and BM F = 0

0

The …gure reports the impulse responses of SVAR (UM ; ip; UF ) under the hypothetical parameter values
BM Y = 0 and BM F = 0. The shaded areas report the identi…ed set of impulse response to positive, one
standard deviation shocks in units of percentage points for the base case system. The dashed lines report the
hypothetical responses. The sample spans the period 1960:07 to 2015:04.

Figure 5: SVAR (EP U; ip; UF )0
Impulse Response Function

EPU Over Time

Policy Uncertainty
5

EPU
EPN
4

2011 debt
ceiling crisis

Standardized unit

3

September 11

2

1

0

−1

−2

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
The left panel plots the time series of baseline policy uncertainty EP U and news-based EP N , expressed in standardized units. Shaded areas correspond
to NBER recession dates. The horizontal line corresponds to 1.65 standard deviations above the unconditional mean. The right panel displays impulse
responses to one standard deviation shocks. Response units are reported in percentage points. The parameters k1 , k2 , k3 and k4 are at 75th-percentile of
the unconstrained set. Additional identifying restriction: for EPU; eEP U , t 3 2 for for all t3 2 f2011:07, 2011:08g. The sample spans the period 1987:01
to 2015:04.

Figure 6: IRFs of SVAR (UM ; ip; UF )0 under Alternative Parameters
Change in 1987 and 1970 Event

60

0

Y shock

2.0

0.0

0.0

Y

0.6

40

60

60

0

0.0

0.0

Y

0.6

-1.9

20

40

20

40

Months

60

40

60

0

Y shock

40

Months

60

40

60

0

0

20

40

0.0

UF shock

20

40

0.0

60

0

UF shock

1.7

2.4

20

40

Months

60

60

20

40

2.4

0.0
-0.6

60

0

UF shock

1.4

20

40

60

UF shock

4.8

0.7

0.0

-1.9

0

40

Y shock

4.8

-1.1
0

60

20

0.7

-1.9

0.0
-0.5
20

20

Y shock

1.4

0.9

0

UF

Y

20

2.4

0.0
-0.6

Baseline
k 2, k 3 at Median

4.7

-1.4
0

0

1.7

2.4

60

UF shock

1.3

1.0

60

0.0
-0.5

UF

40

UF shock

2.0

UM

20

40

0.0

-1.1

0.9

-1.4
0

20

Y shock

4.7

Baseline
k 1, k 4 at Median

-1.9

-1.9

0

Y shock

1.3

1.0

20

4.8

UF

40

0.0

Y

20

UF

0

UM

0.0
-0.5

-1.4

UM shock

0.7

Y

-1.9

2.4

UM

0.0

UM shock

1.4

0.9

UM

0.0

1.7

UM

0.6

UM shock

M

4.7

UF

1.0

U shock

M

1.3

Y

UM

U shock

M

UF

U shock
2.0

Change in Lehman Event

0.0

0.0
-0.6

-1.1
0

20

40

Months

60

2.4

0

20

40

Months

60

0

20

40

Months

The left panel reports sets of solutions obtained when k1 and k4 are slackened to median from 75th percentile of the unconstrained set while the other
parameters are held …xed at their baseline values. The right panel reports sets of solutions obtained when the k2 and k3 are slackened to median from
75th-percentile of the unconstrained set while the other parameters are held …xed at their baseline values. The sample spans the period 1960:07 to
2015:04.

60

Figure 7: Distribution of BY F and BY M

BY M

0.2
0.15

BY M

0.15
Cov. Only
Cov. + Event Only
Base Case

Cov. Only
Cov. + Event w/o Lehman + Ext. Variable
Base Case

0.1

0.1
0.05

0.05
0
-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0
-0.8

-0.4

-0.2

BY F

0.15

0.1

0.05

0.05

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0
-0.8

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

BY F

0.15

0.1

0
-0.8

-0.6

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

The left panels exhibit the distribution of BY M (upper panel) and BY F (lower panel) when only the covariance restrictions are imposed (blue), when only
covariance + event constraints are imposed (red) and for the base case where all covariance+event+external variable constraints are imposed (black). The
right panels exhibit the distribution of BY M (upper panel) and BY F (lower panel) when only the covariance restrictions are imposed (blue), when only
covariance + external variable + event constraints without the Lehman event are imposed (red) and for the base case where all covariance+event+external
variable constraints are imposed (black). The sample spans the period 1960:07 to 2015:04.

Figure 8: SVAR (UR ; ip; UF )0
Impulse Response Function

Real Uncertainty Over Time

Real Uncertainty UR
5

4

1970:12

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
The left panel plots the time series of real uncertainty, expressed in standardized units. Shaded areas correspond to NBER recession dates. The horizontal
line corresponds to 1.65 standard deviations above the unconditional mean. The right panel displays impulse responses to one standard deviation shocks.
Response units are reported in percentage points. The parameters k1 , k2 , k3 and k4 are at 75th-percentile of the unconstrained set. The sample spans
the period 1960:07 to 2015:04.

Figure 9: SVAR (UM (12) ; ip; UF (12))0

The …gure reports the identi…ed set of impulse response to positive, one standard deviation shocks in units of
percentage points for the one-year-ahead uncertainties UM (12) and UF (12). The parameters k1 , k2 , k3 and k4
are at 75th-percentile of the unconstrained set. The sample spans the period 1960:07 to 2015:04.

Table 1: d

s
1
12
1
smax
s
1
12
1
smax
s
1
12
1
smax

Table 1: Variance Decomposition
SVAR (UM ; ip; UF )0
SVAR (EP U; ip; UF )0
Fraction variation in UM
Fraction variation in EP U
UM Shock ip Shock
UF Shock
EP U Shock ip Shock
UF Shock
[0:19; 0:41] [0:52; 0:72] [0:05; 0:22]
[0:15; 0:76] [0:03; 0:61] [0:20; 0:44]
[0:22; 0:46] [0:39; 0:57] [0:13; 0:36]
[0:10; 0:46] [0:02; 0:34] [0:52; 0:70]
[0:25; 0:49] [0:39; 0:59] [0:10; 0:30]
[0:09; 0:38] [0:02; 0:28] [0:60; 0:75]
[0:25; 0:49] [0:52; 0:72] [0:13; 0:36]
[0:18; 0:81] [0:03; 0:64] [0:60; 0:75]
Fraction variation in ip
Fraction variation in ip
UM Shock ip Shock
UF Shock
EP U Shock ip Shock
UF Shock
[0:36; 0:60] [0:31; 0:53] [0:06; 0:12]
[0:04; 0:72] [0:16; 0:82] [0:09; 0:17]
[0:07; 0:21] [0:40; 0:60] [0:31; 0:40]
[0:03; 0:58] [0:12; 0:64] [0:26; 0:37]
[0:02; 0:07] [0:47; 0:64] [0:32; 0:51]
[0:13; 0:74] [0:04; 0:60] [0:19; 0:29]
[0:37; 0:62] [0:47; 0:64] [0:38; 0:54]
[0:13; 0:74] [0:22; 0:83] [0:27; 0:39]
Fraction variation in UF
Fraction variation in UF
UM Shock ip Shock
UF Shock
EP U Shock ip Shock
UF Shock
[0:03; 0:14] [0:01; 0:07] [0:84; 0:94]
[0:01; 0:11] [0:07; 0:35] [0:62; 0:84]
[0:08; 0:23] [0:00; 0:05] [0:76; 0:89]
[0:02; 0:30] [0:06; 0:48] [0:41; 0:66]
[0:11; 0:28] [0:02; 0:05] [0:70; 0:86]
[0:04; 0:38] [0:06; 0:51] [0:35; 0:59]
[0:11; 0:28] [0:02; 0:10] [0:84; 0:94]
[0:04; 0:38] [0:11; 0:51] [0:64; 0:84]

Each panel shows the fraction of s-step-ahead forecast-error variance of the variable given in the panel title that is explained by the shock named in the
column heading. The row denoted “s = smax ”reports the maximum fraction of forecast error variance explained across all VAR forecast horizons s. The
numbers in brackets represent the ranges for these numbers across all solutions in the identi…ed set. The data are monthly and span the period 1960:07
to 2015:04.

Online Appendix
Sampling Simulation
In point-identi…ed models, sampling uncertainty can be evaluated using frequentist con…dence
intervals or Bayesian credible regions, and they coincide asymptotically. Inference for setidenti…ed SVARs is, however, more challenging because no consistent point estimate is available.
As pointed out in Moon and Schorfheide (2012), the credible regions of Bayesian identi…ed
impulses responses will be distinctly di¤erent from the frequentist con…dence sets, with the
implication that Bayesian error bands cannot be interpreted as approximate frequentist error
bands. Our analysis is frequentist, and while the two applications presented above illustrate
how the dynamic responses vary across estimated models, where each model is evaluated at a
solution in B(B; k; ; S), we still need a way to assess the robustness of our procedure, especially
since it is new to the literature.

Unfortunately, few methods are available to evaluate the sampling uncertainty of set identi…ed SVARs from a frequentist perspective, and these tend to be speci…c to the imposition of
particular identifying restrictions. Moon, Schorfheide, and Granziera (2013) suggest a projections based method within a moment-inequality setup, but it is designed to study SVARs that
only impose restrictions on one set of impulse response functions. Furthermore, the method
is computationally intense, requiring a simulation of critical value for each rotation matrix.
Gafarov, Meier, and Olea (2015) suggest to collect parameters of the reduced form model in a
1

Wald ellipsoid but the approach is conservative. For the method to get an exact coverage

of 1
, the radius of the Wald-ellipsoid needs to be carefully calibrated. As discussed in
Kilian and Lutkepohl (2016), even with these adjustments, existing frequentist con…dence sets
for set-identi…ed models still tend to be too wide to be informative. It is fair to say that there
exists no generally agreed upon method for conducting inference in set-identi…ed SVARs.
We use a bootstrap/Monte Carlo procedure to assess the sampling error of our inequality
restrictions when St and Gt are variables external to the three variable SVAR.
Let R be the number of replications in a repeated sampling experiment. Let “hats”denote
b estiestimated values from historical data, e.g., b
et denotes estimated structural shocks and B

mated structural covariance matrix. To denote simulated data, we use a “*”, while to denote
estimated values from simulated data, a “hat”is combined with a “*”. To generate samples of
the structural shocks from this solution in a way that ensures the events that appear in historical data also occur in our simulated samples, we draw randomly with replacement from the
sample estimates of the shocks, b
et , with the exception that we …x the values for these shocks in

each replication in the periods
market crash,

2,

3,

4

and

5,

where

1

is the period 1987:10 of the stock

2 [2007:12; 2009:06], 4 is 1979:10 and 5 2 [2011:07; 2011:08].
b and therefore a set of estimated shocks b
Since we identify a set of estimated parameters B
et ,
2

is 1970:12,

1

3

1

we generate R samples of data from each b
et in the set. This is then repeated for every solu-

tion/shock sequence in the identi…ed set to obtain a con…dence region for the identi…ed set of
impulse responses.

Let M be the number of solutions in the identi…ed set B(B; k; ; S) and let m index an

arbitrary solution in the set. Index each draw from the estimated shocks with r and denote the
mr
is combined with the B parameters of the
rth draw from the mth solution as emr
t . Each et
b m to generate R samples of size T of mr = B
b m emr . Next, R new samples of Xt
mth solution, B
t
t
P
b j Xt j + mr ; with
are recursively generated for each replication r = 1; :::; R using Xt = pj=1 A
t

initial conditions …xed at their sample values, [X

Usingheach of these new samples
i
b mr ; :::; A
b mr and
;
A
of Xt , we …t a VAR(p) model to obtain new least squares estimates b mr
t
1
p
p+1 ; :::; X0 ].

b mr =cov(b mr ; b mr ) ; and B^mr = fB
b mr = P
^ mr Q : Q 2 On , diag B
b mr
0; gZ (B) = 0g,
t
t
^ mr is the unique lower triangular
where where On is the set of n n orthonormal matrices and P
Cholesky factor of b mr .
To generate samples of the external variables S1t and S2t from mth solution in a way that

ensures that the correlations with the uncertainty shocks that appear in our historical data also
appear in our simulated samples, we …rst generate historical idiosyncratic stock market shocks
m
em
S1 t and gold price shocks eS2 t as the …tted residuals from regressions of S1t and S2t on a single
autoregressive lag and on b
et ; respectively. Next, we draw randomly with replacement from em
S1 t

and em
S2 t with the exception that, as above, we …x the values for these shocks in each replication
in the periods

1

and

2,

mr
to obtain r = 1; :::; R new values emr
S1 t and eS2 t and R new values of

S1t and S2t by recursively iterating on
mr
S1t
= dm
01 + b1 S1t

mr
S2t
= dm
02 + b1 S2t

1

mr
mr
+ dm0
1 et + eS1 t

(A1)

1

mr
mr
+ dm0
2 et + eS2 t

(A2)

with initial conditions …xed at their initial sample values, [S11 ; S21 ] : The parameters b1 and b2

m0
are estimated from a …rst order autoregression for each variable. The parameters dm0
1 and d2 in
(A1) and (A2) are calibrated to target the observed correlations corr(S1t ; b
em
em
t ) and corr(S2t ; b
t )

mr
mr
mr
for the mth solution in historical data so that corr(S1t
; emr
t ) and corr(S2t ; et ) roughly equal
corr(S1t ; b
em
em
t ) and corr(S2t ; b
t ) on average across all replications R.

We construct con…dence sets for the set of IRFs in repeated samples as follows. The number

of replications is set to R = 1; 000. In each replication of each solution, K = 1:5 million rotation
matrices Q are entertained, but only Kmr K rotations will generate solutions that are admitted into the identi…ed set for that replication, B mr ( ). Let

m;r;k
i;j;s

be the s-period ahead response

of the ith variable to a standard deviation change in shock j at the k-th rotation of Kmr , for

2

m;r

m;r;k
m;r;k
replication r and solution m.20 Let m;r
i;j;s = maxk2[1;Kmr ] i;j;s :
i;j;s = mink2[1;Kmr ] i;j;s and
m;r
Each ( m;r
i;j;s ; i;j;s ) pair represents the extreme (highest and lowest) dynamic responses in replim;r M;R
i;j;s m=1;r=1

cation r of solution m. From the quantiles of the set
for all solutions we can obtain the =2 critical point
m;r M;R
i;j;s m=1;r=1 ,

of

we have the 1

=2 critical point

and highest =2 percent of the samples gives a (1
de…ned by
CI
CI

;g

;g

=

i;j;s (

=2);

i;j;s (

that includes all replications

=2). Similarly, from the quantiles

i;j;s (1

=2). Eliminating the lowest

)% percentile-based con…dence interval
i;j;s (1

=2) :

denotes the con…dence intervals for sets of solutions that satisfy all constraints, including

the event and correlation constraints: gZ (B) = 0; gE (B; ; k)

0; gC (B; S)

0: We use

CI ;gZ to denote the con…dence intervals for sets of solutions that satisfy only the reduced form
covariance restrictions gZ (B) = 0.

20

The s-period ahead dynamic responses to one-standard deviation shocks in the jth
/ variable are de…ned as
@Xt+s
b mrkj ;
= b mr
b
s
@ejt

b mrkj is the jth column of B
b mrk and the coe¢ cient matrixes b mr are given by b mr (L) = b mr +
where b
s
0
1
mr
mr
2
mr
b
b
L + b2 L + ::: = A
(L) .
1

3

