                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ECONOMIC IMPOSSIBILITIES FOR OUR GRANDCHILDREN?

                                    Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke

                                       Working Paper 21807
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21807


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2015




This is a revised version of the Keynes Lecture, presented at the British Academy on October 7, 2015.
I am extremely grateful to Mary Morgan who chaired that event, and to Roger Backhouse, Patrick
O’Brien, Richard Portes, Morten Ravn, Hélène Rey, and Donald Winch, who attended the lecture
and made many useful suggestions and comments. I particularly want to thank Morgan Kelly and Alan
Taylor for many conversations on the subject of secular stagnation; and to Bob Allen, Charlie Bean,
Paul Beaudry, Agustín Bénétrix, Steve Broadberry, Nick Crafts, Brad DeLong, Rui Esteves, Ron Findlay,
Mike Gavin, Richard Grossman, Leander Heldring, Svend Hylleberg, Philip Lane, Jacob Madsen,
Perry Mehrling, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Cormac Ó Gráda, Thomas Piketty, Filipa Sa, Claus Vastrup,
Karl Whelan, Jeff Williamson, and Nikolaus Wolf, for many useful comments, help with data, and
advice. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Economic Impossibilities for our Grandchildren?
Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 21807
December 2015
JEL No. B22,N10

                                              ABSTRACT

The paper looks at the development of the secular stagnation thesis, in the context of the economic
history of the time. It explores some 19th century antecedents of the thesis, before turning to its interwar
development. Not only Alvin Hansen, but Keynes and Hicks were involved in the conversations that
led to Hansen's eventual statement of the thesis that we are familiar with. The argument made sense
in the context of the interwar period, but more so in Britain than the US.


Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
All Souls College
University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
and NBER
kevin.orourke@all-souls.ox.ac.uk
Section 1. Introduction

For decades, textbook macroeconomics has tended to distinguish between the
short run and the long run. The short run is taken to be the domain of Keynesian
macroeconomics, or at least it is for those of us of a saltwater disposition. The
long run, on the other hand, is the domain of the growth models of Solow and his
successors. In 2013, however, Larry Summers revived an older, “medium run”,
intellectual tradition, dating back to the interwar period, which saw the short
run and the long run as mutually influencing each other, and not for the better. 1


According to this “secular stagnation” view, unemployment could persist into the
long run absent an appropriate fiscal response by government: it might not be a
mere blip around a benign long run trend. There might still be booms and busts,
with unemployment falling and rising along the way, but these oscillations would
occur around an average unemployment rate that was now higher than before. If
savings were sufficiently abundant, relative to investment demand, then (in the
modern formulation of the thesis) the equilibrium (or Wicksellian natural)
interest rate might be negative. If this were the case, the zero lower bound
implied that central banks would be unable to set interest rates at levels
consistent with full employment. 2 Since investment demand might be low for
long run reasons (for example, population growth might be slowing), we would
now have a case of a “short run” variable (unemployment) being in part
determined by long run forces. Worse, persistent unemployment could lower the
long run growth potential of the economy via hysteresis effects: there would now

1 A conscious desire to distinguish between the short run and the long run was
present at the birth of modern growth theory; towards the beginning of his
famous article, Solow (1956, p. 66) commented that “A remarkable characteristic
of the Harrod-Domar model is that it consistently studies long-run problems
with the usual short-run tools. One usually thinks of the long run as the domain
of the neo- classical analysis, the land of the margin. Instead Harrod and Domar
talk of the long run in terms of the multiplier, the accelerator, “the” capital
coefficient.” But Solow has of course also been a prominent advocate of medium
run macroeconomics (Solow, 1987; Solow, 2000).

2Admittedly the zero lower bound is no longer quite what it used to be (Yglesias,
2015); on the other hand, interest rates facing businesses in those Eurozone
countries that really need low interest rates are far from negative.


                                         1
be a pernicious feed-back effect from the short run to the long run as well (Ball et
al., 2014; Blanchard et al., 2015).


Since this is a lecture about secular stagnation, I need to be clear about the sense
in which I am using the term. I use it in the same way that Summers does, and
that Hansen did before him: secular stagnation refers to the possibility that
insufficient aggregate demand and unemployment may be with us in the long
run, unless government does something about it. It’s important to be clear about
the qualification, since the secular stagnation hypothesis was always as much a
policy prescription as a prediction, and probably more so. Secular stagnation is
thus to be distinguished from the fear that long run growth trends may
themselves be declining, as a result of slowing technological progress (Cowen,
2011), or various “headwinds” (in his well-known papers, Robert Gordon refers
to ageing populations, slowing human capital accumulation, rising inequality,
and rising government debt) (Gordon, 2012; Gordon, 2014). Such supply side
forces may make secular stagnation more likely, by lowering investment
demand; they do not constitute secular stagnation in and of themselves, since
secular stagnation is all about unemployment. Secular stagnation should also be
distinguished from the fear that too much of the wrong sort of technological
change will lead to workers being displaced by machines or robots. Such fears
date back at least to Ricardo, and are still with us today (Ricardo, 1973, Chapter
XXXI; Mokyr et al., 2015), and they do concern unemployment, but this is
unemployment being generated on the technological supply side. Secular
stagnation, on the other hand, is all about aggregate demand.


Economists don’t live in ivory towers. They react to the world around them, and
change their theories, or invent new ones, or revive old ones, as circumstances
change. Figure 1 plots world industrial output during the Great Depression and
our own Great Recession, measured from their respective pre-crisis peaks (June
1929 and April 2008). We all know that recovery occurred much more quickly
after 2008 than it did after 1929. We also know that its pace slowed rapidly, and
eventually started petering out, to the extent that in August 2015 the current




                                         2
world industrial output series was overtaken by that of the interwar period. This
is a truly dismal performance.




Figure 1. World industrial output during two crises
Source: Eichengreen and O'Rourke (2010), updated with data from
http://www.cpb.nl/en/node/

And so it’s no surprise that a saltwater economist like Summers (2013) sounded
the alarm bell when he did, in November 2013; especially given the long history
of stagnation in Japan, and especially given the series of financial bubbles that
preceded the 2008 crisis. Bubbles are a classic symptom of a world in which
savings are excessive, relative to available real investment opportunities; they
should also, according to Summers, have led to much frothier and more
inflationary growth than what we in fact saw, suggesting that the underlying
level of aggregate demand was low.


Nor is it any surprise that Hansen became a Keynesian when he did. His review
of the General Theory hadn’t been particularly enthusiastic. He arrived in
Harvard in the fall of 1937, to take up a new chair in the brand new Graduate
School of Public Administration, now the Kennedy School. The School’s faculty



                                         3
was mostly drawn from the existing Harvard faculty; the other outside
appointment, it so happens, was Heinrich Brüning, former chancellor of Weimar
Germany, who was appointed Lecturer in Government before being promoted to
Professor the following academic year (Musgrave, 1976, p. 4; Harvard University,
1939, p. 293; Harvard University, 1940, p. 38). Brüning gets a walk-on role in
most courses on the Great Depression, a dismal reminder of just how dangerous
pro-cyclical fiscal policies during a deep recession can be. I’ve often wondered
what he and Hansen talked about around the water cooler. 3


What made Hansen Keynesian? 4 Was it his newfound proximity to the briny
waters of the Atlantic? Or was it the fact that his arrival at Harvard, and the start
of the famous Fiscal Policy seminar which he ran with John Williams, coincided
with the US economy falling off a cliff (Figure 1; Salant, 1976)? Perhaps
Keynesian theories could explain why this was happening, in a way that other
theories couldn’t. And so it’s no surprise that he started moving in a Keynesian
direction at this time, and that his writings on secular stagnation started to
appear in 1938. This wasn’t necessarily what the Harvard department had been
expecting. As Paul Samuelson (1976, p. 29) said, “Hansen received his call to
Harvard by miscalculation. They did not know what they were getting. And
neither did he.”


Section 2. The early 19th century: the stationary state and capital gluts


But I want to begin by saying something about various early 19th century
anticipations of the secular stagnation thesis, since this helps clarify what was
novel about the argument. And first let me say that it also makes sense that they


3Brüning gave the fifth-ever talk to the Monday Fiscal Policy seminar, on
“Monetary and Fiscal Policies in Germany during the Depression” (Harvard
University, 1939, p. 309). According to Schuker (1994, p. 347), after the war
Hansen told Brüning that Keynes had intended, before dying, to make clear his
view that “counter-cyclical spending provided no magic bullet to counter a
depression” – or at least, so Brüning claimed.

4As we’ll see later, a less Anglocentric and perhaps more accurate question
might be: what made Keynes a Hansen-ian?


                                          4
appeared when they did, since economic life in Britain was difficult once the
Napoleonic Wars had ended. Feinstein (1998, pp. 646-7) puts unemployment in
industry and transportation at 17 per cent in 1816, as demobilised soldiers and
sailors came home to a depressed economy; he estimates that the average rate of
unemployment in these sectors rose from 5 per cent during 1770-1815 to 8 per
cent between 1815 and 1850. Per capita GDP fell by 11 per cent between its
1815 peak and 1819, and barely increased between 1815 and 1830 (Broadberry
et al., 2015). The period also saw considerable political unrest: the Peterloo
Massacre of 1819, the agrarian Swing Riots of 1830, Chartism. It’s hardly
surprising that economists of the time tried to find explanations for the
economic difficulties they saw all around them.


One obvious response to these difficulties was to point to rapid population
growth, which was at its fastest at precisely the time that Malthus was writing
his Essay on the Principle of Population. Diminishing returns, as these extra
workers pressed against a fixed land supply, could potentially explain why life
was so hard for so many. As Tony Wrigley has frequently emphasised (e.g.
Wrigley 2010), such an analysis made quite a lot of sense in an “organic
economy” in which land was still an input into most productive activities, and a
fundamental constraint on economic growth.


But it wasn’t just population that was growing rapidly in early 19th century
Britain. Britain’s capital stock grew at an accelerating rate between 1760 and
1790; the acceleration came to a halt during the wartime years; and it resumed
once peace broke out in 1815 (Mitchell, 1988, p. 864). Contemporary observers
didn’t have access to figures like these, but they would have been aware that
accumulation was proceeding increasingly rapidly. They could also observe
closed factories and unemployed workers in post-war Britain, and it seems
understandable that some of them would have concluded that the accumulation
had been excessive. Since diminishing returns could explain why excessive
population growth was bad for workers, it made sense to wonder whether it also
implied that excessive capital accumulation was bad for capitalists as well.




                                         5
And so a variety of arguments were developed during these years in which as
capital accumulates, the return to capital falls. Exactly what the implications of
this were depended on the economist concerned. In the hands of Ricardo and his
followers, the implications were not too disastrous. In a closed economy, as
capital and labour supplies rose they would increasingly press against a fixed
land supply; diminishing returns meant that the price of food and nominal wages
would rise, and that profit rates would fall. Eventually they would fall to the
point where future accumulation would cease altogether. This was the famous
stationary state.


Was the stationary state necessarily a bad thing? Implicitly, yes, if you thought
that economic growth was a good thing, and especially if you thought that wages
could only be above subsistence in a growing economy (Donald Winch,
Introduction to Ricardo, 1973, p. xiv). The idea that free trade was desirable,
largely because it would prevent the onset of the stationary state, was at the
heart of Ricardo’s thinking. But on the other hand, the stationary state
emphatically did not involve stagnation:


    When in the course of things profits should be so low from a great
    accumulation of capital and a want of means of providing food for an
    increasing population, all motive for further savings will cease; but there
    will be no stagnation; all that is produced will be at its fair relative price,
    and will be freely exchanged. Surely the word stagnation is improperly
    applied to such a state of things, for there will not be a general glut, nor will
    any particular commodity be necessarily produced in greater abundance
    than the demand shall warrant. 5


Say’s Law ensured that everything that was produced would be purchased by
somebody. Excessive accumulation was impossible. Furthermore, later
Ricardians, faced with the reality of rising real wages, increasingly emphasised
that if workers exercised moral restraint, the stationary state might be
consistent with high equilibrium real wages (O'Brien, 1975, pp. 61-64). And

5   Cited in Winch (1965, p. 75)


                                            6
perhaps there is something to be said for a quiet life, especially if you are a
successful middle-aged man like John Stuart Mill (Mill, 1849, Book IV, Chapter
VI), or for that matter Maynard Keynes (1978a).


Mill (1849, p. 293) was famously optimistic about the stationary state, but at the
same time he worried that as the economy approached it, lower returns on
capital would lead savers to engage in “over-trading and rash speculation”,
which would necessarily end in tears. Far more radical, however, were those
authors who maintained that “gluts” of capital and commodities were possible,
involving “the distress both of a redundant population among the labourers, and
of a redundant capital among the mercantile classes” (Chalmers, 1832, p. 134).
That such a tradition should have surfaced at this time is hardly surprising, as we
have seen. Thus Lauderdale, writing in 1804 and 1819, argued that accumulating
capital beyond what “the present state of the knowledge of mankind enables him
to lay out with advantage” was wasteful, for the capital would not be employed,
but lie idle, like the finest palaces in Delhi, or the spacious warehouses of
Antwerp, “unoccupied and undesired” (Lauderdale, 1804, pp. 221-223). 6 Worse,
excessive accumulation would reduce output and employment in consumer
goods industries, and even worse, this would also lead to a decline in the value of
investment goods, with output in both sectors falling in consequence
(Lauderdale, 1819, pp. 214-5). Malthus worried that excessive saving, leading to
too much capital accumulation and too many “productive workers”, would lead
to an excessive supply of commodities in general, given the parsimony of the
rich, and in consequence to a sharp fall in profits (Malthus, 1836, pp. 315-6).


According to Chalmers (1832), diminishing returns meant that just as “there
might be too many ploughmen, so there might be too many ploughs” (p. 80); just
as overpopulation could lead to wages falling below the subsistence level, and to
population declining, so excess accumulation could lead to negative returns on
capital and a fall in the capital stock. Both excesses would lead to economic
distress (Chalmers, 1832, pp. 110-11). Wakefield (1833, Volume 2, p. 97), who

6 Note the link that is made here between the state of technology and the
demand for capital.


                                          7
approvingly quoted Chalmers, argued that excess saving could lead to capital
lying idle “for want of employment for capital”. Just as moral restraint could
serve as a preventive check, avoiding excess population and the need for a
positive population check, so increased spending and lower saving could serve as
a preventive check for capitalists, helping them to avoid excess capital
accumulation and the destruction of capital this would entail (Smith et al., 1835,
p. 253). An admirable theory, indeed, that made sexual restraint by the poor, and
extra consumption by the rich, functionally equivalent, and equally necessary for
the smooth functioning of the capitalist system! Unfortunately, the rich might
continue to save, despite the fact that the new capital could not be “productively
employed” (Torrens, 1836, p. 241).


These theories were not Keynesian, since they assumed that ex ante savings
automatically translated into an equivalent amount of investment and a higher
capital stock. The problem was that this capital stock, and its associated
production, could be excessive. 7 They didn’t spell out what seems obvious to us:
that over-investment in one period doesn’t cause unemployment directly; it’s the
lower investment in the next period that does that. 8 These writers argued that
aggregate demand might be lower than aggregate supply, once accumulation had
proceeded too far; this did not imply that increased investment was the solution
to the problem, since this would merely aggravate its root cause. Increased
spending by the rich, and possibly public works, were better solutions. 9 If
capitalists did not restrain themselves via the preventive check of profligacy,
crises of over-investment might be a recurrent phenomenon.


These theories also assumed a certain irrationality on the part of savers-cum-
investors, which Keynes picked up on in the General Theory. 10 This irrationality



7 See Corry (1959) and O'Brien (1975, pp. 229-232).
8 Samuelson (1976, p. 28) makes this point with respect to a later generation of
writers. For a model in which an excessive supply of durable goods can cause a
recession in a world with flexible prices, see Beaudry et al. (2014).
9 On Malthus’ views on public works, see O'Brien (1975, pp. 231-2).
10 On Hobson’s theory of over-saving, he writes that it assumes that “it is a case

of excessive saving causing the actual accumulation of capital in excess of what is


                                         8
might be enough for you to rule out the possibility of over-investment on a priori
grounds. On the other hand, consider the hypothetical case of a centrally
controlled economy, where investment decisions are made, not by rational
profit-maximizing entrepreneurs, but by nervous officials contemplating the
political consequences of a major economic downturn. Might over-investment be
possible in such an economy, and can we think of any possible examples today? 11


Insofar as these writers assumed a negative relationship between the capital
stock and the returns to capital, and insofar as they assumed that accumulation
was the driving force of the economy, they tended to conclude that – at least in a
closed economy – there was something inevitable in the long run about either
the stationary state, or capital gluts, as the case may be. They knew that these
outcomes could be averted by technological change, and some authors
emphasised this a lot. But if you conceive of technological change as something
episodically shifting out what we would now think of as the demand for capital
curve, rather than as something continuous, which continuously shifts that curve
outwards, then it’s going to be easier to conclude that the stationary state, or
gluts, as the case may be, is something that will tend to inevitably happen in the
long run.


Section 3. The secular stagnation thesis


To get from these classical arguments to secular stagnation required at least
three conceptual breakthroughs. First, and most obviously, you needed the
Keynesian thesis linking aggregate demand and employment, in which
investment drives savings rather than the other way around. Second, you needed
to analyse a dynamic, growing economy, as Hansen always did, and acknowledge
that continuous technical progress and population growth meant that
accumulation and investment could continue forever. And third, you needed to


required, which is, in fact, a secondary evil which only occurs through mistakes
of foresight” (Keynes, 1973, p. 367, emphasis in the original).
11 Writing about China, Martin Wolf asks: “does it make economic sense for an

economy to invest 44 per cent of GDP and yet grow at only 5 per cent? No. These
data suggest ultra-low, if not, negative marginal returns” (Wolf, 2015).


                                         9
synthesize these two arguments, and ask whether this long run sustainable
investment rate would be sufficient to absorb savings supply.


The General Theory provided the first of these breakthroughs. The book is
famously about the short run. However, when Keynes was writing it, he was
doing so not only in the light of the Great Depression, but of the disastrous
British 1920s. Things had been so bad for so long that it must have been
tempting for Keynes to seek structural explanations for Britain’s interwar
economic performance. And there is a short section in Chapter 16 (section III)
that seems to move in this direction, and provide the foundations for a theory of
unemployment in the long run (Keynes, 1973, pp. 217-220). 12


As Alvin Hansen (1953, p. 157) noted, it isn’t a particularly well-written section,
but the story seems to be as follows. As accumulation proceeds, the marginal
efficiency of capital schedule shifts to the left, due to diminishing returns. Ideally
the central bank will lower interest rates to maintain investment at a high level,
but there is a limit to how low interest rates can fall, which could be zero, or
could be something higher. When that limit is reached, investment will decline,
aggregate demand will fall, and unemployment will rise. Moreover, there is
something inevitable about this, because of diminishing returns; and once we’re
in this state of the world, there is no reason to suspect that we will ever leave it.
If government doesn’t intervene, the outcome will be persistent unemployment.
If it does intervene, on the other hand, to maintain aggregate demand, then the
result will be a “quasi-stationary” state in which returns to capital will be zero,
and rentiers will be a thing of the past.


Now this is very obviously not a classical story. Investment drives savings, not
the other way around; we have the consumption function and multiplier to link
the two; it is under-investment, not over-investment, that is the problem. But on

12 There is a debate about the extent to which Keynes had a long run vision of
secular stagnation (Guthrie and Tarascio, 1992) and I’m aware that I’m no
historian of thought. But if I’m wrong in thinking that the General Theory
contains such a vision, then so was Hicks, so at least I’m in good company.



                                            10
the other hand, there does seem to be a classical element lurking in the
background; some fixed downward sloping relationship between the stock of
capital on the one hand, and the return to capital on the other, down which the
economy slides on its rendez vous with destiny.


Because of this downward sloping relationship, the implication is that capital
accumulation will eventually and inevitably lead to some sort of stationary or
“quasi-stationary” state, which may be either desirable (the euthanasia of the
rentier) or undesirable (involving long-run unemployment), depending on
government policy. 13 Indeed, in this respect Keynes seems more classical than
the classics, since while they often wrote about the impact of technological
progress on the position of this schedule, technical change doesn’t get a look-in
with Keynes. Interestingly, Keynes doesn’t think he is just engaged in idle
theoretical speculation; he argues that the post-war difficulties experienced in
Britain and America are “actual experiences” (p. 219) of these processes in
action.


In his review of the book, which appeared in June 1936, Hicks (1936, pp. 249-50)
zoomed in on this “novel and startling” theory of “secular unemployment”, and in
particular on the assumption of diminishing marginal returns to capital. He
pointed out that this implicitly assumes that population and technology are
constant. He pointed to a striking passage elsewhere in the General Theory in
which Keynes himself argued that quite high interest rates had been compatible
with “a reasonably satisfactory average level of employment” during the 19th
century, as a result of “the growth of population and of invention, the opening-up
of new lands, the state of confidence and the frequency of war” (Keynes, 1973, p.
309). Hicks pointed out that invention might put off the decline in the marginal
efficiency of capital “almost indefinitely”, as would a growing population, which




13 Reduced working hours might be part of the policy mix, providing a link
between the euthanasia of the rentier and the economic possibilities for our
grandchildren (Aspromourgos, 2012, p. 154).


                                        11
was thus “actually favourable to employment” (Hicks, 1936, p. 252). 14
Unfortunately, it was likely that the population in Britain and her closest trading
partners would soon start to decline, or remain stationary, and when that
happened Keynes’ theory would become relevant. Britain might not already be
engulfed in a situation of secular unemployment, “but there is little doubt that
we are heading for these dangers” (p. 253). It seems strange that Hicks is never
credited with, or blamed for, the development of the secular stagnation thesis in
its modern form, since he so clearly anticipated it. And he presumably got
Keynes thinking about technological change: a letter to Hicks reveals that he was
a little put out by the suggestion that he had ignored it in his book. 15


Another review that presumably mattered for the development of the secular
stagnation hypothesis is Hansen’s (Hansen, 1936). Alvin Hansen was the son of
Danish immigrants. He was born in 1887 in Daneville, a small settlement in
South Dakota. When he was about six the railway came, about half a mile down
the road. The settlement relocated in response, and was re-christened Viborg. 16
The late 19th century expansion of the American frontier, and the waves of
railway investment that accompanied it, were constant themes in Hansen’s work,
and it’s easy to see why.


Viborg was and is proud of its Danish heritage, and this is an important part of
the story: Hansen’s prairie background made him an intellectual cosmopolitan.
He grew up speaking Danish (Mehrling, 1997, p. 85), and read writers like Frisch,
Wicksell and Myrdal in the original Scandinavian (Hansen, 1941, p. 196; Hansen,
1951, pp. 6, 328). He also read extensively in German: not just Wicksell, or the
German economists we are familiar with in the English-speaking world, but
people like Arthur Spiethoff who published almost exclusively in that language. 17

14 This is the second of the breakthroughs needed to get from the classics to
secular stagnation, listed at the start of this section. It is something that would
always have seemed obvious to Hansen.
15 Keynes and Moggridge (1973, Part II, pp. 72-3)
16 Mehrling (1997, p. 85); http://www.viborgsd.org/history-of-viborg/,

accessed 18 November 2015.
17 The French economist Albert Aftalion was another important influence, and

Hansen read him in the original too.


                                          12
As Samuelson (1976, pp. 27-8) noted, these writers fit well with his views on the
importance of technological change, and the notion that long run waves of
innovation can propel waves of investment and economic growth. And another
factor that led him to emphasise technological change much more than Keynes
must have been the fact that the United States was so much more technologically
progressive than Britain (Figure 2).




Figure 2. TFP growth, UK and US, 1760-2007
Source: Crafts (2014), pp. 32-33 (UK, and US 1871-90); Bakker et al. (2015).

Given all of this, it’s hardly surprising that Hansen’s initial judgement of the
General Theory was not particularly glowing. In his review of the book he argued
that wage and price rigidity were a “necessary condition” for a “stable
underemployment equilibrium” (p. 680). Like Hicks, he pointed out that
technological progress raised the marginal efficiency of capital and increased
investment: “Thus economic progress constantly tends toward equilibrium at
full employment” (p. 680). However, he also anticipated the secular stagnation
thesis, arguing that without new capital-intensive technologies such as the
railroad, without the frontier, and without population growth, “the problem of
structural, or secular, unemployment…is almost certain to present itself for
solution in the decades before us” (p. 681). At this stage, however, he also laid


                                         13
stress on “increasing cost rigidities” as a cause of secular unemployment (ibid.),
and he was sceptical about Keynesian solutions of “forced investment” brought
about by “artificially contrived measures”, fearing that if savings were forced into
investment by government, “business is likely to stagnate… it is not improbable
that the continued workability of the system of private enterprise will be made
possible, not by changes in prevailing economic institutions (such as those
advocated by Keynes), but rather by the work of the inventor and the engineer”
(pp. 682-3).


Were these two reviews important in getting Keynes to think about whether he
could say something more rigorous about unemployment in the long run, and in
particular make his analysis more dynamic, in the sense of incorporating
technical change, population growth and other factors shifting out the demand
for capital curve on an on-going basis? It seems likely. An additional possible
influence on Keynes may have been the fact that fears about a declining birth
rate were in the air around this time, as Hicks’ review suggests (Thane, 1990;
Toye, 2000, pp. 199-202). In any event, in February 1937 Keynes set out the
major elements of the secular stagnation hypothesis, when he delivered the
annual Galton Lecture at a meeting of the Eugenics Society (Keynes, 1937).


In the lecture, he focussed squarely on the question of whether investment
demand was likely to be sufficient to offset savings supply. 18 Net investment is
equal to the increase in the capital stock dK, and the net investment rate
(expressed as a share of GDP, Q) is thus dK/Q. But this is equal to the rate of
increase of the capital stock, dK/K, multiplied by the capital-output ratio K/Q;
and if the capital-output ratio is constant, as Keynes asserted it was – an
assumption that we would see a lot of in the coming years! – then this is equal to



18 He was vague about whether he was talking about net or gross savings and
investment, but the argument suggests that it was net investment that he had in
mind. In that case, he was implicitly assuming that net savings rate were
constant also, which as those of you who have been reading Krusell and Smith
(2015) on Piketty (2013) know is a mistake. So he got some important things
wrong; but he still managed to lay out the essential points of the analysis.



                                         14
the growth rate of output (n, the growth rate of population, plus g, the growth
rate of output per capita) multiplied by K/Q.


Expressed as a share of GDP, net investment demand was thus (n+g)*K/Q. Was
this going to be sufficient to offset net savings supply, which Keynes asserted
was 8-15% of GDP? Keynes thought that K/Q was around 4, and that n+g thus
had to lie between about 2 and 4 per cent per annum. If population growth fell to
zero, as seemed likely, then this seemed to Keynes to be a very tall order indeed.
And if you look at British TFP growth rates of the time (Figure 2), you can see
why he was worried. 19


We know that Hansen read the Galton lecture carefully. Barber (1987) argues
that it was an important factor in his conversion to Keynesianism, though it
might be more accurate, as Mehrling (1997, p. 133) suggests, that Hansen viewed
the Galton lecture as indicating that Keynes was moving in Hansen’s (that is to
say, a more dynamic) direction. Its stress on technology would have resonated
with Hansen, and since it was published shortly before the US economy fell off a
cliff, the Keynesian elements of the analysis (and in particular the multiplier)
would soon have seemed more acceptable to him as well. And so when Hansen
reprinted his review of the General Theory in a 1938 collection of essays
(Hansen, 1938), the view that wage and price rigidity were “necessary” for
Keynesian underemployment equilibrium had been deleted, along with the fear
that government investment would lead to the stagnation of business. Hansen’s
career as America’s leading exponent of Keynes was about to begin.


In his 1938 presidential lecture, with is most often associated with the secular
stagnation thesis, he argued that the “seven fat years” of 1923-29 were due to
“special conditions…of a sufficiently temporary character to raise grave


19 The late 19th century British net savings rate seems to have been close to 8 per
cent, if Feinstein’s data reported in Mitchell (1988) are to be believed: it was the
gross rates that were at the upper end of Keynes’ range. This would have made
Keynes more optimistic; on the other hand, the net capital output ratio seems to
have been around 2, which he would have thought was very bad news (based on
the data in Feinstein (1972) and http://www.measuringworth.com).


                                        15
questions about the future”, and that the same was true of the British recovery of
1935-37 (Hansen, 1938, p. 7). The longer run prospects were dim, owing to the
closing of the frontier and slowing population growth. Furthermore, it was no
longer clear that innovations would be as capital-using as they had been in the
19th century. Boosting innovation was crucial, as he had always believed; indeed
it was more crucial than ever. But Hansen now also believed that fiscal policy
had a role to play in combatting unemployment under conditions of secular
stagnation (although he still worried about the political implications).


In a 1941 book (Hansen, 1941, pp. 301-312) he sets out his views in greater
detail, arguing that you will only get business cycles occurring in the context of a
dynamic, innovating, growing economy. In a static economy where Q and K are
fixed, and net savings are zero, there is no reason why equilibrium would ever be
disrupted, or why unemployment would ever emerge. In a dynamic economic,
however, technical change will increase investment demand. As an aside, at this
stage in the technological cycle, the more you can save, the more you will invest,
and the faster you will grow. For example, several economic historians have
argued that countries with a greater capacity to generate profits and savings
grew more rapidly in Golden Age Europe (Crafts et al., 1996; Eichengreen, 2007).
When growth slows, however, investment demand will fall as well, and it is
unlikely that consumption will rise sufficiently to fill the gap in expenditure,
since savings and consumption behaviour are deeply embedded in a variety of
social institutions. Those high savings rates, which had been beneficial in the
boom, now become a chronic drag on aggregate demand; unless government
steps in to boost the propensity to consume, unemployment will be the result.
As we know, World War II soon intervened. The Americans started seriously
rearming from June 1940, and the economy moved rapidly towards full
employment (Gordon and Krenn, 2010). Hansen himself was worried about the
possibility of post-war inflation (Tobin, 1976, p. 37). However, others worried
that with the end of wartime expenditure, unemployment would re-emerge. As is
well know, their fears were unrealised. Instead, the western world experienced a
“Golden Age” of economic growth that lasted until the oil crises of the 1970s. And
so secular stagnation gradually faded from view. On its way out, however, the


                                         16
attempt to graft together Keynesian and dynamic thinking led to the
development of accelerator-multiplier models (Samuelson, 1939); a range of
other models in which investment depended positively on income, and
negatively on the capital stock (Matthews, 1955); Harrod (1939a) and Domar
(1946) models; and finally, ironically, and in reaction to the latter, the Solow
growth model and the separation of the short run and the long run. 20 If this was
a cul-de-sac, it was a pretty productive one.


Why did the prediction of secular stagnation not come to pass? Figure 2
presented TFP growth rates for various phases of British and US history, and I’ve
converted these into equivalent rates of labour-augmenting technical progress g
(assuming a Cobb-Douglas production function, and a labour share of 0.67). We
also have the population growth rate for each of these periods. These are the
variables that should matter for long run growth, in either a Hansen-Keynes or a
Solovian world (and in a Hansen-Keynes world they should matter for
unemployment rates as well). When you look at the numbers (Figure 3), it’s
obvious what the pessimists got wrong. In the US, it was the baby boom. Far from
continuing to decline, as seemed a good bet in the 1930s, population growth
rates more than doubled after the war. The UK story is different: population
growth did pick up a bit, but far more important was a dramatic acceleration of
technological progress. The UK Golden Age was pretty feeble compared with the
German Wirtschaftswunder, or the French Trentes Glorieuses, but it was
revolutionary by British standards.




20 For a fascinating account of the decline of the secular stagnation hypothesis,
see Backhouse and Boianovsky (2015).


                                         17
Figure 3. n plus g, UK and USA, 1760-2007
Source: TFP growth as in Figure 2, converted to g by dividing by the labour
share, taken to be 0.67. Population growth: Britain: 1700-1870: Broadberry et al.
(2015); 1870-1970: Palgrave Macmillan (2013); 1971-2014: ONS. USA: Carter et
al. (2006), Series Aa7 (total resident population), spliced with FRED,
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/POP# . For each sub-period the
growth rate is calculated by regressing the log of population on time.

Just because the secular stagnation prediction didn’t come about doesn’t
automatically mean that we should scrap the underlying theory, which is that
there is a predictable relationship between n plus g and unemployment rates,
operating though the net investment channel. Is it the case that when n+g is
higher, unemployment is lower? The data for the UK (Figure 4) suggest that the
answer is “yes”; the correlation is -0.8. The data for the US also suggest that the
answer is yes, with two qualifications. First, the medium run unemployment rate
never seems to fall below around 4 per cent, even during periods of very rapid
growth like the roaring 20s or the Golden Age. And second, the Great Depression
was a massive outlier. The underlying growth fundamentals were good:
population growth was low by US standards, but TFP progress was famously
high (Field, 2011). And yet unemployment was also extremely high. Exclude this
observation, and the US correlation is -0.78.



                                         18
Figure 4. Unemployment versus n plus g
Sources: n plus g: Figure 3. Unemployment: UK: Thomas et al. (2010), updated
with ONS series BCJE, http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lms/labour-market-
statistics/september-2015/dataset--claimant-count-and-vacancies.html; US:
Carter et al. (2006) until 1947, FRED civilian unemployment rate,
https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/UNRATE/downloaddata,
thereafter.

One interesting difference between the two countries concerns the Great
Depression. It appears as an outlier in the US graph, but not in the British one; as
we saw, both population growth and technical progress were dismal in interwar
Britain. Perhaps it made sense for Keynes to speculate that Britain’s interwar
problems were structural in nature. America’s problems, in contrast, seem like a
clear case of “magneto trouble” (Keynes, 1978b, p. 129).




                                         19
Figure 5. Net investment versus unemployment
Source: for unemployment, the source is as in Figure 4. Net investment from
Piketty and Zucman (2014, Data Appendix, Tables UK12B, US12B)




Figure 6. Net investment versus n plus g
Source: as for Figures 4, 5




                                      20
These are just correlations, and of necessity (since I am looking at medium run
relationships) they involve very few data points. And if there is a causal
relationship here, it could go in many different ways. 21 The Hansen-Keynes
argument proceeds in two steps. The first is that there is a negative relationship
between net investment rates and unemployment. The data suggest that this is
indeed true (Figure 5). The second step suggests that there is a positive
relationship between n + g and net investment. While it’s a little less clearcut,
especially in the US case, the correlation is positive, just as it should be, with the
US Great Depression once again appearing as a major outlier (Figure 6). Perhaps
this positive relationship is coincidental; perhaps it is driven by savings supply
rather than investment demand. I don’t want to make any claims based on these
data. But perhaps we should be willing to keep an open mind about these
matters, in which case at least three conclusions would seem to follow. First, we
need more macroeconomic medium run theorizing (Solow, 1987; Solow, 2000;
Beaudry, 2005; Comin and Gertler, 2006). Second, we need statistical techniques
capable of dealing with low frequency relationships (Müller and Watson, 2015).
And finally, perhaps we should be open-minded about the secular stagnation
mechanism, while remaining prudently sceptical about any secular stagnation
predictions that people may make about the future.


Section 4. The future


What about the future? What will happen to world savings supply and world
investment demand? Might the Wicksellian natural interest rate remain low or
even negative?


Pessimists tend to focus on investment demand. The main force that will
predictably reduce investment demand in the future is falling population growth.

21 I should mention that the correlation survives when I lag population growth
by 20 years, although it gets weaker, falling to around 0.65. Another obvious
point is that you really want to use cyclically adjusted TFP, but unfortunately we
lack such series stretching back into the 19th century. In Figure 4 I opted for
consistency over time; if you replace Crafts’ US numbers with Fernald’s (Fernald,
2014) for the post-1945 period, the negative correlation survives (it is now -0.71
excluding the Great Depression).


                                          21
Its trajectory is highly uncertain, but all scenarios have it eventually declining. 22
Mind you, falling population growth seemed a reasonable prediction in the
1930s as well.


If we take the UN’s medium fertility scenario, population growth will fall in all
major world regions, but there is a lot of variation in the levels of growth. On this
score, investment prospects will be lousy in Europe and Japan, and will sharply
worsen in East Asia. Population growth will remain a lot higher for a lot longer in
Africa, however, suggesting where the investment should be heading in the
future.


What about the rate of technical progress? Here we need to distinguish between
TFP growth at the frontier, which we can take to be the US, and TFP growth in
countries far from the frontier. Theory suggests that the latter should behave
somewhat predictably. TFP growth may remain strong for a while in countries
successfully converging on the frontier, like China; but it will eventually slow
down. On the other hand, if convergence growth really takes off in sub-Saharan
Africa, you could see a long spell of high TFP growth there.


TFP growth on the frontier is much more unpredictable. In fact, I’d describe it as
unpredictable full stop. The available data (Fernald, 2014) show a sharp
slowdown in US TFP growth after 1973, since when it gradually recovered; the
question now is whether 2000-2007 was a (good) blip, or whether it was the
period since then that was a (bad) blip, and what we should expect going
forward. To which I think the only honest answer is “I don’t know”. Economists
have typically been much too pessimistic about the technological future. Simon
Kuznets used to tell his students that if you want an accurate forecast, your best
bet is to read science fiction (Fogel, 2005, p. 13). The available forecasts for
future US TFP growth vary so wildly that it isn’t clear that any of them are very
useful. 23


22United Nations file POP/1-1, at http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/DVD/
23Erumban and de Vries (2014, p. 19) put US TFP growth at 0.2 per cent per
annum during 2015-19, and just 0.1 per cent per annum during 2020-25. Bob


                                          22
Perhaps it makes most sense to admit that the future is unknowable, but to
suggest ways in which simple growth theory can help us to think about what
might be driving future trends. Fernald and Jones (2014) make the point that if
modern theories of endogenous growth are to be believed, then it makes sense to
attribute the majority of TFP progress in the United States since World War II to
rising levels of education and R&D activity. Since there are limits to these trends
in any society, the implication is that “frontier” US TFP growth will decline. On
the other hand, growing numbers of scientists in Asia may join in the quest to
extend the technological frontier, and this effect will work in the opposite
direction, as would the involvement of robots in the R&D process. Quantifying
these opposing trends will be more difficult, however, especially since the
relationship between R&D inputs and technological outputs is not well known,
and may be changing over time.


Obvious areas where one might expect rapid technological progress include
robotics and energy-related technologies. As regards the former, there is a
debate about whether excessive, rather than insufficient, rapid technological
progress might turn out to be a problem, in that it might lead to large lay-offs of
workers engaged in various routine activities, both physical and mental. The
extent to which this is likely to be a problem is going to depend on several
factors, including the rate and direction of technological progress and the labour
supply response of countries’ educational and training systems (Autor, 2015;
Crafts, 2015; Pratt, 2015). As regards the latter, the efficiency of alternative
energy technologies has been rapidly advancing, and we may reach a point
where massive investments start to make sense. If so, that will be good news for
those concerned about secular stagnation. Even more importantly, if we don’t



Gordon (2010, Table 10), an author known for his technological pessimism,
guesses that US TFP growth will average 1.05 per cent per annum between 2007
and 2027. Nick Crafts (2015) cites one estimate that US productivity growth will
average 1 per cent per annum between 2014 and 2023 (with Eurozone TFP
growth at just 0.5 per cent), and a second, due to the OECD, that it will average
1.6 per cent per annum between 2014 and 2014 (with Eurozone TFP growing at
1 per cent per annum).


                                         23
make rapid progress on this front, secular stagnation risks being the least of our
worries.


Many other factors may influence net investment demand going forward, but let
me highlight three. The first is the Great Recession, which many fear will lead to
a durable decline in investment demand in rich countries (IMF, 2014). The
second is the relative price of investment goods, which some think may fall in the
future, further lowering the dollar value of investment demand (ibid;
Eichengreen, 2015). And third, Krusell and Smith (2015) have recently reminded
us, rather forcefully, that people decide to engage in gross rather than net saving.
Depreciation has accounted for more than half of world gross savings in recent
decades. While normal wear and tear may happen automatically, firms still have
to choose to replace depreciated capital. From the point of view of an individual
country, it matters whether they choose to replace it in that country or
elsewhere. If depreciation is due to obsolescence, economic choices seem to be
even more clearly involved. Any analysis of where the natural interest rate is
headed would seem to require thinking about where depreciation rates are
headed, even if we typically don’t think about depreciation very much, and can’t
measure it properly.


Optimists tend to focus on savings supply. The factor that should most
predictably lower savings supply is ageing populations (World Bank, 2013;
Gavin, 2015; Goodhart et al., 2015) . The fact that populations are going to be
ageing in East Asia is especially important, since the region accounts for such a
big share of world savings. On the other hand, as poorer countries converge on
richer ones, their share of world income will rise, and this will predictably
increase world savings rates, since poor countries save so much more than the
rich (35 versus 22 per cent in 2013). 24 Indeed, this compositional effect means
that everyone could save less, but the world could end up saving more – the
World Bank (2013) estimates that the net effect will be a wash.




24   World Development Indicators.


                                        24
Growth rates also matter for savings rates: the consensus is that high per capita
growth translates into high savings (IMF, 2014, Chapter 3; Krusell and Smith,
2015). Slowing growth in those developing countries that have been successfully
converging on the technological frontier is one predictable factor that should
lower savings supply and raise interest rates, although a serious growth
slowdown may be some way away still; a growth take-off in Africa would work in
the opposite direction. Financial development should lower savings rates in
developing countries, and changing economic and social policies in China might
some day do the same.


Given that there are so many factors working in opposite directions, it would be
a brave man or woman who would stick their neck out and predict what the
balance of effects will be. Two international organisations (the World Bank and
IMF) have recently guesstimated that the net effect on world interest rates will
be minimal. Bean et al. (2015) suggest that while real interest rates will
eventually recover, they may remain low for some time yet. Since world interest
rates would be remaining roughly constant starting from historically low levels,
this suggests that the zero lower bound might be something to worry about in
the years ahead. 25


Ben Bernanke (2015) has suggested that international capital flows should solve
this problem, since a country with excess savings can export them, depreciating
the exchange rate, and boosting net exports. Secular stagnation, he points out,
should be thought of as a global problem in a world of internationally mobile
capital. That makes sense, but one can turn the argument around, and argue that
as far as countries like the US and UK are concerned, secular stagnation could
only possibly be a problem in a global context, since their net savings rates are
close to zero.


Furthermore, if recurrent financial crises are one of the symptoms of secular
stagnation, then it seems odd to argue that international capital flows will fix the

25 Dobbs et al. (2010), Gavin (2015) and Goodhart et al. (2015) are much more
optimistic.


                                         25
problem, since international capital flows and sudden stops have been at the
heart of so many crises in recent years, from Latin America in the 1980s to the
Tequila, Asian and Russian crises of the 1990s, through to the Eurozone crisis of
2010 (Barkbu et al., 2012). Third, if the problem with secular stagnation is that
central bankers can no longer hit their Wicksellian interest rate target, then do
international capital flows make their life easier? Not if Hélène Rey (2015) is
right, and capital mobility makes it impossible for you to run an independent
monetary policy, irrespective of your exchange rate regime. 26


One thing that might be informative is to look at the experience of John Hobson’s
Britain. Hobson (1902) thought that Britain was exporting vast amounts of
capital, and conquering large chunks of the world, all of which was a bad thing in
his view, because of the excess savings of the rich. He also thought that excess
savings could lower demand and production. Would savings have been excessive
in late 19th century Britain, had capital exports not been possible? How low
would interest rates have been in their absence? Might the zero lower bound
have been a problem? And did capital exports help to solve the problems caused
by excessive savings, by lowering unemployment?


If you take the IMF’s (2014, pp. 21-22) estimates of the elasticities of savings
supply (0.15) and investment demand (-0.5) (both expressed as shares of GDP)
with respect to real interest rates; data on UK savings and investment rates
(Mitchell, 1988, pp. 831-5); and data on real ex ante consol yields, 27 you can
calculate a no-capital-export counterfactual series for real interest rates for
1830-1913. As can be seen in Figure 7, if you believe the calculation nineteenth
century capital exports raised interest rates considerably; without them interest
rates between 1870 and 1913 would on average have been 1.2 percentage points
lower than they actually were. They would have steadily declined over the
course of the period, rather than sharply increasing after the turn of the century.
And by the end of the period they would have been even lower than they are



26   Unless you are the United States.
27   Kindly provided by Charlie Bean.


                                         26
today. 28 If we are entering secular stagnation territory now, perhaps Britain
would have entered it then as well. Estimates of what repatriating the capital
stock would have done to the marginal return to capital, in the context of a CES
aggregate production function, suggest a similar-sized percentage effect on profit
rates as well. 29




Figure 7. Actual and counterfactual real ex ante consol yields, 1830-2014
Source: see text

Capital exports may have been good for capitalists, but were they necessarily
good for workers? Keynes thought not: after all, they raised interest rates, which
was never a good thing. And it turns out that in the medium run there was a clear
positive relationship between capital exports and unemployment, presumably
linked to the fact that as capital exports rose, domestic investment fell (Figure 8).
Economic historians have long discussed these correlations (Ford, 1958); the
best explanations for them locate the ultimate driver of these Kuznets cycles, as

28 Since I am calculating counterfactual interest rates assuming constant interest
rate elasticities of savings supply and investment demand, negative interest rates
are ruled out by assumption.
29 Assuming an elasticity of substitution of 0.52, as cited by Rognlie, repatriating

Britain’s overseas capital in 1913 would have lowered the return to capital in
Britain by 38%. Details available on request.



                                         27
they are called, in Hansen’s prairies (Harley, 1978; Knick Harley, 1980). But
whatever the ultimate causalities at work here, it seems difficult to make the
case that capital exports helped lower unemployment rates in Hobson’s Britain.
Bernanke would presumably reply that since Britain was on the gold standard,
his “capital exports causing depreciation” mechanism was ruled out, and that
would be perfectly reasonable. Even so, the British experience is a useful
reminder that the initial impact of capital exports is to export capital, which is
generally not seen as being good for labour




Figure 8. Nine year (centred) moving averages of capital exports, home
investment and unemployment, UK 1859-1910
Source: for unemployment, as in Figure 3; and Mitchell (1988, pp. 831-5).



Were late 19th century British capital exports good or bad for the rest of the
world? Britain exported capital via portfolio bond purchases, which was safer for
everyone than channelling them through banks. It invested the money in capital-
scarce frontier economies, helping to finance real investment in railways and a
wide range of other infrastructure. This may have been portfolio investment, but
it overwhelmingly went into greenfield projects. It occasionally led to financial



                                         28
crises (Meissner, 2013), but to my knowledge foreigners at the time didn’t
complain about being flooded with a glut of British savings.


The obvious comparison today is with China. China accounts for a larger share of
world GDP than did nineteenth century Britain (13 per cent and climbing,
compared with a British peak of around 9 per cent) and its savings rates are
much higher. 2014 Chinese gross savings accounted for over 6 per cent of world
GNI, compared with roughly one per cent in the nineteenth century British case;
and for almost a quarter of world savings. 30 In 2007 China’s non-Hong-Kong
investments were overwhelmingly in the US and other advanced economies
(Milesi-Ferretti et al., 2010), although things may have changed since then. Was
this as useful for the world economy as British investments had been a century
earlier? I am inclined to doubt it.


If international capital flows are not a magic bullet ruling out the possibility of
secular stagnation, then what, apart from the obvious (promoting R&D), could be
done to make it less likely? Three suggestions warrant consideration.


The first is to boost investment in Africa. That’s where the population growth
will be; it’s where the big catch-up growth potential is going to be. And we want
Africa to grow anyway, for lots of reasons, and this will require investment. An
African growth miracle might go a long way to rule out secular stagnation at the
global level for the foreseeable future.


The second is to become more like Japan. They have lousy demographics,
without TFP growth sufficiently rapid to counteract it; and yet their
unemployment performance in recent decades has been admirable, much better
than in other rich countries. They must be doing something right.


The third concerns fiscal policy. Many people worry that rich economies today
have run out of fiscal space, and will be ill-prepared to meet the next negative
shock to aggregate demand. Would secular stagnation imply a choice between

30   Figures based on World Development Indicators.


                                           29
persistent budget deficits and persistent unemployment? Roy Harrod (1939b, p.
19) thought so: “The more the population declines the greater the need will be
for public works to absorb redundant savings; but equally the more intolerable
will be the growth in the burden of indebtedness”. The good news, it turned out
however, was that Harrod was wrong. This was the conclusion of the balanced
budget multiplier theorem, first discovered and published by Jørgen Gelting in
1941 (Gelting, 1941), and soon rediscovered by William Salant and Paul
Samuelson. Samuelson noted the discovery 31 in a 1943 paper that discussed
ways of offsetting savings so that full employment could be maintained after the
war. He separately listed government deficits, and a large government paid for
by taxes, as separate options, and stated that “only recently” had he been
persuaded that a large government per se provides a “genuine offset to saving”,
that was “employment- and income-creating”, and that this might be a means “by
which our economy can maintain the level of effective demand” (p. 1446).


There was thus a political trade-off: budgetary orthodoxy implied a bigger
government, while a smaller government would require larger deficits
(Samuelson 1948, p. 146). What is striking to a modern economist is that the
participants in these debates were so forthcoming about the political
implications of their theories. 32 Bob Fogel (2005, p. 7) had it right, I think, when
he wrote that “The key issue, as the stagnationists defined it, was not whether
the growth of the GDP would come to an end, but whether a high level of
government spending was necessary to prevent a high level of permanent
unemployment, even if GDP did grow.” And that is perhaps the question that we
should be posing today.


We can’t know if secular stagnation will be a problem in the years ahead, since
the technological future is unknowable. But perhaps a prudent government
should be prepared for all eventualities. If you think it possible that net
investment demand will remain low, or even decline in the future, and that this


31Without specifying the underlying logic.
32Gelting on the other hand seems to have motivated by the love of theory for its
own sake; I am grateful to Claus Vastrup for clarification on this point.


                                         30
will not be sufficiently offset by a decline in savings; and if you are the kind of
person who worries about excessive budget deficits; then perhaps you should
logically conclude that this is no time to shrink the state.




                                          31
Bibliography
Aspromourgos, T. (2012). Keynes’s General Theory After 75 Years: Chapter 24
         and the Character of ‘Keynesian’ Policy. Economic Record 88, 149-157.
Autor, D. H. (2015). Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of
         Workplace Automation. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 3-30.
Backhouse, R. E. and Boianovsky, M. (2015). Secular Stagnation: the History of a
         Macroeconomic Heresy.
Bakker, G., Crafts, N. and Woltjer, P. (2015). A Vision of the Growth Process in a
         Technologically Progressive Economy: the United States, 1899-1941.
Ball, L., DeLong, B. and Summers, L. (2014). Fiscal Policy and Full Employment.
         Washington DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Barber, W. J. (1987). The Career of Alvin H. Hansen in the 1920s and 1930s: A
         Study in Intellectual Transformation. History of Political Economy 19, 191-
         205.
Barkbu, B., Eichengreen, B. and Mody, A. (2012). Financial crises and the
         multilateral response: What the historical record shows. Journal of
         International Economics 88, 422-435.
Bean, C., Broda, C., Ito, T. and Kroszner, R. (2015). Low for Long? Causes and
         Consequences of Persistently Low Interest Rates. London: CEPR Press.
Beaudry, P. (2005). Innis Lecture: Explorations in medium-run macroeconomics.
         Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'économique 38, 1136-
         1159.
Beaudry, P., Galizia, D. and Portier, F. (2014). Reconciling Hayek's and Keynes
         Views of Recessions. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
         Paper Series No. 20101.
Bernanke, B. (2015). Why are interest rates so low, part 2: Secular stagnation. In
         Ben Bernanke's Blog, Vol. 2015. Washington DC: Brookings Institution.
Blanchard, O. J., Cerutti, E. and Summers, L. H. (2015). Inflation and Activity –
         Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications. IMF Working
         Paper 15/230.
Broadberry, S. N., Campbell, B. M. S., Klein, A., Overton, M. and Leeuwen, B. v.
         (2015). British economic growth, 1270-1870. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Carter, S. B., Gartner, S. S., Haines, M. R., Olmstead, A. L., Sutch, R. and Wright, G.
         (2006). Historical Statistics of the United States Millennial Edition Online.
         New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chalmers, T. (1832). On political economy in connexion with the moral state and
         moral prospects of society. Glasgow: W. Collins.
Comin, D. and Gertler, M. (2006). Medium-Term Business Cycles. The American
         Economic Review 96, 523-551.
Corry, B. A. (1959). Malthus and Keynes--A Reconsideration. The Economic
         Journal 69, 717-724.
Cowen, T. (2011). The great stagnation: How America ate all the low-hanging fruit
         of modern history, got sick, and will (eventually) feel better: A Penguin
         eSpecial from Dutton. Penguin.
Crafts, N. (2015). The threat of secular stagnation in Europe: an historical
         perspective. Presented at the 43rd Annual Economics Conference of the
         Austrian National Bank, Vienna.



                                          32
Crafts, N. F. R., Toniolo, G. and Centre for Economic Policy Research (Great
        Britain) (1996). Economic growth in Europe since 1945. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
Dobbs, R., Lund, S., Roxburgh, C., Manyika, J., Kim, A., Schreiner, A., Boin, R.,
        Chopra, R., Jauch, S., Kim, H., McDonald, M. and Piotrowski, J. (2010).
        Farewell to cheap capital? The implications of long-term shifts in global
        investment and saving. McKinsey Global Institute.
Domar, E. D. (1946). Capital Expansion, Rate of Growth, and Employment.
        Econometrica 14, 137-147.
Eichengreen, B. (2015). Secular Stagnation: The Long View. American Economic
        Review 105, 66-70.
Eichengreen, B. and O'Rourke, K. H. (2010). What do the new data tell us? In
        VoxEU.
Eichengreen, B. J. (2007). The European economy since 1945 : coordinated
        capitalism and beyond. Princeton, N.J. ; Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Erumban, A. A. and de Vries, K. (2014). Projecting Global Economic Growth The
        Conference Board Global Economic Outlook 2015. Economics Program
        Working Paper #14 – 03.
Feinstein, C. H. (1972). National income, expenditure and output of the United
        Kingdom, 1855-1965. Cambridge: University Press.
Feinstein, C. H. (1998). Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard of
        Living in Britain during and after the Industrial Revolution. The Journal of
        Economic History 58, 625-658.
Fernald, J. G. (2014). A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor
        Productivity. FRBSF Working Paper 2012-19.
Fernald, J. G. and Jones, C. I. (2014). The Future of US Economic Growth. The
        American Economic Review 104, 44-49.
Field, A. J. (2011). A great leap forward : 1930s Depression and U.S. economic
        growth. New Haven ; London: Yale University Press.
Fogel, R. (2005). Reconsidering Expectations of Economic Growth After World
        War II from the Perspective of 2004. IMF Staff Papers 52, 6-14.
Ford, A. G. (1958). The Transfer of British Foreign Lending, 1870-1913. The
        Economic History Review 11, 302-308.
Gavin, M. (2015). Population dynamics and the (soon-to-be- disappearing) global
        ‘savings glut’. In Barclays Equity Gilt Study. Barclays.
Gelting, J. (1941). Nogle bemærkninger om finansieringen af offentlig
        virksomher. Nationaløkonomisk Tidsskrift 79, 293-299.
Goodhart, C., Pradhan, M. and Pardeshi, P. (2015). Could Demographics Reverse
        Three Multi-Decade Trends? Global Issues.
Gordon, R. J. (2010). Revisiting U. S. Productivity Growth over the Past Century
        with a View of the Future. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper Series No. 15834.
Gordon, R. J. (2012). Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation
        Confronts the Six Headwinds. National Bureau of Economic Research
        Working Paper Series No. 18315.
Gordon, R. J. (2014). The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement,
        Rebuttal, and Reflections. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper Series No. 19895.



                                        33
Gordon, R. J. and Krenn, R. (2010). The End of the Great Depression 1939-41:
        Policy Contributions and Fiscal Multipliers. National Bureau of Economic
        Research Working Paper Series No. 16380.
Guthrie, W. and Tarascio, V. J. (1992). Keynes on Economic Growth, Stagnation,
        and Structural Change: New Light on a 55-Year Controversy. History of
        Political Economy 24, 381-412.
Hansen, A. H. (1936). Mr. Keynes on Underemployment Equilibrium. Journal of
        Political Economy 44, 667-686.
Hansen, A. H. (1938). Full recovery or stagnation? London: Adam and Charles
        Black.
Hansen, A. H. (1941). Fiscal policy and business cycles. New York: Norton.
Hansen, A. H. (1951). Business Cycles and National Income. London: Allen and
        Unwin.
Hansen, A. H. (1953). A guide to Keynes. New York ; London: McGraw-Hill.
Harley, C. K. (1978). Western Settlement and the Price of Wheat, 1872–1913. The
        Journal of Economic History 38, 865-878.
Harrod, R. F. (1939a). An Essay in Dynamic Theory. The Economic Journal 49, 14-
        33.
Harrod, R. F. (1939b). Modern Population Trends. The Manchester School 10, 1-
        20.
Harvard University (1939). Graduate School of Public Administration. Official
        Register of Harvard University XXXVI, 291-321.
Harvard University (1940). President's report 1938-39. Official Register of
        Harvard University XXXVII, 5-39.
Hicks, J. R. (1936). Keynes' Theory of Employment. The Economic Journal 46,
        238-253.
Hobson, J. A. (1902). Imperialism : a study. London: James Nisbet.
IMF (2014). World economic outlook April 2014. Washington DC: International
        Monetary Fund.
Keynes, J. M. (1937). Some economic consequences of a declining population. The
        Eugenics Review 29, 13-17.
Keynes, J. M. (1973). The general theory of employment, interest and money.
        London: Macmillan for the Royal Economic Society.
Keynes, J. M. (1978a). Economic possibilities for our grandchildren (1930). In
        The collected writings of John Maynard Keynes. Volume lX : : Essays in
        persuasion(Ed, Royal Economic Society (Great Britain)). London:
        Macmillan Press, 321-332.
Keynes, J. M. (1978b). The great slump of 1930 (December 1930). In The
        collected writings of John Maynard Keynes. Volume lX : : Essays in
        persuasion(Ed, Royal Economic Society (Great Britain)). London:
        Macmillan Press, 126-134.
Keynes, J. M. and Moggridge, D. E. (1973). The General Theory and after. London:
        for the Royal Economic Society by Macmillan.
Knick Harley, C. (1980). Transportation, the world wheat trade, and the Kuznets
        Cycle, 1850–1913. Explorations in Economic History 17, 218-250.
Krusell, P. and Smith, A. A. J. (2015). Is Piketty’s “Second Law of Capitalism”
        Fundamental? Journal of Political Economy 123, 725-748.




                                      34
Lauderdale, J. M. (1804). An inquiry into the nature and origin of public wealth, :
         and into the means and causes of its increase. Edinburgh: Printed for Arch.
         Constable & Co., Edinburgh: and T.N. Longman & O. Rees, London.
Lauderdale, J. M. (1819). An inquiry into the nature and origin of public wealth :
         and into the means and causes of its increase. Edinburgh: Printed for
         Archibald Constable.
Malthus, T. R. (1836). Principles of political economy : considered with a view to
         their practical application. London: William Pickering.
Matthews, R. C. O. (1955). Capital stock adjustment theories of the trade cycle
         and the problem of policy. In Post-Keynesian economics(Ed, Kurihara, K.
         K.). London: Allen and Unwin, 170-191.
Mehrling, P. (1997). The money interest and the public interest : American
         monetary thought, 1920-1970. Cambridge, Mass. ; London: Harvard
         University Press.
Meissner, C. M. (2013). Capital Flows, Credit Booms, and Financial Crises in the
         Classical Gold Standard Era. National Bureau of Economic Research
         Working Paper Series No. 18814.
Milesi-Ferretti, G. M., Strobbe, F. and Tamirisa, N. (2010). Bilateral Financial
         Linkages and Global Imbalances: a View on The Eve of the Financial Crisis.
         IMF Working Paper WP/10/257.
Mill, J. S. (1849). Principles of political economy : with some of their applications to
         social philosophy. London: J.W. Parker.
Mitchell, B. R. (1988). British historical statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.
Mokyr, J., Vickers, C. and Ziebarth, N. L. (2015). The History of Technological
         Anxiety and the Future of Economic Growth: Is This Time Different? The
         Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 31-50.
Müller, U. K. and Watson, M. W. (2015). Low-Frequency Econometrics. National
         Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 21564.
Musgrave, R. A. (1976). Caring for the Real Problems. The Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 90, 1-7.
O'Brien, D. P. (1975). The classical economists. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Palgrave Macmillan (Ed.) (2013). International Historical Statistics. Basingstoke:
         Palgrave Macmillan.
Piketty, T. (2013). Le capital au XXIe siècle. Paris: Seuil.
Piketty, T. and Zucman, G. (2014). Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich
         Countries 1700–2010. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1255-
         1310.
Pratt, G. A. (2015). Is a Cambrian Explosion Coming for Robotics? The Journal of
         Economic Perspectives 29, 51-60.
Rey, H. (2015). Dilemma not Trilemma: The global Financial Cycle and Monetary
         Policy Independence. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
         Paper Series No. 21162.
Ricardo, D. (1973). The principles of political economy and taxation. London:
         Dent.
Salant, W. S. (1976). Alvin Hansen and the Fiscal Policy Seminar. The Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 90, 14-23.




                                          35
Samuelson, P. A. (1939). Interactions between the Multiplier Analysis and the
        Principle of Acceleration. The Review of Economics and Statistics 21, 75-
        78.
Samuelson, P. A. (1976). Alvin Hansen as a Creative Economic Theorist. The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 90, 24-31.
Schuker, S. A. (1994). Ambivalent Exile: Heinrich Bruning and America's Good
        War. In Zerrissene Zwischenkriegszeit: Wirtschaftshistorische Beiträge(Eds,
        Buchheim, C., Hutter, M. and James, H.). Baden-Baden: Nomos
        Verlagsgesellschaft, Knut Borchardt zum 65. Geburtstag, 329-356.
Smith, A., Wakefield, E. G., Garnier, G. and Stewart, D. (1835). An inquiry into the
        nature and causes of the wealth of nations. London: Charles Knight and Co.
Solow, R. M. (1956). A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 70, 65-94.
Solow, R. M. (1987). Growth theory and after Nobel Prize Lecture 1987.
Solow, R. M. (2000). Toward a Macroeconomics of the Medium Run. The Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 14, 151-158.
Summers, L. (2013). Speech at IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in
        Honor of Stanley Fischer In Larry Summers, Vol. 2015.
Thane, P. M. (1990). The debate on the declining birth-rate in Britain: the
        ‘menace’ of an ageing population, 1920s–1950s. Continuity and Change 5,
        283-305.
Thomas, R., Hills, S. and Dimsdale, N. (2010). The UK recession in context—what
        do three centuries of data tell us? Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 40,
        277-291.
Tobin, J. (1976). Hansen and Public Policy. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 90,
        32-37.
Torrens, R. (1836). Colonization of South Australia. London: Longman, Rees,
        Orme, Brown, Green, and Longman.
Toye, J. (2000). Keynes on population. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wakefield, E. G. (1833). England and America : A comparison of the social and
        political state of both nations. London: Richard Bentley.
Winch, D. (1965). Classical political economy and colonies. London: G. Bell for
        London School of Economics and Political Science.
Wolf, M. (2015). Why worries about China make sense. In The Financial Times.
        London.
World Bank (2013). Capital for the Future: Saving and Investment in an
        Interdependent World. Washington DC: International Bank for
        Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank.
Wrigley, E. A. (2010). Energy and the English Industrial Revolution. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
Yglesias, M. (2015). Something economists thought was impossible is happening
        in Europe. In http://www.vox.com, Vol. 2015.




                                        36
