                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE GLOBALIZATION OF ANGEL INVESTMENTS:
                          EVIDENCE ACROSS COUNTRIES

                                          Josh Lerner
                                       Antoinette Schoar
                                      Stanislav Sokolinski
                                         Karen Wilson

                                      Working Paper 21808
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21808


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2015




We thank numerous angel groups for their willingness to share data and their patience in
answering our many queries. Excellent research assistance was provided by Secil Altintas, Jamie
Beaton, Elaine Dai, Kenneth Fu, Ida Hempel, Zaahid Khan, Michelle Lin, and Ahmed Zaeem,
and the research team at Baker Library led by Sarah Eriksen. Seminar participants at the Angel
Capital Association, Boston University, London Business School, the National Bureau of
Economic Research, and the University of Texas, and especially Shai Bernstein, Thomas
Hellmann, Arthur Korteweg, and Ramana Nanda provided helpful comments. We thank the
Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation
for financial support. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, Stanislav Sokolinski, and Karen Wilson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Globalization of Angel Investments: Evidence across Countries
Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, Stanislav Sokolinski, and Karen Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 21808
December 2015, Revised March 2016
JEL No. G24,O31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines investments made by 13 angel groups across 21 countries. We compare
applicants just above and below the funding cutoff and find that these angel investors have a
positive impact on the growth, performance, and survival of firms as well as their follow-on
fundraising. The positive impact of angel financing is independent of the level of venture activity
and entrepreneur-friendliness in the country. However, we find that the development stage and
maturity of startups that apply for angel funding (and those that are ultimately funded) is
inversely correlated with the entrepreneurship-friendliness of the country, which may reflect self-
censoring by very early-stage firms that do not expect to receive funding in these environments.


Josh Lerner                                      Stanislav Sokolinski
Harvard Business School                          Department of Economics
Rock Center 214                                  Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163                                 1805 Cambridge St
and NBER                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
jlerner@hbs.edu                                  sokolinski@fas.harvard.edu

Antoinette Schoar                                Karen Wilson
MIT Sloan School of Management                   Bruegel
100 Main Street, E62-638                         and Organisation for Economic Cooperation
Cambridge, MA 02142                              and Development
and NBER                                         karen.wilson@bruegel.org
aschoar@mit.edu
    1. Introduction

       The last decade has seen a rapid expansion and deepening of the types of

vehicles that fund startup firms in the U.S. and worldwide. In particular, we have seen

a growing role of angel groups and other more “individualistic” funding options for

startups, such as super angels or crowdsourcing platforms. This trend has not only

been prevalent in the U.S. but also in many other nations (OECD, 2011; Wilson, 2105;

OECD, 2016). One could argue that the funding of new ventures by wealthy

individuals is one of the oldest forms of outside investment that exists, especially

where capital markets and financial institutions are less developed. In this paper,

however, we focus on the organized angel market as a growing form of startup

investing that is less formal than the VC market but more professional than receiving

funding from friends and family.



       The precise measurement of the total size of the angel investment market is

difficult to ascertain due to the fact that most angel investments are made on an

individual basis and thus typically are not subject to regulatory disclosure

requirements. But estimates suggest that the total size of angel investment has long

surpassed venture capital investment in the U.S. and increasingly in some other

countries as well. For instance, survey estimates suggest the projected size of the total

angel market in the U.S. grew from $17.6B in 2009 to $24.1B in 2014.2 The estimated



2 These estimates are by Jeffery Sohl and the University of New Hampshire’s Center
for Venture Research:
http://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/paulcollege.unh.edu/files/2009_Analysis_Report.
pdf and
                                           2
capital deployed by angel groups in Europe has almost doubled over the past five

years, and in Canada, it almost tripled.3 Despite its rapid growth, we know very little

about the role that angels play internationally and the type of firms in which they

invest.



          The appeal of angel investors is that they share many of the positive features

of venture capitalists. They fund early-stage entrepreneurs, undertake intensive due

diligence of potential investments, and serve as mentors and (sometimes) outside

directors for the entrepreneurs (Kaplan and Stromberg, 2003; Wong, Bhatia, and

Freeman, 2009). But because angels invest their own money, they should be less

prone to agency problems that have been documented for VC funds: for instance, fee-

based compensation structures can lead to excessive fundraising (Metrick and

Yasuda, 2010; Chung, et al., 2012) or sub-optimal investment and exit decisions

(Gompers, 1996). The consequences of these agency problems may be periods of

overfunding in certain sectors (Gompers and Lerner, 1999). Active involvement in the

investments and close social ties between angels and entrepreneurs may help to

overcome the lack of minority shareholder and legal protections that are important

for the development of more decentralized capital markets (see, e.g., La Porta et al.,

1998, 2002). Reflecting these patterns, governments are increasingly seeking to

encourage angel investment (Wilson, 2015). The hope is to encourage alternative



https://paulcollege.unh.edu/sites/paulcollege.unh.edu/files/webform/2014%20An
alysis%20Report.pdf.
3 According to data presented in reports from EBAN in Europe and NACO in Canada,

which is collected from angel groups via surveys.
                                            3
mechanisms for funding new ventures and to improve the ecosystem for

entrepreneurs.



       Relying on an idiosyncratic and decentralized angel investment process,

however, might lead to challenges of its own. Since angels are typically not

professional investors, there is a worry that entrepreneurs will be exposed to

idiosyncratic funding risk, either because angels themselves might be subject to

idiosyncratic liquidity shocks or because they might change their opinions more

frequently about what projects to fund. Additionally, angels might not be prepared to

invest in truly disruptive or high-growth projects, since they are usually more risk

averse than institutional investors due to limited diversification. They also might not

have the professional expertise to invest in more complex technologies. Finally, there

is a concern that in countries lacking the culture or infrastructure to support startup

investments, angels only waste their time and money with no real impact.



       This paper seeks to understand the differences in the nature and

consequences of angel investments across a variety of geographies that differ in the

development in their venture capital markets and other forms of risk capital. We first

ask whether angel investors improve the outcomes and performance of the startups

in which they invest. Furthermore, we ask whether and how the types of firms that

seek angel funding vary with the overall entrepreneurial ecosystem in a country. For

example, does the pool of startups that apply for angel funding differ in their risk




                                          4
profile, development stage or industry concentration in places where the

entrepreneurial ecosystem is less friendly?



       For that purpose, we examine the records of 13 angel investment groups based

in 12 nations and with applicants for financing transactions from 21 nations,

examining both the applicants that were considered and rejected and those that were

funded. To differentiate the value added of angel groups from their ability to select

good investments, we employ the type of regression discontinuity analysis we used

in our earlier analysis of U.S. angel groups (Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar, 2014). We use

discontinuities in the funding likelihood of startups that are based on cumulative level

of interest around the deal on the part of the angel groups. This allows us to examine

not only whether angel investors add value to the companies in which they invest in

general, but also how their impact and the types of transactions undertaken varies

with the development of the venture markets in these nations.



       Our focus on angel groups has advantages and disadvantages. Many papers in

the entrepreneurial finance literature rely on datasets constructed of matched firms

based on relatively few observables across a diverse set of investors. In our sample,

we only include firms that sought financing from angels and that received similar

evaluations from the groups, which makes the firms more comparable. But since

these groups were required to have a track record and systemized record keeping to

be included in our study, they may be more successful and impactful than the average

angel. As a result we might be estimating an upper bound of the impact.


                                           5
       Our key findings from the analysis are twofold. First, angel investors have a

positive impact on the growth of firms they fund, both in terms of their performance

and survival. Startups funded by angel investors are 14% to 23% more likely to

survive for the next 1.5 to 3 years and grow their employment by 40% relative to non-

angel funded startups. Angel funding affects the subsequent likelihood of a successful

exit, raising it by 10% to 17%. Having angel funding also seems to matter significantly

for the ability of a firm to obtain follow-on financing. This last result differs from the

earlier findings in Kerr et al. (2013), which showed that angel investments in the U.S

boost startups’ survival and performance, but do not impact their likelihood of future

fundraising. This result suggests that angel groups outside the U.S. serve as an

important accreditation or gateway for follow-on funding. Risk capital in the U.S. may

be more abundant, and therefore startups have many different avenues of obtaining

their initial seed funding, including venture capitalists. As a result, U.S. firms do not

necessarily have to raise an angel round before getting funding from larger players.4



       Second, we find that the selection of firms that apply for angel funding is

different across countries. In countries that have a less conducive entrepreneurial


4 Using a sample of Canadian firms, Hellmann, Schure and Vo (2015) find that prior
angel financing reduces probability of obtaining subsequent venture capital
financing. However, their results are driven mostly by inexperienced angels and their
analysis is based on a country with a relatively developed risk-capital market. By way
of contrast, we collect data from a variety of countries and, from some of the most
active angel groups within a particular country. Therefore, the differences in results
might arise from the fact that our angel groups are quite sophisticated and
experienced investors in their respective countries. See also Hellmann and Thiele
(2014).
                                            6
environment, companies seeking angel funding appear to be more established and

are usually already revenue generating, compared to applicants in more

entrepreneurship-friendly countries. Yet despite their apparent greater maturity, the

firms in these markets seek smaller amounts of funding. We proxy for the

entrepreneur-friendliness of a country with (1) the depth of the VC market as a

fraction of GDP and (2) the number of regulatory procedures while incorporating a

firm, taken from Djankov, et al. (2002). Given that these are countries with a less

developed ecosystem for risk capital, it is difficult to believe that entrepreneurs in

these countries have many other sources of capital. Instead, the results suggest that

firms seem to “self-censor” when they apply to angel groups in the less venture-

friendly markets, reflecting the fact that the angel investors themselves are more risk

averse or less experienced in assessing very early-stage investments. So despite being

at a mature stage of their development, these firms receive less funding from the

angels, which underscores the less favorable entrepreneurial investment climate in

these countries.5



       The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we describe the construction

of the data set and the key institutions at work. In Section 3, we preview the sample

and the regression discontinuity design that we employ. Section 4 presents the results




5We cannot rule out that in countries with less developed entrepreneurship markets
the demand for capital is more constrained as well, for example, if there are more
barriers to entry on the product market side. If startups believe that their growth
opportunities or the speed at which they can expand is limited, they might demand
smaller amounts of capital.
                                          7
regarding the impact of angel investment; Section 5 presents results relating to the

selection of firms into angel financing. The final section concludes the paper.



   2. Construction of the Data Set

       This section describes the process by which we constructed the dataset. We

also provide a brief overview on the nature of angel investment groups worldwide.

To build the dataset, we began by contacting angel groups with whom we had

personal connections. These included cases where we had previous interactions with

groups in previous OECD studies, those in which former students played prominent

roles, and alumni contacts via Harvard and MIT. In addition, we reached out to a

number of associations and informal consortia of angels, such as the Angel Capital

Association, to encourage participation in the study.



       In each case, we required that the participating angel groups:

      Have been active investors for at least two years.

      Have (or be able to compile) records both on applicants that were funded and

       those that were considered and rejected.

      Have records about the degree of angel interest in potential transactions, or in

       one case, as discussed below, be able to reconstruct the level of such interest.

These requirements eliminated many would-be participants from our effort.



       In all, we obtained data from 13 groups. In most cases, we signed a data-

sharing agreement, which confirmed that we would ensure the anonymity of the

                                           8
groups and the portfolio companies and which limited our ability to redistribute the

data but did not restrict our ability to undertake academic research using the data in

an unfettered manner. The funds were based in Argentina, Australia, Belgium,

Canada, China, Germany, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand, Switzerland, the United

Kingdom, and the United States.



       Angel groups included in the study range from smaller groups with a few

members to larger groups with 100 or more members. The membership models

differ, from groups that are more open to those that are more selective. Some groups

encourage new angels to join and provide training for these individuals to help them

develop their skills and confidence in angel investing. Other groups are invitation only

and have specific requirements regarding the background, experience, and area of

expertise of the angel investors.



       The angel groups differ in terms of how they originated. Angel investors

founded some groups, but a number were created by business people and, in some

cases, are linked with a university or business school. In addition, some of the angel

groups were created with support from national or regional governments.



       Most of the angel groups in the study invest in companies in technology-

related sectors, including, in many cases, life sciences and clean tech. Some also invest

in a much broader set of sectors including arts and entertainment, consumer goods,

education, and food and beverage. The angel groups in the study also vary in their


                                           9
geographic focus. The majority of the angel groups invest primarily in companies in

the local or nearby communities. Some invest more broadly across the country or, in

some cases, across borders.



       The structure and approach of the angel groups vary, as do their selection

processes. Professional staff run many of the groups, but some are run by volunteer

angels. However, in all cases, the angel groups have pitching events in which selected

entrepreneurial teams are invited to present their company, after which a decision is

made, either as a group or by angels individually, whether to consider making an

investment. As described in the next section, two of the groups do not have a voting

process, but other proxies were used to determine angel interest.



3.2. Sample Selection

       The angel groups participating in the study are from a range of countries in

Europe, Asia Pacific, Latin America, and North America, each with very different

funding landscapes. It is important to acknowledge that within each country, our

selection methodology and criteria are likely to lead to us getting data from the more

organized and prominent angel groups. This fact probably means that we are

estimating the upper bound of the impact that angels can have in a country. But across

countries, the selection procedure was similar, so it is unlikely that we have identified

high-caliber angel groups in some markets and lower-tier ones in others.




                                           10
       While the U.S. remains dominant in terms of the volume of venture capital and

angel investment, angel investing, both individually as well as through groups, has

grown in many other countries around the world (OECD, 2011). There are significant

differences in the financial and regulatory environment across the countries covered

in the study. For instance, the level of development of public markets and the formal

venture capital sector differs. Similarly, substantial differences exist in the

administrative burdens not only of starting but also growing firms. There are also

differences in regulation related to investment, which impact the incentives for

institutional and individual investors to provide funding for startups. These include

investment rules, barriers to cross-border investment, and securities legislation

(Wilson and Silva, 2013).



       It is unclear how these differences will affect the level of angel investment. If

venture capital and angel investments are complements, the nations where venture

activity is better developed could also be the places where angel investment is more

effective. This complementarity could be driven by the fact that angel groups, after

undertaking the initial financing, “hand off” their transactions to venture groups for

subsequent financing: without a healthy venture sector, the companies could

languish. If, on the other hand, venture capital and angel investments are

substitutes—for instance, because both groups of investors are competing for the

same transaction—a well-developed venture market could “crowd out” angel

investment or lead to angels funding less promising firms. Similarly, the presence of

high regulatory barriers to entrepreneurship could make angel investments either


                                          11
more or less effective. We will examine the impact of these differences in the analyses

below.



         One aspect, which we will not examine, is the numerous efforts by policy

makers to facilitate the development of angel investments. In some countries, policy

makers have launched co-investment funds to address a perceived seed/early-stage

equity financing gap and to help develop and professionalize the angel investment

market. Other countries have put various tax incentives in place to encourage angel

investments, mostly at the national level but sometimes at the state or provincial

level. Other initiatives include investor training programs, as well as the direct

funding of incubators, accelerators, and other matchmaking services. Most of these

efforts are of quite recent vintage but will present opportunities for study in later

years.



   3. Data Description and Regression Discontinuity Design

         3.1 Data Description

         Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the final sample of 1,682 deals that

resulted from our data collection effort: a total of 295 funded and 1,287 non-funded

companies. Because our sample consists of small, privately held firms, and the

incomplete record keeping by the angel groups, determining the outcomes of these

investments was challenging. We proceeded in the following manner:




                                            12
1. Angel group information: The angel groups in many cases tracked key

   information about the firms that they had funded. Coverage of firms that the

   angel groups had not funded, however, was much poorer.

2. Internet searches. We examined the website URLs that were provided to the

   angel groups at the time the companies sought financing. In addition, we

   sought to identify such company websites (or other websites with relevant

   information) using Google, Baidu, and LinkedIn searches, employing the

   company and founder names as search elements. Finally, we used the domains

   suggested by the email addresses of the founders to identify relevant websites.

   These sites yielded information about, among other information, the founders,

   firm status, employment, and investors. When we encountered foreign-

   language sites, we used students or Harvard Business School staff researchers

   with the requisite language skills to examine the websites in hopes of gleaning

   relevant information.

3. Corporate and financing databases. We turned to the two primary corporate

   databases with broad coverage of international entrepreneurial firms,

   CapitalIQ and Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis database. These entries yielded

   information about the founders, firm addresses, employees, number of and

   total amount raised in investment rounds, and firm outcomes. We also

   examined the specific databases of initial public offerings and acquisitions

   compiled by Thomson Reuters. All financing sums were in (or were converted

   into using contemporaneous exchange rates) U.S. dollars.




                                     13
   4. Venture capital-specific databases. We also examined databases that cover

       venture capital financings. These were Thomson Reuters’ VentureXpert,

       CrunchBase, and the Emerging Markets Private Equity Association database.

       These contained data on financings raised, founders, and subsequent changes

       in firm status.

   5. News stories. We searched by company name for relevant news stories in the

       Factiva database. This provided information about the company status, exit

       events, and the founders.

   6. Patents. We collected information about U.S. patent awards through the U.S.

       Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) website, as well as the Thomson

       Innovations database. While the latter database has a large amount of

       information about patent filings worldwide, we focused solely on U.S. awards

       to ensure consistency.

   7. Direct contacts: We contacted the companies directly via email and cellular

       phone (contact information was typically gathered by the angel groups as part

       of the application process). To undertake the email and phone contacts, we

       employed students with the necessary language skills.



       Due to the challenges in gathering data, we focus on a relatively modest set of

outcomes, not seeking to gather information that would be likely to be perceived as

too proprietary or complex to gather in a short call (e.g., balance sheet and income

statement information, or valuation data). Instead, we focus on the following




                                         14
measures (all data were collected over the period between February and October

2014 and were for the time of our contact with the firm, unless otherwise noted):

      Survival of the firm.

      Survival of the firm for at least 18 months after the original application to the

       angel group (to control for the fact that these firms’ initial financing occurred

       at various points in time, and hence they had different times to survive until

       2014).

      A successful exit, defined following the earlier literature (e.g., Hochberg,

       Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2007) as an initial public offering or an acquisition. While

       ideally we would distinguish between acquisitions at attractive and

       unattractive valuations, given data limitations, this was not feasible.

      Employment at the firm.

      The number of patents awarded to the firm by the USPTO, both within 18

       months of the original application to the angel group and at the time of the

       final observation.

      Whether any of the founders were still with the company, and whether any of

       the founders were still CEO of the firm.

      Whether the firm received any subsequent financing and any venture capital

       financing specifically.

      The total amount of subsequent financing raised.



       Table 1 shows that the average applicant had ten employees at the application

stage, with three of them representing the firm’s management team. It was also

                                          15
seeking to raise US$1.2 million from the angel group. These numbers are somewhat

smaller relative to what Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2014) reported when relying solely

on the U.S. data. This information suggests that entrepreneurial firms outside of the

U.S are smaller at the application stage. The distribution of the venture’s stage of

development is heavily skewed towards firms that are already marketing their

products and revenue-generating firms. These results imply that firms apply for

angel financing when they have an established business concept and already have

made progress in the development of their products or services. In fact, 40% of

ventures applying for funding already generated some revenue.



       We also observe substantial differences between funded and non-funded

deals. In particular, funded ventures tend to be significantly larger and are more likely

to be revenue generating at the time of the application. In addition, we can observe

that the industry distributions of funded and non-funded deals are also very different,

with greater representation among the funded of biomedical and electronics firms

and less of Internet and e-commerce concerns. These results could be driven by cross-

country composition of our sample if angels in different countries face different sets

of deals. We will turn to a composition analysis later in the paper.



       3.2 Identifying discontinuities

       The key ingredient of our identification strategy is constructing a measure of

angel interest that reflects the fact that angel groups provide funding with a certain

degree of randomness.      Following Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2014), we obtain


                                           16
information on voting patterns of each of the angel groups to construct such a

variable. For each group, we collect information on the number of angels that

expressed interest in a particular deal, as well as on the total number of angels that

were able to evaluate that deal. Having this information, we proceed to a construction

of our group-specific angel interest measure.



       We observe two key voting patterns across our sample groups. For the first

type of groups, the number of angels that participate in deal evaluation remains

relatively constant. In these cases, we use a number of angels that were interested in

a deal as our measure of angel interest. For the second type of groups, the total

number of angels varies across deals. Usually, we observe growth in a total number

of members because the group is expanding over time. In these cases, the absolute

number of interested angels is not very informative about the overall level of interest.

Therefore, for these deals, we calculate a share of angels that expressed interest and

use this number of our measure of angel interest.



       In two cases, the information on voting patterns was not available. In the first

case, angels use a scoring system on a scale of 0-5 when evaluating potential deals.

For this group, we use an average score that a venture received as a measure of angel

interest. In the second case, we asked the group’s founder to evaluate the level of

interest for a particular deal on a scale of 0-5. We realize that this measure could be

biased because it is subjective and is reported after the funding decision was made.




                                          17
The results were robust to the exclusion of this group’s transactions from the analysis

below.



         Having defined a group level measure of interest, we proceed to the

identification of discontinuities in the probability of being funded as a function of

angel interest. As our sample groups do not have explicit funding cutoffs, we must

identify breaks using observed voting behavior. We follow the procedure described

in Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2014). For each group, we identify a “funding

discontinuity”: the critical level of interest that translates into a substantial increase

in the funding probability. Once such a level of interest is determined, we generate a

narrow sample of ventures that are either just above or just below the funding

discontinuity.



         Figure 1 illustrates the process of identifying the funding discontinuity and the

construction of the border sample for one of the groups that participated in the study.

First, we plot the probability of being funded by an angel group together with a

measure of angel interest (the share of angels interested in this particular case). The

likelihood of obtaining funding generally increases with angel interest, as expected.

Second, we observe that the biggest increase in funding probability occurs around an

interest level of 30%. In particular, when the level of interest crosses 30%, the

funding probability increases dramatically: from 2% to 15%.             We identify this

threshold as the funding discontinuity and the firms that had similar levels of interest

(20%-40%) as a border sample. We refer to deals that obtained interest levels of


                                            18
20%-30% as “below the border” deals and to the deals that obtained interest levels

of 30%-40% as “above the border” deals. A similar process is repeated for every

group that participated in our study.



       Table 2 provides an overview of the construction of the border sample. For

each group, it presents the indication of angel interest used to determine the

discontinuity, the range in which the border group fell, the cutoff employed, and the

sample size.



       In each case, we also present the difference in the probability of funding for

groups in the border sample above and below and discontinuity. We present these

differences on an absolute and relative basis. For instance, for group 1, the mean

probability of being funded if in the border sample and below the cutoff is 2%, while

if in the sample and above the cutoff it is 15%, for an absolute difference of 13% and

a relative difference of 750%. We explore below the robustness of the analysis to

alternative definitions of the border sample.



       Our central identifying assumption is that characteristics of ventures are

similar around the funding discontinuity. In other words, certain ventures fell above

the funding discontinuity only because they randomly obtained a slightly higher level

of interest. It is reasonable to assume that there is enough heterogeneity in angels’

preferences and their subjective evaluations such that their aggregated level of

interest exhibits some degree of randomness and does not perfectly match with


                                         19
underlying venture’s quality. In addition, we verify empirically below that above the

border and below the border ventures do not differ in their observed characteristics.



         3.3 Description of “threshold deals”

         Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics for our “border” sample of 578 deals.

We have 343 ventures below the border discontinuity and 235 ventures above the

border. The difference in number reflects the fact that the funding discontinuities are

group-specific and the within-group distribution of ventures around the border is not

always even. We also observe that the venture characteristics in the border sample

are similar to those of the entire sample, as presented in Table 1.



         Table 3 is also informative about incomplete data in our border sample. As it

shows, we were not able to obtain a complete set of characteristics for every single

venture: this is especially true for the amount of financing that a venture was seeking.

We observe that distribution of “gaps” is not different around the funding

discontinuity. In fact, we have slightly more information about the “below the cutoff”

ventures, which is consistent with having more observations in total for this set of

firms.



         We perform two sets of analysis to verify comparability of the two border

groups. First, we look into the simple difference in means between the groups. The

results show that ventures above the border discontinuity have slightly larger




                                            20
management teams and exhibit a different distribution of the stage of firm

development.



       These differences could arise, however, from the fact that the border sample

combines a number of angel groups that face quite different sets of deals. To

overcome this issue, we demeaned venture’s characteristics one by one using its

group-level means and rerun our balance tests. The results indicate that none of the

demeaned differences are statistically significant. Therefore, we conclude that the

results from the first test were driven by differences across angel groups. After

accounting for these differences, the border firms are very comparable in terms of

firm size, as well as industry and stage compositions.6



       A final concern is that we might have much more information about the

outcomes of transactions above the discontinuity than those below it. In an

unreported analysis, we compare the availability of outcome data for the 578 firms in

the border sample. We have data on eleven different outcomes (e.g., number of

patents, whether the firm was acquired): seven outcomes have full coverage and four

outcomes have partial coverage. For the cases with partial outcome data, the coverage



6 In an unreported analysis, we undertook "enhanced demeaning". Instead of running
demeaned t-tests, we ran regressions of firm's characteristics on "above the cutoff"
dummy and fixed effects. The coefficient on the "above the cutoff" dummy was never
significant, which means that after controlling for fixed effects, the status relative to
the cutoff was not correlated with firm's characteristics. This result implies that the
firms above the cutoff and below the cutoff have similar characteristics, as we argue
above.

                                           21
is nearly identical for the groups above and below the discontinuity. The one

exception is employment, where the coverage is substantially higher for the above

the cutoff firms (66%) than those below (45%). Therefore, it is unlikely that our key

results are driven by the differences in the availability of information about the

outcomes across firms.



   4. Results of Regression Discontinuity Analysis

       Having established the presence of a discontinuity, we now go further towards

exploring the relationship between angel funding and firm outcomes by using a

regression discontinuity approach (Lee and Lemieux, 2010). As we argued in Section

3, there exists a discrete jump in the probability of venture funding as interest

accumulates around a deal.



       We first compare the outcomes of firms in the bands above and below the

discontinuities. As shown in Section 3, these firms look similar in terms of their

characteristics prior to approaching the angel group. But the outcomes, as we will see

below, are quite different.



       Table 4 summarizes the key findings. The firms above the discontinuity are

significantly more likely to survive in the short and longer run, as well as to undergo

a successful exit. For instance, the probability of a successful exit is four times greater

(25% vs. 6%). These firms are also significantly more likely to raise subsequent

financing.


                                            22
       Comparing the results to those found in Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2014), there

is a similar pattern in that firms that are above the discontinuity are more likely to

survive, as well as (more weakly) to undergo a successful exit. The U.S. firms studied

in the earlier paper that were above the angel financing discontinuity were more

likely to patent, an effect not seen here, perhaps reflecting the relative ineffectualness

of formal intellectual property protection in many of these markets or the barriers to

small, non-U.S. firms in seeking U.S. protection. Finally, the U.S. firms did not display

a significantly higher probability of raising additional financing, unlike these firms.

This may reflect the relative immaturity of many of the markets in this study, where

accessing early-stage financing could be more of a struggle.



       Another important way to look at the division of outcomes is to examine how

these vary by nationality of the firm. Again, we focus on firms around the funding

discontinuity. We examine two partitions: whether the angel group (not the applicant

firm)7 is located in a nation with above or below the median level in terms of venture

capital activity (computed as venture capital investment as a fraction of GDP, as of

2010, compiled from various national and regional venture and private equity




7We decided to focus on 12 countries the groups come from and not the 21 countries
that firms comes from because we find that most of the investment is local, i.e.,
American groups invest primarily in American firms, etc. There are a very small
number of foreign investments by these groups, driven by a few organizations in
small nations. There is consequently not enough variation to analyze both the firm's
country and the angel group's country simultaneously. When we repeat the analysis
using firm's country instead, the analysis does not yield any different results.
                                           23
associations), and in the barriers to entrepreneurial activity, measured by the

number of steps required to start a business, as reported by Djankov et al. (2002).



       It is worth highlighting that many of the measures of the entrepreneurial

environment across nations are highly correlated. For instance, across the 12 nations

in which angel groups are located, the correlation between one of the measures we

use, the number of steps to form a business, is strongly negative with such metrics as

the Heritage Foundation index of property rights in 2004 (-0.77), GDP per capita in

2010, as reported by the World Bank (-0.71), and the creditor rights index in Djankov,

McLiesh, and Shleifer (2007) (-0.43), and positively correlated with the estimated

cost of starting a business from World Bank’s 2010 Doing Business report (0.80).

Similarly, there is a strong negative correlation between two measures that we use

here (-0.47).



       We picked up these variables because we see these as proxies for the overall

entrepreneurship-friendliness of the country. We should not be seen as arguing that

these analyses "identify" a specific channel. When we repeat these analyses using the

alternative measures—e.g., GDP per capita, the creditor rights measure, or the index

of property rights—we get similar results. The correlations across the various

country-level variables (with each country as an observation) are reported in

Appendix Table I. All variables are defined in Appendix Table II.




                                         24
       We see in Table 5 that success does vary with the national environment. In

nations with above the median level of venture capital activity, firms are more likely

to have a successful exit, to experience growth in employment and patenting, and to

raise additional financing. In countries that are more entrepreneur-friendly (i.e.,

those requiring fewer steps to start a business), firms are more likely to survive, to

patent more, and to raise additional financing. Interestingly, in these nations,

founders are less likely to remain with the firm, which may reflect greater pressures

from outside financiers to professionalize these firms’ managements (Hellmann and

Puri, 2002).8



       Having established the presence of these differences in univariate

comparisons, we now turn to regression discontinuity analyses. Table 6 documents

the probability that a firm raises angel financing, as a function of its position relative

to the funding discontinuity. Thus, the analysis formally tests whether there is a

significant discontinuity in funding around the thresholds for the ventures

considered by these groups. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that

equals one if the firm received funding and zero otherwise. The primary explanatory

variable is an indicator variable for the venture being above or below the

discontinuity.




8In later tables, we include controls for angel groups and industry, among other
considerations, to control for unobserved differences.
                                           25
       Column 1 presents a regression with just a constant, while successive columns

control for angel group fixed effects, year fixed effects, and industry fixed effects, as

well as other observed characteristics of the ventures at the time of the application

date, such as the stage of development, employment, management team size, amount

of financing sought, and number for patents awarded by USPTO. As in Tables 3 and

4, we have 578 deals that are distributed above and below the discontinuity. (When

we employ the venture-specific variables, the sample size drops considerably to 307.)



       We find that there is a statistically and economically significant relationship

between funding likelihood and being above the funding threshold: a firm’s presence

above the border increases the funding likelihood by between 18% and 30%. Clearly,

the border line designation is not a perfect rule—and this fuzziness will limit below

how strongly we can interpret the regression discontinuity—but it does signify a very

strong shift in funding probability among ventures that are ex ante comparable, as

shown in Tables 2 and 3.



       Tables 7 and 8 then present the regression analyses of the impact of angel

financing on firm outcomes. Again, we use in each case the sample of firms near the

cutoff, and we run specifications using the entire (or almost the entire) sample (when

employing angel group, year, and industry fixed effects) and the smaller 307-firm

sub-sample (when using the venture-level controls). We examine a subset of the

outcomes considered in Tables 3 and 4.




                                           26
       In Table 7, we use whether the firm received angel financing as the key

independent variable; in Table 8, we use whether the firm was above the funding

discontinuity. The results are quite similar across the two analyses: in each case, the

angel-funded (or more likely to be funded) ventures are more likely to survive, to

have a successful exit, and to raise subsequent financing, as well as to hire additional

employees.



       The results are somewhat more consistently statistically significant when the

regression discontinuity approach is employed (that is, in Table 8). For example, in

the first specification of Table 8, Panel A, moving from below to above the cutoff

increases the probability of venture's survival in the years after the application for

financing by 18%, relative to a mean of 73%. In the fifth regression, moving from

below to above the cutoff increases the probability of IPO or acquisition by 16%,

relative to a mean of 15%. In the seventh and eighth regressions, moving from below

to above the cutoff increases the number of employees by approximately 40%. In the

fifth regression in Panel B, moving from below to above the cutoff increases the

probability of raising additional financing by 16%, relative to a mean of 29%.



       As discussed above, one concern is that the results are an artifact of the

particular border sample chosen. In an unreported set of regressions, we repeat the

analysis in Table 8, now using more narrow ranges than those denoted in Table 2: for

each group, we look at a border sample that is one-half the size of the reported

analysis. For instance, for Group 1, we narrow the border sample to ventures with a


                                          27
level of interest between 25% (instead of 20%) and 35% (instead of 40%). When we

use this smaller sample (for instance, the unreported analog of the first regression in

Table 8 has 226 observations rather than 568 observations in the reported analysis),

significance levels fall somewhat but the results are qualitatively similar.



       We finally consider how these outcomes vary with the national environment:

that is, whether the impact of angel investment is different in settings that are more

entrepreneur-friendly or where venture activity is more prevalent. To examine this

question, we repeat the analyses in Table 8, adding as independent variables one of

the two measures of the national environment we use above and an interaction

between this measure and the dummy variable indicating whether the firm was

above the funding discontinuity.



       The results, reported in Table 9, are striking. As in Table 8, the increased

likelihood of angel financing has a strongly positive impact on outcomes. A more

entrepreneur-friendly environment also translates into a greater probability of

survival and of subsequent financing. More venture capital activity is associated with

a greater probability of subsequent financing but a lower chance of survival. But most

interesting are the interaction effects: in all but two regressions, the interaction

between the national environment and being above the cutoff for angel financing is

insignificant. This suggests the positive impact of angel financing on the development




                                          28
of portfolio firms remains consistent across the nations under study, regardless of the

level of venture activity and the entrepreneur-friendliness of the environment.9



    5. Which Types of Firms Apply to Angels?

       The differences between angel funding in the U.S. and that in other countries

might point to the fact that the type of firms that select into angel funding are different

between countries. A more mechanical story would be that in Europe, younger or less

mature firms get angel funding and therefore angels have a greater role in follow-on

funding. For that purpose, we analyze to what extent the criteria for funding

employed by angels vary with the national setting. We first undertake univariate

comparisons of the companies applying to the angel groups; we then replicate our

results in regression analyses. We show that the mechanical selection story

mentioned above does not explain our results.



       We begin by examining all the 1,682 firms that were considered by the angel

groups; we then turn to the 578 firms in our cutoff sample. In Table 10, we compare


9Due to the concerns discussed above about the broad range of ways in which in the
countries of the angel groups can be characterized, we also take an alternative
approach to characterizing nations. We run a principal components analysis using a
number of key country characteristics that capture the level of economic and financial
development, as well as the costs of doing business. We find that the first component
explains 63% of the variation in the country characteristics. Moreover, it loads
strongly positively on the development variables such as GDP per capita, index of
property rights, and VC/GDP ratio. The first principal component also loads strongly
negatively on a number of variables that capture costs of doing business, including
the variable that we use in the paper. We repeat the analyses in Tables 9 and 11, using
the first principal component score, as well as the other measures, in lieu of the
national characteristics. The results are very similar to the reported ones.

                                            29
the two samples of firms—whether funded or not—in nations with above and below

the median number of steps to start a business, as well as those with above and below

the median venture capital to GDP ratio.



       We find a striking pattern: when we look at the entire population of applicants

in Panel A, the firms look very different across the nations. In environments that were

less entrepreneur-friendly or where the venture market was less well developed, the

firms were less likely to be in the early stages of development. These companies also

were seeking a smaller amount of funding. In part, these differences may reflect

industry composition: for instance, the firms in these less venture-friendly markets

were more likely to be Internet and e-commerce firms, which may be asset-light. But

these differences may reflect choices by entrepreneurs about which startups can

realistically succeed and raise funding in these markets.



       Turning in Panel B to the subset of firms in the cutoff sample, we see that very

similar patterns hold. The firms seriously considered for funding in less venture-

friendly markets tended at a later stage of development and to seek less funding.

While these patterns are seen in the choice of firms under careful scrutiny of the

groups, it also reflects (as we saw in Panel A), the overall pool of applicants for

funding.



       Having demonstrated these patterns in a univariate analysis, we now turn to

a regression analysis. Here we use the entire sample of 1,682 firms seeking financing


                                           30
from these angel groups (i.e., the same sample in Panel A of Table 10). We compare

the firms on the basis of various ex ante characteristics, including employment,

management team size, the amount of financing sought, and the firm’s stage of

development. We control for whether the firm ultimately received angel financing,

the characteristics of the national venture environment, and the interaction between

these two factors.



       Table 11 shows that there are substantial differences across countries. We see

that the angel-funded companies tend to have more employment and larger

management teams, to seek more funding, and are less likely to be in the early stages.

In Panels A and B, we see that in nations that are less entrepreneur-friendly, the

ventures seeking angel financing tend to be in the early stages of development. In

nations with less venture funding (Panels C and D), the ventures tend to seek less

funding. Unlike those in the entrepreneur-unfriendly nations, though, they tend to be

in the later stages of development.



       What is more striking is the almost universal lack of significance of the

interaction terms: only one of the 12 interactions is significant at the 5% confidence

level, and two at the 10% level. (The large coefficients on the interaction terms in

Panels C and D reflect the fact that the VC/GDP ratio is quite modest.) It appears that

while the mixture of companies funded by angel groups shows distinct patterns

across nations, this reflects the companies applying to seek angel financing, rather

than their choices within the set of applicants. Consistent with a story in which firms


                                          31
rationally anticipate which types of deals will be attractive to angel investors in that

country, in markets with a less developed venture environment, firms appear to set a

higher bar when deciding whether to apply for angel financing.



   6. Conclusion

       Angel investors are attracting increasing interest from financial economists

and policy makers alike, reflecting their apparent ability to solve some of the

information problems that other types of investors seem to have trouble solving. This

paper examines a cross-section of 13 angel groups who considered transactions

across 21 countries, exploiting information both on transactions they funded and

those they passed on, as well as the groups’ evaluations of the potential transactions.



       We find that, consistent with the evidence from the United States, angel

investors have positive impact on the growth, performance, and survival of the firms

they fund. The positive impact of angel financing on portfolio firms remains

consistent across the nations under study, regardless of the nation’s level of venture

activity and its entrepreneur-friendliness. However, international angel funds,

different from U.S. angels, have an impact on the ability of the funded firms to obtain

follow-on financing. This suggests that angels have a more important gatekeeper or

accreditation role in countries outside the U.S. At the same time, we show that there

is self-selection of firms that are funded by angels in less developed venture

environments: only more mature businesses apply to angels and seek fewer funds.

This might be the outcome of self-censoring by very early-stage startups who do not


                                          32
expect to receive funding from angel groups, who themselves might be more risk

averse or inexperienced in making very early-stage investments.



       This work suggests a variety of avenues for future research. First, we have

suggested that one channel by which angel investors adapt to the changing

investment environment across nations is by attracting and selecting different types

of transactions. It would be interesting to examine whether angel groups also adjust

in different ways, whether by varying the contracts that write with the entrepreneurs

they fund (as Lerner and Schoar (2005) document for venture capital and private

equity funds) or by adjusting the intensity of oversight provided. In addition, we

would like to understand better how these differences in the funding environment

affects the selection of people who choose to be entrepreneurs. Another fertile area

for research would be to examine how angel groups reacted to the rapid emergence

and professionalization of venture capital funds, as has happened recently in China

and India or other fast growing countries.




                                         33
References

Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Léa Stern, and Michael S. Weisbach, (2012), “Pay for
Performance from Future Fund Flows: The Case of Private Equity,” Review of
Financial Studies, 25, pp. 3259-3304.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanez and Andrei Shleifer,
(2002), “The Regulation of Entry”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, pp. 1-37.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, (2007), “Private Credit in 129
Countries,” Journal of Financial Economics 12, pp. 77-99.

Gompers, Paul, (1996), “Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 42, pp. 133–156.

Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, (1999), “Money Chasing Deals?: The Impact of Fund
Inflows on the Valuation of Private Equity Investments,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 55, pp. 281-325.

Hellmann, Thomas and Manju Puri, (2002), “Venture Capital and the
Professionalization of Startup Firms: Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 57, pp.
169-197.

Hellmann, Thomas, Paul Schure, and Dan Vo, (2015), “Angels and Venture Capitalists:
Complements or Substitutes?,” Working Paper, University of British Columbia

Hellmann, Thomas and Veikko Thiele, (2014), “Friends or Foes? The Interrelationship
between Angels and Venture Capital Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 115,
pp. 639-653.

Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, (2007), “Whom You Know
Matters: Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance,” Journal of Finance,
52, pp. 251-301.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Per Strömberg, (2003), “Financial Contracting Meets the Real
World: Evidence from Venture Capital Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, pp.
281–315.

Kerr, William R., Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar, (2014), “The Consequences of
Entrepreneurial Finance: A Regression Discontinuity Analysis,” Review of Financial
Studies, 27 pp. 20-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny,
(1998), “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106 pp. 1133–1155.



                                         34
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny,
(2002), “Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance 57, pp.
1147–1170.

Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux, (2010), “Regression Discontinuity Designs in
Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48, pp. 281-355.

Lerner, Josh and Antoinette Schoar, (2005), “Does Legal Enforcement Affect Financial
Transactions?: The Contractual Channel in Private Equity,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120, pp. 223-246.
Metrick, Andrew and Ayako Yasuda, (2010), “The Economics of Private Equity
Funds,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, pp. 2303-2341.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, (2011), Financing High-
Growth Firms: The Role of Angel Investors, Paris: OECD.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, (2016), Financing SMEs
and Entrepreneurs Scoreboard, Paris: OECD.

Wilson, Karen and Filipe Silva, (2013), “Policies for Seed and Early Stage Finance,”
Science, Technology and Innovation Directorate Policy Paper #9, Paris: OECD.

Wilson, Karen E., (2015), “Policy Lessons from Financing Young Innovative Firms”,
Science, Technology and Innovation Directorate Policy Paper #24, Paris: OECD.

Wong, Andrew, Mihir Bhatia, and Zachary Freeman, (2009), “Angel Finance: The
Other Venture Capital.” Strategic Change. 18 (7-8), pp. 221-230.




                                        35
Figure 1   Voting Pattern of a Representative Group
                                                                Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics
 Venture’s Characteristics                                             Full sample       Funded                 Non-Funded             Funded vs. Non-funded
                                                                                        ventures                 ventures

 Employment                                                                   9.939               13.29             9.181                       4.109***
                                                                             (22.15)             (33.72)           (18.49)                       (1.542)
 Management team size                                                         3.391               3.799             3.297                       0.502***
                                                                             (1.783)             (1.848)           (1.755)                       (0.121)
 Financing sought (USD, thousands)                                            1,186               1,381             1,140                         240.5
                                                                             (2,868)             (3,955)           (2,557)                       (193.4)
 Stage of development

 Initial Idea                                                                 0.186               0.119             0.201                      -0.0815***
                                                                             (0.389)             (0.325)           (0.401)                       (0.0266)
 Marketing and development                                                    0.422               0.412             0.424                         -0.0124
                                                                             (0.494)             (0.493)           (0.494)                       (0.0339)
 Revenue generating                                                           0.392               0.469             0.375                      0.0939***
                                                                             (0.488)             (0.500)           (0.484)                       (0.0335)
 Industry

 Biopharma, cleantech and healthcare                                          0.141               0.231             0.117                       0.114***
                                                                             (0.348)             (0.422)           (0.321)                      (0.0221)
 Computers, electronics and measurement                                       0.147               0.190             0.130                      0.0599***
                                                                             (0.354)             (0.393)           (0.336)                      (0.0225)
 Financial, educational and professional services                            0.0937               0.108            0.0976                        0.0108
                                                                             (0.291)             (0.312)           (0.297)                      (0.0194)
 Internet and e-commerce                                                      0.183              0.0983             0.217                      -0.118***
                                                                             (0.386)             (0.298)           (0.412)                      (0.0254)
 Technology, media and telecommunication                                     0.0985              0.0881             0.106                        -0.0174
                                                                             (0.298)             (0.284)           (0.307)                      (0.0196)
 Other                                                                        0.337               0.285             0.334                        -0.0491
                                                                             (0.473)             (0.452)           (0.472)                      (0.0303)


 Observations                                                                 1,682                295               1,287
Table presents the descriptive statistics of the entire set of 1,682 deals. Column 1 shows means and standard errors of ventures characteristics for the full sample. Columns 2
and 3 present information for funded and non-funded ventures separately. Column 4 tests for the equality of the means between funded and non-funded ventures and presents
the differences between the means. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
                                 Table 2: Definitions of interest measures and cutoffs across groups


 Group         Angel interest measure             Around           Cutoff         Border             Absolute funding             Relative funding
                                                 the border                     sample size         probability change           probability change
                                                   range                                            – above the cutoff           – above the cutoff
                                                                                                      vs. below the                 vs. below the
                                                                                                          cutoff                        cutoff
     1         Share of angels that              20%-40%            30%              107                   13%                          750%
               expressed interest

     2         Subjective measure of                 3-4             3.5              51                     41%                         232%
               interest (1-5 scale)

     3         Number of angels that                 1-9              5               41                     44%                         218%
               expressed interest

     4         Number of angels that                 5-14            10               20                     63%                            *
               expressed interest

     5         Number of angels that                 5-14            10               29                     16%                         245%
               expressed interest

     6         Number of angels that                 1-9              5               30                     63%                         415%
               expressed interest

     7         Average score given                   3-4             3.5              76                      9%                         250%
               by angels (1-5 scale)

     8         Share of angels that              70%-90%            80%               22                     23%                         264%
               expressed interest

     9         Share of angels that              60%-80%            70%               21                     23%                            *
               expressed interest

    10         Number of angels that                 5-15            10               39                     10%                         143%
               expressed interest

    11         Number of angels that                 0-5              3               28                     40%                         221%
               expressed interest

    12         Number of angels that                10-34            20               94                     19%                         166%
               expressed interest

    13         Average score given                  80%-            90%               43                     43%                         146%
               by angels                            100%


Table presents the definitions of interest measures and funding cutoffs across groups. Column 2 presents measures of angel’s interest for each group. If the
level of interest for a venture falls in the range shown in column 3, a venture is classified as a part of the “border” sample. Column 4 shows the “cutoff”
levels of interest and column 5 shows the “border” sample size. Column 6 shows the differences in average funding probability between ventures that are
above and below the cutoff. Column 7 shows the differences in relative average funding probability between ventures that are above and below the cutoff.
Relative funding probability is not reported when the probability to get funded for ventures below the cutoff is zero.
                                                                   Table 3 - Balance Test for the Cutoff Sample
Venture’s Characteristics                                                 Cutoff      Above the cutoff Below the cutoff                        Above vs.           Above vs. below –
                                                                         Sample            ventures           ventures                           below            demeaned difference
Employment at the time of submission                                      10.25              11.53              9.293                            2.235                  2.350
                                                                         (16.18)            (15.74)           (16.46)                           (1.537)                (1.489)
Observations                                                                452               193                259
Management team size                                                      3.532              3.731              3.381                           0.350**                     0.178
                                                                         (1.803)            (2.038)           (1.591)                           (0.165)                    (0.128)
Observations                                                                481               207                274
Financing sought (USD, thousands)                                         845.6              915.2              800.1                             115.1                     124.1
                                                                         (1,405)            (1,462)           (1,369)                            (150.7)                   (145.3)
Observations                                                                364               144                220
Patent count                                                               1.23               1.27               1.20                              0.07                      0.02
                                                                          (6.56)             (5.75)            (7.07)                             (6.47)                    (4.58)
Observations                                                                578               235                343
Stage of Development
Initial idea                                                                0.155                   0.113                    0.188             -0.0742**                   -0.0652
                                                                           (0.362)                 (0.318)                  (0.391)             (0.0339)                  (0.0629)
Marketing and development                                                   0.399                   0.350                    0.438              -0.0877*                   -0.0823
                                                                           (0.490)                 (0.478)                  (0.497)             (0.0459)                  (0.0638)
Revenue generating                                                          0.447                   0.537                    0.375              0.162***                    0.148
                                                                           (0.498)                 (0.500)                  (0.485)             (0.0462)                  (0.0941)
Observations                                                                 459                     203                      256
Industry
Biopharma, cleantech and healthcare                                         0.189                   0.209                    0.175                0.0336                  0.00393
                                                                           (0.392)                 (0.407)                  (0.380)             (0.0332)                  (0.0321)
Computers, electronics and measurement                                      0.201                   0.238                    0.175              0.0634*                    0.0706
                                                                           (0.401)                 (0.427)                  (0.380)             (0.0339)                  (0.0525)
Financial, educational and professional services                            0.138                   0.128                    0.146               -0.0181                   -0.0264
                                                                           (0.346)                 (0.334)                  (0.353)             (0.0293)                  (0.0297)
Internet and e-commerce                                                     0.142                   0.115                    0.160               -0.0455                   -0.0497
                                                                           (0.349)                 (0.320)                  (0.367)             (0.0295)                  (0.0379)
Technology, media and telecommunication                                     0.130                   0.132                    0.128              0.00364                    0.0104
                                                                           (0.336)                 (0.339)                  (0.335)             (0.0285)                  (0.0281)
Other                                                                       0.201                   0.179                    0.216               -0.0370                  -0.00890
                                                                           (0.401)                 (0.384)                  (0.412)             (0.0339)                  (0.0332)
Observations                                                                 578                     235                      343
Total Observations                                                           578                     235                      343
Table compares the ex-ante characteristics of 578 ventures below and above the funding cutoff. Column 1 shows means and standard errors of ventures characteristics. Columns 2 and 3 present
information for ventures below and above the cutoff separately. Column 4 tests for the equality of the means between ventures below and above the cutoff and presents the differences between the
means. Column 5 tests for the equality of the means between ventures below and above the cutoff when venture’s characteristics are demeaned using group-level means. *, ** and *** denote
statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
                                                           Table 4 - Outcomes for cutoff ventures
 Outcomes                                                                                                        Above the           Below the            Above
                                                                                                                   cutoff              cutoff            vs. below
                                                                                                                  ventures            ventures
 Survival
 (0,1)Venture is in operation or underwent a successful exit                                                        0.770               0.542            0.228***
                                                                                                                   (0.422)             (0.499)           (0.0397)
 (0,1)Venture has a minimum of 1.5 years of operations since the financing event                                    0.787               0.636            0.152***
                                                                                                                   (0.410)             (0.482)           (0.0385)
 Success
 (0,1)Venture underwent IPO or acquisition                                                                          0.251              0.0641            0.187***
                                                                                                                   (0.435)             (0.245)           (0.0284)
 Operations and growth
 Employment count as of today                                                                                       25.26               23.87              1.397
                                                                                                                   (30.68)             (67.22)            (5.916)
 Patent count after 1.5 years since the application for angel financing                                             1.923               1.936             -0.0125
                                                                                                                   (6.937)             (9.583)            (0.729)
 Patent count as of today                                                                                           5.200               5.446              -0.246
                                                                                                                   (16.21)             (20.91)            (1.621)
 Founder’s status
 (0,1) At least one of the founders is still with the venture                                                       0.813               0.830             -0.0170
                                                                                                                   (0.391)             (0.377)           (0.0413)
 Founder is a CEO                                                                                                   0.624               0.564             0.0596
                                                                                                                   (0.486)             (0.497)           (0.0586)
 Subsequent financing
 (0,1)Venture received any subsequent financing                                                                     0.417               0.204            0.213***
                                                                                                                   (0.494)             (0.404)           (0.0375)
 (0,1)Venture received subsequent VC financing                                                                      0.230               0.105            0.125***
                                                                                                                   (0.422)             (0.307)           (0.0303)
 Total subsequent financing raised (USD, millions)                                                                  14.09               10.94              3.152
                                                                                                                   (50.91)             (17.15)            (7.905)

 Observations                                                                                                        235                 343
Table presents the outcome information for 578 ventures below and above the funding cutoff. Columns1 and 2 present information for ventures below and above the cutoff
separately. Column 3 tests for the equality of the means between ventures below and above the funding cutoff and presents the differences between the means. *, ** and ***
denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                  Table 5 - Venture’s outcomes across countries
                                                                                                           Ventures in countries
Outcomes                                                                         Cutoff       with       with        Above                              with        with     Above
                                                                                sample      above the below the vs. below                            above the below the vs. below
                                                                                             median     median                                        median      median
                                                                                              VC to      VC to                                        number      number
                                                                                              GDP        GDP                                         of steps to of steps to
                                                                                              Ratio      Ratio                                          open        open
                                                                                                                                                      business business
 Survival
 (0,1) Venture is in operation or underwent a successful                           0.635            0.650          0.625            0.025            0.531           0.722       -0.191***
 exit
                                                                                  (0.482)          (0.478)        (0.485)          (0.041)          (0.500)         (0.449)        (0.040)
 (0,1) Venture has a minimum of 1.5 years of operations                            0.697            0.668          0.716            -0.048           0.649           0.737        -0.088**
 since the financing event
                                                                                  (0.460)          (0.472)        (0.452)          (0.039)          (0.478)         (0.441)        (0.038)
 Success
 (0,1) Venture underwent IPO or acquisition                                        0.140            0.243          0.074          0.169***           0.080           0.190       -0.110***
                                                                                  (0.347)          (0.430)        (0.262)          (0.029)          (0.272)         (0.393)        (0.029)
 Operations and growth
 Employment count as of today                                                     24.564           36.936         17.827         19.110***          19.896          27.684          -7.788
                                                                                 (52.170)         (78.225)       (27.632)         (6.096)          (32.536)        (61.812)        (6.021)
 Patent count after 1.5 years since the application for angel                      1.931            2.562          1.526           1.036             0.969           2.728        -1.758**
 financing
                                                                                  (8.599)          (7.886)        (9.015)          (0.732)          (8.926)         (8.248)        (0.715)
 Patent count as of today                                                          5.346            9.606          2.611          6.995***           1.504           8.532       -7.028***
                                                                                 (19.121)         (24.380)       (14.170)          (1.605)         (14.114)        (21.959)        (1.572)
 Observations                                                                       578              226            352                               262             316
Table compares the ex-ante characteristics of 578 ventures below and above the funding cutoff across countries. Column 1 shows means and standard errors of ventures outcomes. Columns 2
and 3 present information for deals in countries with VC to GDP Ratio above the median and deals in countries with below the median VC to GDP ratio. Column 4 tests for the equality of the
means from columns 2 and 3 and presents the differences between the means. Columns 5 and 6 compare information for deals in countries where number of steps to open business is above the
median to deals in countries where this number of below the median. Column 7 tests for the equality of the means from columns 5 and 6 and presents the differences between the means. *, **
and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
                                                          Table 5 - Venture’s outcomes across countries (continued)
                                                                                                          Ventures in countries
Outcomes                                                                       Cutoff       with        with        Above                               with        with     Above
                                                                               sample    above the below the vs. below                               above the below the vs. below
                                                                                          median      median                                          median      median
                                                                                           VC to       VC to                                          number      number
                                                                                           GDP          GDP                                          of steps to of steps to
                                                                                           Ratio        Ratio                                           open        open
                                                                                                                                                      business business
 Founder’s status
 (0,1) At least one of the founders is still with the venture                      0.822            0.783          0.845            -0.063           0.894           0.774        0.120***
                                                                                  (0.383)          (0.414)        (0.362)          (0.042)          (0.309)         (0.419)        (0.041)
 Founder is a CEO                                                                  0.590            0.545          0.615            -0.070           0.648           0.546         0.102*
                                                                                  (0.493)          (0.500)        (0.488)          (0.061)          (0.480)         (0.499)        (0.058)
 Subsequent financing
 (0,1) Venture received any subsequent financing                                   0.291            0.412          0.213          0.198***           0.122           0.430       -0.308***
                                                                                  (0.454)          (0.493)        (0.410)          (0.038)          (0.328)         (0.496)        (0.036)
 (0,1) Venture received subsequent VC financing                                    0.156            0.230          0.108          0.122***           0.061           0.234       -0.173***
                                                                                  (0.363)          (0.422)        (0.311)          (0.031)          (0.240)         (0.424)        (0.029)
 Total subsequent financing raised (USD, millions)                                12.767           20.145          3.348          16.797**           3.356          15.202        -11.847
                                                                                 (40.204)         (52.543)        (4.692)          (7.696)          (5.031)        (44.768)        (9.593)

 Observations                                                                       578              226            352                               262             316
Table compares the ex-ante characteristics of 578 ventures below and above the funding cutoff across countries. Column 1 shows means and standard errors of ventures outcomes. Columns 2
and 3 present information for deals in countries with VC to GDP Ratio above the median and deals in countries with below the median VC to GDP ratio. Column 4 tests for the equality of the
means from columns 2 and 3 and presents the differences between the means. Columns 5 and 6 compare information for deals in countries where number of steps to open business is above the
median to deals in countries where this number of below the median. Column 7 tests for the equality of the means from columns 5 and 6 and presents the differences between the means. *, **
and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
                                            Table 6 - Discontinuity and funding status
                                                              (0,1)Venture received funding from angel group
                                                          (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)


 (0,1)Venture is above the funding cutoff                  0.303***          0.269***         0.252***          0.255***         0.183***
                                                           (0.0382)          (0.0367)         (0.0375)          (0.0376)         (0.0466)

 Observations                                                 578               578              568               568               307
 R-squared                                                   0.109             0.251            0.288             0.293             0.368
 Angel group FE                                               No                Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
 Year FE                                                      No                No               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Industry FE                                                  No                No               No                Yes               Yes
 Venture level controls                                       No                No               No                No                Yes
Table presents results of linear regressions of venture’s funding status on a dummy variable that equals one if the venture is above the funding
cutoff. Column 1 presents the basic specification and the following columns add control variables. Column 2 adds angel group fixed effects.
Column 3 adds year fixed effects. Column 4 adds industry fixed effects and column 5 adds venture-level controls. *, ** and *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                                                      Table 7 - Outcomes and funding status – Panel A
                                                                            (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)                             (5)          (6)                (7)       (8)
                                                                          (0,1)Venture is in      (0,1)Venture has a                              (0,1)Venture                  Log(Employment)
                                                                       operation or underwent minimum of 1.5 years                              underwent IPO or
                                                                           a successful exit    of operations since the                            acquisition
                                                                                                    financing event

 (0,1)Venture received funding from angel group                           0.228***         0.168**          0.139***           0.017          0.173***           0.008        0.486***        0.402***
                                                                           (0.043)         (0.065)           (0.037)          (0.045)          (0.037)          (0.029)        (0.134)         (0.156)

 Observations                                                                568              307              568              307              568              307             307             185
 R-squared                                                                  0.220            0.258            0.273            0.367            0.254            0.062           0.322           0.497
 Angel group FE                                                              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Year FE                                                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Industry FE                                                                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
 Venture level controls                                                      No               Yes              No               Yes              No               Yes             No              Yes

                                                                      Table 7 - Outcomes and funding status – Panel B
                                              (1)         (2)                (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)         (8)                                      (9)        (10)
                                             Patent count as of           (0,1) At least one of    (0,1)Venture received (0,1)Venture received                                   Total subsequent
                                                   today                   the founders is still any subsequent financing    subsequent VC                                       financing raised
                                                                             with the venture                                   financing                                        (USD, millions)

 (0,1)Venture received                       1.824           1.736           -0.014          0.095          0.157***          0.234***           0.052          0.103*           7.718           -0.999
 funding from angel group
                                            (2.078)         (1.072)         (0.053)         (0.072)          (0.049)           (0.073)          (0.039)         (0.054)         (7.165)         (6.703)

 Observations                                 568             307             343             196              568               307              568             307             107              45
 R-squared                                   0.118           0.871           0.164           0.144            0.197             0.269            0.178           0.311           0.239           0.987
 Angel group FE                               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
 Year FE                                      Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
 Industry FE                                  Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
 Venture level controls                       No              Yes             No              Yes              No                Yes              No              Yes             No              Yes
 Table presents results of linear regressions of venture’s outcomes on a dummy variable that equals one if the venture was funded by the angel group. Panel A presents the results for the first four outcomes
and Panel B presents the results for five additional outcomes. For each outcome two specifications were used – with and without venture level control variables. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance
at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                                                       Table 8 - Outcomes and discontinuity - Panel A
                                                                           (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)                              (5)          (6)                   (7)       (8)
                                                                          (0,1)Venture is in      (0,1)Venture has a                          (0,1)Venture underwent                Log(Employment)
                                                                       operation or underwent a minimum of 1.5 years                             IPO or acquisition
                                                                            successful exit     of operations since the
                                                                                                    financing event

(0,1)Venture is above the funding cutoff                                0.181***          0.194***          0.105***            0.069          0.161***          0.087***         0.392***        0.430***
                                                                         (0.040)           (0.054)           (0.036)           (0.045)          (0.031)           (0.030)          (0.116)         (0.132)

Observations                                                                568               307               568              307              568               307               307             185
R-squared                                                                  0.215             0.279             0.269            0.372            0.260             0.105             0.315           0.509
Angel group FE                                                              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes
Year FE                                                                     Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes
Industry FE                                                                 Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes
Venture level controls                                                      No                Yes               No               Yes              No                Yes               No              Yes


                                                                 Table 8 - Outcomes and discontinuity – Panel B
                                               (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)                                     (7)          (8)                 (9)        (10)
                                              Patent count as of    (0,1) At least one of    (0,1)Venture received                               (0,1)Venture received               Total subsequent
                                                    today            the founders is still any subsequent financing                                  subsequent VC                   financing raised
                                                                       with the venture                                                                 financing                    (USD, millions)

(0,1)Venture is above the                    -1.564          -0.237           0.014           0.001          0.163***          0.213***          0.089***          0.093**           4.913           1.719
funding cutoff
                                             (1.595)         (0.793)         (0.043)         (0.057)          (0.039)           (0.050)            (0.032)          (0.038)         (7.680)         (4.294)

Observations                                   568             307             343             196              568                307               568              307             107              45
R-squared                                     0.118           0.869           0.164           0.135            0.206              0.287             0.187            0.316           0.236           0.987
Angel group FE                                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Year FE                                        Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Industry FE                                    Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Venture level controls                         No              Yes             No              Yes              No                 Yes               No               Yes             No              Yes
 Table presents results of linear regressions of venture’s outcomes on a dummy variable that equals one if the venture is above the funding cutoff. Panel A presents the results for the first four outcomes and
Panel B presetns the results for five additional outcomes. For each outcome two specifications were used – with and without venture level control variables. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at
10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                            Table 9 - Angel financing effect across countries – Steps to open business
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)                                        (9)          (10)
                                (0,1)Venture is in       (0,1)Venture has a          (0,1)Venture          (0,1)Venture received                                    (0,1)Venture received
                             operation or underwent minimum of 1.5 years           underwent IPO or           any subsequent                                            subsequent VC
                                 a successful exit     of operations since the        acquisition                 financing                                                financing
                                                           financing event
(0,1)Venture is               0.198***      0.199*     0.127***      0.170*      0.174*** 0.255*** 0.189***               0.124                                     0.109***           0.092
above the funding
cutoff
                                (0.040)   (0.103)   (0.037)                       (0.100)          (0.031)         (0.088)          (0.040)   (0.119)                 (0.034)         (0.091)
Steps to open                 -0.156*** -0.156*** -0.102***                      -0.092**           0.025          0.044*         -0.152*** -0.168***                -0.062**        -0.066**
business
                                (0.033)         (0.043)          (0.030)          (0.040)          (0.021)         (0.026)          (0.034)          (0.037)          (0.025)         (0.028)
(0,1)Venture is                                  -0.000                            -0.025                           -0.048                            0.039                            0.010
above the funding
cutoff * Steps to
open business
                                                (0.061)                           (0.058)                          (0.046)                           (0.062)                          (0.047)

Observations                      562              562             562              562              562              562             562              562              562             562
R-squared                        0.127            0.127           0.143            0.143            0.223            0.225           0.127            0.127            0.073           0.073
Year FE                           Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Industry FE                       Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Venture level                     No               No              No               No               No               No              No               No               No              No
controls
Table presents results of linear regressions of selected venture’s outcomes on a dummy variable that equals one if the venture is above the funding cutoff and on its interactions with a number of
steps to open business. For each of five outcomes two specifications were used – with and without the interaction term. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels
respectively. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                                            Table 9 - Angel financing effect across countries - VC to GDP Ratio
                          (1)            (2)                     (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)                                        (9)           (10)
                          (0,1)Venture is in                    (0,1)Venture has a        (0,1)Venture underwent      (0,1)Venture received any                                   (0,1)Venture received
                       operation or underwent a              minimum of 1.5 years of         IPO or acquisition          subsequent financing                                   subsequent VC financing
                            successful exit                    operations since the
                                                                  financing event
(0,1)Venture            0.203***           0.172***          0.133***         0.038       0.173***         0.050       0.190***       0.236***                                   0.108***           0.129***
is above the
funding cutoff
                        (0.040)            (0.060)     (0.037)     (0.053)                            (0.031)           (0.042)            (0.041)            (0.059)             (0.034)           (0.048)
VC to GDP             -111.213**         -128.998** -161.926*** -216.804***                           17.410            -54.299           130.840**         157.544***           92.401**          104.898**
Ratio
                        (56.165)           (64.358)           (52.177)           (58.901)            (42.594)          (46.832)            (52.741)           (57.868)           (38.531)            (42.553)
(0,1)Venture                                41.328                              127.527**                             166.638***                               -62.055                                -29.042
is above the
funding cutoff
* VC to GDP
Ratio
                                           (59.224)                               (57.530)                              (54.772)                              (62.369)                               (49.259)

Observations               561                561                561                 561                561                561                561                561                561                561
R-squared                 0.102              0.102              0.143               0.151              0.222              0.245              0.105              0.107              0.072              0.073
Year FE                    Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Industry FE                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Venture level              No                 No                 No                  No                 No                 No                 No                 No                 No                 No
controls
Table presents results of linear regressions of selected venture’s outcomes on a dummy variable that equals one if the venture is above the funding cutoff and on its interactions with VC to GDP ratio. For each of
five outcomes two specifications were used – with and without the interaction term. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                        Table 10 - Firm's characteristics across countries – Panel A – Full Sample
                                                                                         Ventures in countries
Venture’s characteristics                with above the      with below the            Above          with above the                                       with below the               Above
                                         median number median number                 vs. below        median VC to                                         median VC to                vs. below
                                         of steps to open of steps to open                             GDP Ratio                                            GDP Ratio
                                             business            business
Employment at the time of submission          11.472               8.671              2.802**             10.229                                                 9.791                   0.439
                                             (22.051)            (22.164)             (1.202)            (26.217)                                              (19.760)                 (1.267)
Management Team Size                           3.156               3.601            -0.445***              3.749                                                 3.218                 0.531***
                                              (1.481)             (1.993)             (0.093)             (2.339)                                               (1.410)                 (0.099)
Financing sought (USD, thousands)            869.344            1,467.327          -597.983***          1,881.531                                              842.838               1,038.692***
                                           (1,298.506)         (3,723.438)           (149.858)         (4,608.198)                                           (1,206.385)               (157.524)
Stage of development
Initial idea                                   0.098               0.260            -0.162***              0.255                                                 0.152                  0.103***
                                              (0.298)             (0.439)             (0.020)             (0.436)                                               (0.359)                  (0.022)
Marketing and development                      0.488               0.365             0.123***              0.350                                                 0.457                 -0.107***
                                              (0.500)             (0.482)             (0.026)             (0.477)                                               (0.498)                  (0.028)
Revenue generating                             0.413               0.375               0.039               0.395                                                 0.391                    0.004
                                              (0.493)             (0.484)             (0.026)             (0.489)                                               (0.488)                  (0.028)
Industry
Biopharma, cleantech and healthcare            0.094               0.177            -0.084***              0.158                                                 0.131                   0.028
                                              (0.292)             (0.382)             (0.017)             (0.365)                                               (0.337)                 (0.018)
Computers, electronics and                     0.086               0.194            -0.109***              0.195                                                 0.118                 0.077***
measurement
                                              (0.280)             (0.396)             (0.017)             (0.396)                                               (0.323)                 (0.018)
Financial, educational and professional        0.081               0.103               -0.022              0.128                                                 0.073                 0.056***
services
                                              (0.274)             (0.304)             (0.014)             (0.335)                                               (0.259)                  (0.015)
Internet and e-commerce                        0.293               0.098             0.195***              0.092                                                 0.238                 -0.146***
                                              (0.455)             (0.297)             (0.019)             (0.289)                                               (0.426)                  (0.019)
Other                                          0.327               0.344               -0.017              0.353                                                 0.327                    0.027
                                              (0.470)             (0.475)             (0.023)             (0.478)                                               (0.469)                  (0.024)
Technology, media and                          0.119               0.083              0.036**              0.073                                                 0.114                 -0.041***
telecommunication
                                              (0.324)             (0.276)             (0.015)             (0.260)                                               (0.318)                  (0.015)
Observations                                    724                 958                                     648                                                  1,034
Panel A compares the ex-ante characteristics of 1,682 ventures across countries. Columns 1 and 2 compare information for deals in countries where number of steps to open business is above the median to
deals in countries where this number of below the median. Column 3 tests for the equality of the means from columns 1 and 2 and presents the differences between the means Columns 4 and 5 present
information for deals in countries with VC to GDP Ratio above the median and deals in countries with below the median VC to GDP ratio. Column 6 tests for the equality of the means from columns 4 and
5 and presents the differences between the means. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
                                        Table 10 - Firm's characteristics across countries – Panel B – Border Sample
                                                                                              Ventures in countries
Venture’s characteristics                      with above the     with below the           Above          with above the                                       with below the               Above
                                               median number median number               vs. below         median VC to                                        median VC to                vs. below
                                               of steps to open of steps to open                            GDP Ratio                                           GDP Ratio
                                                   business            business
Management team size                                 3.028               4.064           -1.035***              4.219                                                3.235                0.983***
                                                    (1.513)             (1.932)            (0.158)             (2.297)                                              (1.449)                (0.174)
Employment at the time of submission                10.969               9.507              1.463              12.190                                                9.403                 2.787*
                                                   (16.942)            (15.361)            (1.522)            (18.971)                                             (14.757)                (1.652)
Financing sought (USD,thousands)                   767.389           1,010.752            -243.363           1,484.686                                             777.626               707.060***
                                                 (1,212.922)        (1,737.912)          (157.426)          (2,869.979)                                          (1,133.076)              (247.441)
Stage of development
Initial idea                                         0.071               0.235           -0.164***              0.226                                                0.121                0.105***
                                                    (0.258)             (0.425)            (0.033)             (0.420)                                              (0.327)                 (0.036)
Marketing and development                            0.458               0.342            0.116**               0.301                                                0.444                -0.143***
                                                    (0.499)             (0.475)            (0.045)             (0.460)                                              (0.498)                 (0.049)
Revenue generating                                   0.471               0.423              0.048               0.473                                                0.435                   0.038
                                                    (0.500)             (0.495)            (0.046)             (0.501)                                              (0.496)                 (0.050)
Industry
Biopharma, cleantech and healthcare                  0.130               0.237           -0.108***              0.204                                                0.179                   0.025
                                                    (0.337)             (0.426)            (0.032)             (0.404)                                              (0.384)                 (0.033)
Computers, electronics and measurement               0.126               0.263           -0.137***              0.257                                                0.165                 0.092***
                                                    (0.332)             (0.441)            (0.033)             (0.438)                                              (0.372)                 (0.034)
Financial, educational and professional              0.168               0.114             0.054*               0.115                                                0.153                   -0.038
services
                                                    (0.375)             (0.318)            (0.029)             (0.320)                                              (0.361)                 (0.029)
Internet and e-commerce                              0.244               0.057           0.187***               0.040                                                0.207                -0.168***
                                                    (0.430)             (0.232)            (0.028)             (0.196)                                              (0.406)                 (0.029)
Other                                                0.191               0.209              -0.018              0.261                                                0.162                0.099***
                                                    (0.394)             (0.407)            (0.034)             (0.440)                                              (0.369)                 (0.034)
Technology, media and telecommunication              0.141               0.120              0.021               0.124                                                0.134                   -0.010
                                                    (0.349)             (0.326)            (0.028)             (0.330)                                              (0.341)                 (0.029)
Observations                                          262                 316                                    226                                                  352
Panel B compares the ex-ante characteristics of the 578 ventures in the “border” sample across countries. Columns 1 and 2 present information for deals in countries where number of steps to open business is
above the median vs deals in countries where this number of below the median. Column 3 tests for the equality of the means from columns 1 and 2 and presents the differences between the means. Columns 4
and 5 present information for deals in countries with VC to GDP Ratio above the median and deals in countries with below the median VC to GDP ratio. Column 6 tests for the equality of the means from
columns 4 and 5 and presents the differences between the means. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.
                                             Table 11 - Deal composition across countries – Steps to open business – Panel A
                                                         (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                                              (5)               (6)
                                                              Employment                    Management Team Size                                               Financing sought (USD,
                                                                                                                                                                     thousands)
(0,1)Venture received funding from                         5.231**                  -0.107                 0.365***                 1.297***                  107.023          -64.548
angel group
                                                           (2.362)                  (3.250)                  (0.124)                 (0.355)                (241.683)                (317.565)
Steps to open business                                    3.226***                 2.728***                -0.288***               -0.196***                  31.688                   13.657
                                                           (0.975)                  (1.028)                  (0.068)                 (0.071)                 (80.962)                 (84.548)
(0,1)Venture received funding from                                                   3.319                                         -0.571***                                          103.274
angel group * Steps to open business
                                                                                    (2.421)                                          (0.202)                                         (182.810)

Observations                                                1,311                    1,311                    1,386                    1,386                   1,390                    1,390
R-squared                                                   0.034                    0.035                    0.226                    0.231                   0.018                    0.018
Year FE                                                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Industry FE                                                  Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes

                                 Table 11 - Deal composition across countries - Steps to open business – Panel B
                                                (1)                 (2)             (3)               (4)                                                         (5)                     (6)
                                                                                   Stage of development
                                                     Initial idea               Marketing and development                                                        Revenue generating
(0,1)Venture received funding from          -0.107***            -0.155**         -0.008             0.048                                                    0.114***         0.107
angel group
                                              (0.025)             (0.067)        (0.036)           (0.105)                                                     (0.036)                 (0.107)
Steps to open business                      -0.071***           -0.075***        0.058**          0.063**                                                       0.012                   0.012
                                              (0.020)             (0.021)        (0.025)           (0.027)                                                     (0.023)                 (0.025)
(0,1)Venture received funding from                                 0.030                            -0.034                                                                              0.005
angel group *Steps to open business
                                                                  (0.037)                          (0.062)                                                                             (0.063)

Observations                                                    1,356                   1,356                   1,356                   1,356                   1,356                   1,356
R-squared                                                       0.083                   0.083                   0.028                   0.028                   0.059                   0.059
Year FE                                                          Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Industry FE                                                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Table reports linear regressions of firm’s characteristics on a dummy variable that equals one if the venture received funding and on its interaction term with a number of steps to open business.
For each venture characteristic two specifications are used: with and without the interaction term. Panel A includes the results for employment, management team size and amount of financing
sought and Panel B adds the results for venture’s stage of development. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are
reported.
                                                Table 11 - Deal composition across countries - VC to GDP Ratio – Panel C
                                                         (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)                                             (5)               (6)
                                                             Employment                     Management Team Size                                             Financing sought (USD,
                                                                                                                                                                   thousands)
(0,1)Venture received funding from                       4.860**                  7.400**                 0.391***                   0.239                  120.278          417.539
angel group
                                                        (2.340)                   (3.460)                 (0.112)                 (0.159)                (239.927)                (305.485)
VC to GDP Ratio                                      3,161.679***             3,885.230***             1,703.820***            1,658.818***            484,127.729**           576,246.490***
                                                      (1,069.719)              (1,150.348)               (114.683)               (115.683)             (188,758.046)            (215,396.596)
(0,1)Venture received funding from                                              -3,334.140                                        207.735                                       -406,564.684*
angel group *VC to GDP Ratio
                                                                               (2,061.899)                                        (192.589)                                      (220,837.326)

Observations                                               1,311                   1,311                    1,386                    1,386                    1,390                   1,390
R-squared                                                  0.030                   0.032                    0.334                    0.335                    0.021                   0.023
Year FE                                                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Industry FE                                                 Yes                     Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes

                                                    Table 11 - Deal composition across countries - VC to GDP – Panel D
                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                                             (5)                    (6)
                                                                                                Stage of development
                                                                   Initial idea              Marketing and development                                           Revenue generating

(0,1)Venture received funding from                            -0.096***              -0.114***                 -0.014                  -0.022               0.109***                 0.136**
angel group
                                                               (0.025)                (0.038)                  (0.036)                (0.054)                (0.036)                (0.054)
VC to GDP Ratio                                             -132.773***            -137.587***                  4.826                  2.660               127.947***             134.927***
                                                              (28.746)               (29.439)                 (37.883)               (39.442)               (35.763)               (37.449)
(0,1)Venture received funding from                                                    25.176                                          11.329                                        -36.504
angel group *VC to GDP Ratio
                                                                                      (23.350)                                       (53.896)                                        (53.951)

Observations                                                     1,356                  1,356                   1,356                  1,356                   1,356                  1,356
R-squared                                                        0.087                  0.088                   0.024                  0.024                   0.067                  0.067
Year FE                                                           Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Industry FE                                                       Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Table reports linear regressions of firm’s characteristics on a dummy variable that equals one if the venture received funding and on its interaction term with VC to GDP ratio. For each venture
characteristic two specifications are used: with and without the interaction term. Panel A includes the results for employment, management team size and amount of financing sought and Panel
B adds the results for venture’s stage of development. *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively. Robust standard errors are reported.
