NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOUBLE FOR NOTHING? EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE IMPACT OF
AN UNCONDITIONAL TEACHER SALARY INCREASE ON STUDENT PERFORMANCE
IN INDONESIA
Joppe de Ree
Karthik Muralidharan
Menno Pradhan
Halsey Rogers
Working Paper 21806
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21806
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015

We thank Nageeb Ali, Eli Berman, Julie Cullen, Gordon Dahl, Uri Gneezy, Roger Gordon,
Gordon Hanson, Lawrence Katz, Richard Murphy, Derek Neal, Ben Olken, Hessel Oosterbeek,
Valerie Ramey, Miguel Urquiola, and several seminar participants for comments. We are grateful
to the Indonesian Ministry of Education and Culture for its interest in evaluating its teacher pay
reforms, and for supporting this large-scale experiment and data collection. This evaluation
would not have been possible without generous financial support from the government of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. The authors are grateful to Dedy Junaedi (and team), Titie Hadiyati
(and team), Susiana Iskandar, Amanda Beatty, and Andy Ragatz for their exceptional efforts and
support in conducting this evaluation as part of the World Bank BERMUTU project team at
various points of time over the course of this project, and to counterparts at the Indonesian
Ministry of Education and Culture, including Dr. Baedhowi, Dian Wahyuni, Santi Ambarukmi,
Yendri Wirda Burhan, Simon Sili Sabon (and the team at puslitjak), Dhani Nugaan, Bastari, Hari
Setiadi, Rahmawati, and Yani Sumarno (and the team at puspendik), who supported this
experiment and implemented it flawlessly. Over the years, the project also benefited from
excellent research assistance of Ai Li Ang, Husnul Rizal, and others at the World Bank office in
Jakarta. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of
the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its
affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Joppe de Ree, Karthik Muralidharan, Menno Pradhan, and Halsey Rogers. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Double for Nothing? Experimental Evidence on the Impact of an Unconditional Teacher Salary
Increase on Student Performance in Indonesia
Joppe de Ree, Karthik Muralidharan, Menno Pradhan, and Halsey Rogers
NBER Working Paper No. 21806
December 2015, Revised September 2016
JEL No. C93,I21,J31,J45,O15
ABSTRACT
How does a large unconditional increase in salary affect employee performance in the public
sector? We present the first experimental evidence on this question in the context of a unique
policy change in Indonesia that led to a permanent doubling of base teacher salaries. Using a
large-scale randomized experiment across a representative sample of Indonesian schools that
accelerated this doubling of pay for teachers in treatment schools, we find that the doubling of
pay significantly improved teacher satisfaction with their income, reduced the incidence of
teachers holding outside jobs, and reduced self-reported financial stress. Nevertheless, after two
and three years, the doubling in pay led to no improvements in measures of teacher effort, and
had no impact whatsoever on student learning outcomes. Thus, contrary to the predictions of
various efficiency wage models of employee behavior (including gift-exchange, reciprocity, and
reduced shirking), as well as those of a model where effort on pro-social tasks is a normal good
with a positive income elasticity, we find that large unconditional increases in salaries of
incumbent teachers had no meaningful positive impact on student learning.

Joppe de Ree
The World Bank
joppederee@gmail.com
Karthik Muralidharan
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu

Menno Pradhan
VU University / University of Amsterdam
De Boelelaan 1105
1081 HV Amsterdam
The Netherlands
m.p.pradhan@vu.nl
Halsey Rogers
The World Bank
Hrogers@worldbank.org

1. Introduction
How does a large unconditional increase in salary affect the performance of incumbent
employees in public sector settings with high job security? While unconditional salary increases
do not provide a direct incentive for increased effort on the job, several influential classes of
"efficiency wage" models predict improved worker effort in response to such pay increases.
These include models of reciprocity and gift-exchange where employees pay back employers for
a wage premium with an effort premium (Akerlof 1982), and models that posit that employees
will shirk less in response to wage increases because of the increased cost of losing a job with a
wage premium (Shapiro and Stiglitz 1984). A further mechanism highlighted in public-sector
contexts is that increasing the pay of public workers in pro-social tasks like teaching or
healthcare provision may reduce the incidence of outside jobs and increase time and effort on
their primary job, from which workers draw intrinsic utility (UNESCO 2014).
Given the centrality of this question to labor and personnel economics, a large empirical
literature has tried to study the impact of unconditional pay raises on worker effort and
productivity, with varying results (see Esteves-Sorenson and Macera 2015 for a recent review).
However, since it is difficult to exogenously change salaries in real employment settings, most of
the evidence to date has relied on laboratory experiments and short-term field experiments with
researcher-led variation in pay. Thus, despite a large empirical literature on this question, we are
not aware of any experimental study of the impact of an unconditional salary increase in the
context of an existing long-term employment contract. This is a critical gap because estimates
from the existing literature are often used to make inferences about real employment contracts,
which can be problematic (see Levitt and List 2007 for a discussion).1
In this paper, we attempt to bridge this gap by providing experimental evidence on the
intensive-margin impacts on teacher effort and student learning outcomes of a unique policy
change in Indonesia that permanently doubled the base pay of eligible teachers who went
through a certification process.2 Given the large fiscal impact of the policy, teacher access to the
certification program was phased in over 10 years (from 2006 to 2015), with priority in the

As they note: "Such inference raises at least two relevant issues. First, is real-world on-the-job effort different in
nature from that required in lab tasks? Second, does the effort that we observe in the lab manifest itself over longer
time periods?" (Levitt and List 2007)
2
The policy was designed to reward a process of teacher skill upgrading (signaled by "certification") by providing a
certification allowance that was equal to the base pay (thereby doubling base pay). However, in practice, the
certification mainly consisted of the pay increase (see section 2 for details).
1

1

certification queue being determined by seniority. Thus, many "eligible" teachers had to wait
several years before being allowed to enter the certification process.
Working closely with the Government of Indonesia, we implemented an experimental design
that allowed all eligible teachers in 120 randomly-selected public schools to immediately access
the certification process and the resulting doubling of pay, while teachers in control schools
experienced the "business as usual" access to the certification process through the gradual phase
in over time. Our design and setting allow us to conduct what is, to the best of our knowledge,
the largest experimental study to date of the intensive-margin effects of an unconditional wage
increase both in terms of the size of the wage increase studied and the duration of the experiment
(lasting three years). Further, the sample for our experimental study was designed to provide
external validity across Indonesia, and consisted of a near-nationally representative sample of
360 schools drawn from 20 districts and all major regions of Indonesia.3
The experiment successfully accelerated access to the certification process and doubling of
pay for eligible teachers in treatment schools. It resulted in a 28 percentage point differential
increase in the fraction of teachers in treatment schools who had been certified and received the
salary supplement at the end of two years, and a 23 percentage point increase at the end of three
years (relative to the control group).4 Among the "target" teachers affected by the experiment
(those who were eligible but not certified at the baseline), there was a 54 (and 43) percentage
point differential increase in teachers who were certified and received their professional
allowance at the end of two (and three) years in treatment schools.
The experiment resulted in significant impacts on the intermediate mechanisms through
which policymakers hoped that the increase in salary would lead to better education quality. At
the end of two and three years of the experiment, teachers in treated schools had significantly
higher income, were significantly more likely to be satisfied with their income and significantly
less likely to report financial stress, were less likely to hold a second job, and worked fewer
hours on second jobs (the last two differences are significant after two years, but not after three).
See Heckman and Smith (1995) for a discussion of the threats to external validity of experiments resulting from
site-selection bias in experimental studies. Allcott (2015) provides evidence of such bias.
4
Roughly 20% of teachers in both treatment schools were already certified at baseline, and another 25% of teachers
were not eligible for certification in any case (due to not being civil-service teachers or college graduates). It is the
remaining 55% of teachers who were "eligible but not certified" at the baseline (the "target" teachers) who were
affected by the experiment, and it is in this population of teachers that the experiment induced a significant increase
in pay. Note that the "first stage" of the experiment weakens over time in our setting as teachers in the control
schools got certified over time (teachers in the control schools were also getting certified, but at a slower rate).
3

2

Despite this improvement in teachers' pay and satisfaction, teachers in treated schools did not
score better on tests of teacher subject knowledge, and they did not self-report any increase in
measures of effort such as attendance. Most importantly, in both primary and junior secondary
schools, we find no difference in student test scores in language, mathematics, or science across
treatment and control schools. Not only is the test-score impact of being in a treated school
insignificant, but the point estimates are close to zero. The zero effects on learning are also very
precise, allowing us to rule out effects as small as 0.05σ at the 95% level in treated schools.
Finally, non-parametric plots of quantile treatment effects reveal an almost identical distribution
of student test scores across treatment and control schools.
These are intention-to-treat estimates at the school level, and they reflect a lack of impact on
average teacher effort and student outcomes in a setting where the fraction of certified teachers
was 28 (and 23) percentage points higher in treated schools over 2 (and 3) years. To estimate the
impact of being taught by certified teachers who received the pay increase, we restrict analysis to
students who were taught by "target" teachers who were "eligible but not certified" in either the
treatment or control schools at the baseline, and use the school-level random assignment as an
instrument for being taught by a certified teacher in a given year. We find no effect of being
taught by a certified teacher (relative to students in control schools taught by similar teachers).
The point estimate is again close to zero, and we can rule out positive test score effects larger
than 0.1σ at the 95% level.
Thus, in contrast to the empirical literature that has found evidence supporting the giftexchange hypothesis in the lab (Fehr et al. 1993 and 1997) and in short-term field experiments
(Falk 2007), our results are consistent with a growing body of evidence suggesting that increases
in worker productivity in response to an unconditional increase in pay, are either short-lived (as
in Gneezy and List 2006, and Jayaraman et al. 2015) or non-existent when measured net of other
confounding factors (as in Esteves-Sorenson and Macera 2015). Note that our results contrast
with those reported in the most closely related paper studying changes in public sector wages.
Mas (2006) finds that police performance in New Jersey deteriorated significantly following
cases when arbitrators do not award the pay increases that the police unions demand. However,
this difference may be explained by gain-loss asymmetry, with worker performance deteriorating
in response to a pay cut relative to expectations but not improving in response to an
unconditional increase in pay (as shown in Mas 2006, and also in Kube et al. 2013).
3

Our results also contribute directly to the literature studying the links between teacher pay
and performance, and they are consistent with prior evidence finding no correlation between
increases in teacher pay and improved student performance in the US (Hanushek 1986; Betts
1995; Grogger 1996; Ballou and Podgursky 1997). However, these results have been questioned
for not having adequate exogenous variation in teacher pay, for failing to control for non-wage
compensation and differences in local labor markets (Loeb and Page 2000), and for being based
on changes in pay that may be too small to generate detectable impacts on outcomes (Dolton et
al 2011).5 We address all three of these limitations in in our setting.
Our results do not necessarily imply that a policy of unconditional salary increases would
have no positive impacts on service delivery in the long run. Dal Bo et al (2013) show that salary
increases for public sector jobs in Mexico increased the observable quality of job applicants, and
Ferraz and Finan (2011) find that higher wages for politicians in Brazil led to improved
performance through both a selection channel and an efficiency-wage channel. Our results
complement these by showing that large unconditional wage increases may yield no
improvement in performance of incumbent workers in a public sector setting of "permanent"
civil-service employment contracts with a low probability of being fired for non-performance.
Thus, policymakers hoping to increase the quality of government service delivery by increasing
salaries across the board need to trade off the potential benefits on the extensive margin against
the large intensive-margin costs of unconditional salary increases to incumbent worker that may
not yield any performance improvement.
Several global education policy reports recommend increasing teacher pay in low-income
countries as a way to improve teacher performance on the intensive margin (UNICEF 2011,
UNESCO 2014), and the Government of Indonesia similarly hoped that the salary increase
would improve teacher morale, motivation, and job satisfaction, and thereby lead to increased
teacher effort and student learning (see section 3). Our results suggest that while the policy did
benefit teachers considerably, there was no corresponding improvement in student learning,6
The only study based on a large increase in teacher salaries we are aware of is Ciotti (1998), who studies a large
increase in per-child education spending in Kansas City mandated by a court order (a lot of which was spent on
teacher salaries) and finds no impact on outcomes. This is, however, a case-study with limited identification.
6
Note that our results are based on a large-scale policy experiment, which was not designed to provide a precise test
of any one specific theoretical mechanism for why an unconditional salary increase may improve the performance of
incumbent workers. However, from a policy perspective, what matters is whether there was an overall effect through
any of the plausible mechanisms identified by proponents of higher teacher pay. This is the question that our
experiment was designed to answer (see section 3 for a more detailed discussion).
5

4

though the Government of Indonesia spent over 5 billion dollars per year (and over 5% of the
annual budget) on teacher salary increases. Such evidence is especially relevant for better policy
making in a public-sector setting, where there is no market test of whether increasing pay not
only improves worker satisfaction but also increases productivity,7 and where policy changes
(such as unconditional increases in salaries) are very difficult to reverse.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the Indonesian education
context and the teacher certification policy; section 3 discusses theoretical reasons for why the
policy may have improved teacher effort; section 4 describes our experiment (design, validity,
and data collection); section 5 presents results on teacher effort and student outcomes; section 6
interprets our results and discusses policy implications; section 7 concludes.
2. Background, and Policy Change
Indonesia has one of the largest school education systems in the world, serving over 50
million students across 34 provinces and more than 500 districts. The country consists of
thousands of islands spanning over 3000 miles from east to west (Figure 1), making service
delivery quite challenging. Promoting primary education was historically a high policy priority
for Indonesia relative to other developing countries in South Asia and Africa, and Indonesia
achieved high rates of primary school enrollment exceeding 90% by the early 1980s (World
Bank EdStats Database). Nevertheless, the performance of the education system in terms of
student learning outcomes is poor compared to that of many other middle-income countries. For
instance, Indonesian 15-year-olds' math test scores on the PISA 2012 assessment were
significantly below those of their peers in all but three participating countries, and their scores on
reading and science were similarly low (OECD 2013). On the 2011 TIMSS math assessment,
Indonesian 8th-graders outscored those from only five other countries (Mullis et al. 2012).
Education policy discussions in Indonesia in the years prior to 2005 identified poor teacher
quality and motivation as key limitations in the performance of the Indonesian education system.
The ambitious education reforms of 2005 were explicitly aimed to address this issue and made a
large fiscal commitment to doing so. The highlight of these reforms was the "Teacher Law" of
In contrast, Henry Ford's famous "five-dollar workday" led to a similar doubling in wages, but also led to sharp
increases in worker productivity (Raff and Summers 1987). Indeed, it is unlikely that Ford would have continued
paying high wages if productivity did not go up, whereas the Indonesian government spent billions of dollars on
teacher salary increases and has continued doing so each year despite no impact on student learning outcomes.

7

5

2005, which decreed that teachers who met certain eligibility criteria (being a civil-service
teacher, and holding either a four-year university degree, or a high rank in the civil service –
typically obtained through a long tenure) and who successfully completed a certification process
would receive a "professional allowance" (also referred to as the "certification allowance") equal
to 100% of their base pay (Chang et al. 2014; World Bank 2010).8
The certification process was initially meant to include a high-standards external assessment
of teacher subject knowledge and pedagogical practice, with an extensive skill-upgrading
component for teachers who did not meet these standards that would include up to a year of
additional training and tests. However, teachers' associations opposed the high-standards
certification exams that were originally planned. Thus, by the time the final law and regulations
were negotiated through the political and policymaking process, the quality-improvement
stipulations had been highly diluted. They were replaced with a much weaker certification
requirement that simply required teachers to submit a portfolio of their teaching materials and
achievements. Even for those who did not pass the portfolio evaluation, just two weeks of
additional training were required to attain certification. Thus, in practice, the certification process
yielded a doubling of base pay with only a modest hurdle to be surmounted.9
The reform led to a substantial increase in teacher salaries. While pre-reform teacher salaries
in Indonesia were lower than teacher salary benchmarks in other Southeast Asian countries
(which was part of the justification for the policy), teachers were reasonably well paid relative to
the distribution of college-graduate salaries in Indonesia even before the reform. Using
representative household survey data from the 2012 Indonesian labor force survey (Sakernas,
August 2012), we estimate that the doubling of base pay moved teacher compensation from
around the 50th percentile of the college-graduate salary distribution to the 90th percentile.10

Note that the professional allowance was 100% of base pay, rather than of total pre-certification pay. Teachers
often receive other allowances based on location of posting and taking on additional tasks, and so the allowance
increased total pay by 80% on average and by 67% for teachers who were eligible for treatment (see Table 4).
9
Very few teachers entering the certification process failed it. For instance, qualitative work showed that “a market
for forged certificates and other necessary portfolio items is prevalent.” Further, even those who failed the first
attempt were all certified after a two-week training program (World Bank 2010).
10
Our estimates are likely to be a lower bound of how teacher pay ranks among college graduates for several
reasons. First, they include only respondents with a positive wage, thus excluding the unemployed. Second, they are
based on salaries alone and do not include the generous pensions and benefits for civil-service teachers. Third, they
do not account for the certainty value of having much higher levels of employment security relative to the private
sector. Consistent with the idea that teacher salaries and benefits were attractive even prior to the reforms, interviews
with experts on Indonesian education suggest that teacher quit rates were very low both before and after the reforms.
8

6

Thus, for eligible teachers the reform significantly improved teachers' financial situation and
hence their ability to focus on their teaching. This very large salary increase was not conditional
on teachers' subsequent effort or effectiveness, but instead depended only on a one-time
determination that the teacher met some certification criteria. Hence, for all practical purposes,
the policy can be considered as having resulted in an unconditional salary increase for eligible
teachers. To the extent that undergoing the certification process actually did increase the human
capital of teachers, our estimates of the impact of certification will be an upper bound on the
intensive-margin impacts of an unconditional increase in pay.
3. Theoretical Considerations
Why should we expect an unconditional salary increase to improve teacher motivation and
effort on the intensive margin? Before discussing the theoretical models that support this idea,
we briefly summarize the policy discourse and documents that informed the policy change. Prior
to the policy change, its proponents pointed out that teacher salaries in Indonesia were lower than
those in neighboring middle-income countries (both in absolute terms and relative to per-capita
income). They argued that low salaries reduced both teachers' morale and caused them to take
second jobs, which decreased the time they had available for teaching. A report from early in the
reform process that discussed the government's justification for the policy change claimed that
"[l]ow pay is likely to be one of the main reasons why teachers perform poorly, have low morale
and tend to be poorly qualified" (World Bank 2008). Another stated that "teachers often have a
high rate of absenteeism because they take second jobs to make ends meet. This reality reduces
their motivation and effectiveness in the classroom" (World Bank 2010). After implementation
of the Teacher Law, a policy report noted that "[g]iven the increased remuneration now available
to [certified] teachers . . ., it is expected that there will be some reduction in this (absenteeism)
rate" (World Bank 2010).
Similar quotes also appear in the global policy literature on teacher quality. UNESCO's
flagship Education for All Global Monitoring Report claims that "[l]ow salaries reduce teacher
morale and effort" and "teachers often need to take on additional work – sometimes including
private tuition – which can reduce their commitment to their regular teaching jobs and lead to
absenteeism" (UNESCO 2014). Further, qualitative studies of service delivery in developing
countries have highlighted that low pay for public service providers makes it difficult for their
7

administrative supervisors to demand accountability for performance (e.g., Webb and Valencia
2006 on the case of Peru). A primary school director in Cambodia made this argument explicitly:
"If salaries went up, I could ask them [teachers] to work harder, give up their second jobs and
spend more time in school planning their work" (VSO 2008). This argument that higher salaries
can lead to greater motivation and better performance appears in the US literature as well; for
example, Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (1999) note that in addition to the attraction and retention
channel, "Many influential reports and proposals advocate substantial salary increases as a means
of attracting and retaining more talented teachers in the public schools and encouraging harder
work by current teachers" (emphasis added). A recent US op-ed from the Teacher Salary Project
argued that "Teachers who spend nights and weekends working other jobs cannot possibly
devote the necessary attention to their students or lesson plans."11 Appendix A presents a fuller
list of quotes and extracts from prominent education policy documents in Indonesia and several
countries that claim that increasing teachers' pay will increase their motivation and effort.
Thus, this significant policy reform in Indonesia was at least partly influenced by the widelyheld belief in the global and local education policy communities, that increasing teacher salaries
would improve teacher effort and student outcomes through intensive-margin channels. Indeed,
the pay increase was widely referred to in policy documents as an "incentive", suggesting an
implicit assumption by policy makers that there would be positive effects on teacher motivation
and effort on the intensive margin (for a recounting of the policymaking process and rationales,
see Chang et al. 2014).12
In Appendix B, we formalize the different mechanisms underlying the intuitive statements by
practitioners above. We present a simple theoretical sketch of three possible mechanisms for
why teacher effort may increase in response to an unconditional increase in salary and derive
comparative statics. These include: (1) reciprocity and gift exchange in employment contracts
(Akerlof 1982; Fehr and Gachter 2000); (2) a model in which effort on pro-social tasks like
teaching is a normal good with a positive income elasticity, because an increase in salary allows

Obtained from https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/answer-sheet/wp/2014/03/25/why-teachers-salariesshould-be-doubled-now/, 13/1/2015
12
The discussion above does not imply that there were no skeptics about the policy in Indonesia (especially in the
Ministries of Finance and Planning) and about whether it would be effective at improving education outcomes,
especially once the certification program made its way through the political and policymaking process. However, we
emphasize the plausible reasons for a positive impact because the policy was implemented despite skepticism from
some quarters, and these were among the stated reasons that led to the policy being implemented.
11

8

employees to reduce their hours at outside jobs and increase time and effort on their primary
teaching job, which gives them greater intrinsic utility (implicit in UNESCO 2014); and (3) a
model where the expected performance of teachers depends on their salary and where nonpecuniary sanctions or rewards are provided through community and administrative monitoring
based on performance relative to these expectations (which is the implicit argument made in
Webb and Valencia 2006, and Cotlear 2006).
In principle, the "reduced shirking" channel of efficiency wages (Shapiro-Stiglitz 1984)
should also apply here, because there is no theoretical reason for why teachers could not get fired
for low effort. If this were true, an increase in the continuation value of holding their job from
the unconditional salary increase should also reduce shirking. However, in practice, it was and is
rare for civil-service teachers to get fired. So we do not believe that this channel would apply in
our setting, and do not derive comparative statics. In terms of the model in Appendix B, this is
equivalent to saying that the "minimum effort" condition (below which employees would get
fired) was not binding before the reform, and would therefore not bind afterwards either.
It is important to note that our results are from a large-scale policy experiment that aimed to
improve education quality. Such policy experiments by design are unlikely to yield a precise
theoretical test of any one of the mechanisms listed above. For instance, reciprocity may require
that the "gift" of a higher salary be received from an employer whom the employee interacts with
on a regular basis and towards whom the employee therefore feels an obligation, as opposed to
being received from a "distant" taxpayer. Similarly, the mechanism that depends on reduced
shirking through more effective administrative/ community monitoring may hold only in a
setting where the monitors are able to apply non-pecuniary awards or sanctions that affect
teachers' behavior. However, policymakers would be less concerned about the precise
mechanism for impact and more interested in whether such an expensive policy had an impact on
teacher effort and learning outcomes through any combination of the posited mechanisms above.
This is the question that our study is designed to answer.
4. Experiment Design
4.1. Design, Sampling, and Implementation
Because of the large number of teachers covered, teacher access to the certification process
was phased in for budgetary reasons. The budgetary restrictions meant that only around 10% of
9

teachers were allowed to go through the certification process each year once the implementation
of the certification process began in 2006. Each year, each district was allocated a quota that
indicated how many of its teachers could start the certification process. Once a teacher was in the
process, he or she was practically guaranteed certification, as described above. Other eligible
teachers had to wait in a certification queue, sometimes for several years, with their position in
the queue determined by their seniority.
Our experimental design takes advantage of the phase-in procedure for teacher access to the
certification process. Rather than having teachers wait in the certification queue, the intervention
aimed to allow all eligible but not yet certified teachers (we define these as "target" teachers) in
treatment schools to immediately access the certification process at the start of the experiment (in
2009). Note that the experiment did not change any of the requirements of certification specified
in the law and regulations, but simply allowed otherwise eligible teachers in treatment schools to
enter the certification process early, rather than having to wait for a few more years. In other
words, the experiment accelerated access to the certification and pay increase for teachers in
treatment schools, but did not change the underlying program in any way. The experimental
protocol was implemented in close collaboration with the Ministry of National Education of the
Government of Indonesia, where senior officials were committed to conducting a high-quality
impact evaluation, and provided exemplary support in implementation.
We first identified a near-representative sample of 360 schools across 20 districts of
Indonesia to comprise the universe of the study. We started with the 2006 national teacher
census, which covered roughly 1,600,000 public primary and junior-secondary teachers across
454 districts. Districts that were too small, were too dangerous to visit, or were included in a
parallel randomized evaluation were excluded,13 leaving us with 383 districts in the sampling
frame. These represented nearly 85% of the districts and over 90% of the population of
Indonesia. From these, we randomly sampled 20 districts, stratified across the five major regions
of the country, with more districts assigned to regions with a larger population. The list of

13
Note that the district sampling for the two parallel sets of randomized evaluations were conducted using the same
procedures, and so the 20 districts dropped on account of not wanting spillovers between the studies were also a
representative sample. However, the second study (of a parallel initiative to set up teacher working groups) ended
up not being implemented. Note also that the districts dropped for access and safety reasons had a much lower
population on average.

10

districts sampled and the strata they represent are presented in Table A.1. A map of the sampled
districts and their representativeness is presented in Figure 1.14
Within each district, we stratified schools by the number of teachers, and sampled 12 primary
and 6 junior secondary schools (stratified by school size).15 Thus, the study universe consisted of
a near-representative sample of 240 primary and 120 junior secondary schools across 20 districts
of Indonesia. 80 primary and 40 junior secondary schools were then randomly assigned to
"treatment" status, while the other 160 primary and 80 junior secondary schools were assigned to
a "business as usual" control group. Just like the sampling of schools, the randomization was
also stratified by district, school type, and school size, and thus the design was identical across
districts, with each district being a microcosm of the overall study.16
Teachers in treatment schools, who were eligible for certification but not yet certified,
received a personal letter from the Ministry of National Education informing them that they had
been granted immediate access to the certification process. To ensure that other teachers would
have no incentive to transfer to treatment schools, only teachers who worked in the treatment
schools at the start of the experiment were eligible for this immediate access. The budget for the
extra certification "slots" created for the experimental study was provided through supplementary
funds from the National Government, and these slots were provided to districts over and above
their regular certification quota.
The research design did not create any other change in the schools besides the additional
quota allocation to treatment schools and the personalized letter sent to the "target" teachers
(who were eligible but not certified at the start of the 2009-2010 academic year). The teachers in

The five major regions of Indonesia and the number of districts sampled in each of them (roughly proportional to
population) include Java (10), Sumatra (5), Sulawesi (2), Eastern Indonesia (2), and Kalimantan (1). As the scale in
Figure 1 indicates, the East to West distance spanned by Indonesia is greater than that of the continental United
States, and our design imposed considerable logistical complexity. However, the resulting random assignment in a
near-representative sample of schools provides greater external validity to our results.
15
We dropped the strata comprising schools with very large and very small number of teachers. If schools were too
large, it would not have been feasible to test all the students in the school during the time that the enumerators would
have in the school. If they were too small, they would not provide adequate power. Note that primary schools cover
grades 1-6, while junior secondary schools cover grades 7-9. We find no evidence of heterogeneous effects as a
function of the number of teachers in the school, and so our results are likely to be representative of all schools, even
though the smallest and largest ones were not in the study universe.
16
Specifically, each of the 20 districts had 6 treatment schools (2 junior secondary, and 4 primary) and 12 control
schools (4 junior secondary and 8 primary). Schools were stratified into "triplets" based on size, and one school in
each triplet was assigned to treatment status. Note that the intervention was expensive and thus, optimal sample
allocation to maximize power yielded a larger control group than treatment group. All our estimating equations will
include "district-triplet" fixed effects (since these are the strata within which we randomized treatment assignment).
14

11

control schools continued business as usual, and those who were eligible but not certified at the
start of the study progressed through the certification process at the same rate as the rest of the
country. Thus, our identifying variation comes from the sharp increase in the fraction of
certified teachers in the treatment schools induced by the experiment, contrasted with the
gradual, business-as-usual increase in the control schools.
The possibilities of spillovers to other schools were minimized by making sure that there was
no public announcement of the additional quota: the eligibility for certification was
communicated to teachers only by the personalized letter that they received from the
Government. Further, within the treatment schools, the teachers who did not receive the
certification letter were those who were not eligible for certification in any case (by virtue of not
being a college graduate or a civil-service teacher). As a result, the experiment is less likely to
have engendered resentment among non-target teachers in the school than in settings where the
pay increases might have been seen as arbitrary. Thus, by conducting our study in a setting
where the pay increases were in line with pre-announced policy criteria, we minimize the extent
to which the intervention may be considered ad hoc or unsustainable.
4.2. Project Timeline and Data
The school year in Indonesia runs from July to May, and the study was carried out over three
school years from 2009-10 to 2011-12. We refer to these three school years as Y1, Y2, and Y3 in
the paper. The sampling and randomization of schools were conducted during the school
holidays before Y1, and the government sent letters to eligible uncertified teachers announcing
their access to the certification process at the start of Y1. The certification process (including
preparing and submitting the application and teaching portfolio, having them evaluated, and
receiving the certification) typically took one full school year, and teachers typically got
"certified" by the end of Y1, and started receiving their certification allowance (equal to 100% of
base pay) at the start of Y2 (the 2010-11 school year).
We carried out three waves of data collection, during which we interviewed head teachers,
teachers, and students, and we conducted independent tests of both teacher knowledge and
student learning outcomes. The first wave was a baseline collected in October 2009, which we
refer to as Y0. The baseline was deliberately conducted a few months into the school year (after
the certification eligibility letters were sent to teachers in treatment schools) so that we could
verify through interviews of the teachers that they had in fact received these letters and entered
12

the certification process. The second wave of data was collected in April-May 2011 at the end of
2 years of the project (Y2), and the third wave was collected in April-May 2012 at the end of 3
years (Y3).17 Figure 2 shows the project timeline for the intervention and data collection.
We collected data on school facilities, finances, and other school-level data from headteacher interviews. Teacher interviews included questions on demographics, experience, pay,
outside jobs, income (from teaching and other sources), and job satisfaction. We used a
combination of school and teacher interviews to map teachers to specific classrooms and subjects
(which will not be needed for the school-level ITT estimates, but will be needed for the IV
estimates of the impact of being taught by a certified teacher). Students in all schools were
tested using multiple choice tests of math, science, and Indonesian, and students in junior
secondary schools were also tested in English. The tests also included a short demographic
survey to collect basic information on household assets from students.
4.3 Validity of Experimental Design
The randomization was successful in ensuring that treatment and control schools were similar
prior to the experiment. There was no significant difference between treatment and control
schools on school-level variables such as the number of students, teachers, or class size (Table 1Panel A). There were also no significant differences in student test scores across treatment and
control schools on test scores in any subject (math, science, Indonesian, or English) or in an
index of household assets (Table 1 - Panel B).18 We report the simple differences in means in
column (3) and report the differences with "district-triplet" fixed effects in column (4), since
these are the strata within which we randomized treatment assignment, and the stratum fixed
effects will be included in our estimating equation for treatment effects.
Teacher characteristics were also similar across treatment and control schools. There were no
significant differences on most teacher-level variables, including teachers' own test scores, their
certification status, their base pay, or the incidence of holding an outside job (Table 2: Columns

Since the certification process took one year, the first year in which target teachers in treatment schools would
have received the additional allowance was the second year of the project. We therefore felt that it was highly
unlikely that there would be any impact at the end of Y1 (since teachers in treatment schools would not have
received any additional payments at this point). Thus, given the high costs of surveys across the Indonesian islands,
we did not collect data at the end of Y1.
18
Note that the randomization (and communication to "target" teachers was carried out before the baseline survey)
and hence the randomization could not be balanced ex ante on these variables. Thus, it is reassuring to see that
treatment and control schools were balanced on observables.
17

13

1-4).19 The only major difference (which is as expected) is that teachers in treatment schools
were 32 percentage points more likely to have entered the certification quota—a difference that
confirms that the intervention successfully led to many more teachers in treatment schools
getting access to the certification process.
We see the impact of the treatment even more clearly in Table 2: Columns 5-8, which are
restricted to the "target" teachers who were "eligible but not certified" in either the treatment or
control schools at the start of the study. In this group, 73% of teachers in treatment schools were
in the certification quota; whereas in the control schools, the rate was only 18% (indicating the
rate at which "target" teachers would have gotten certified in the absence of the experiment). We
do observe small differences in other teacher characteristics that are attributable to random
sampling variation. While the simple differences (in column 7) are typically not significant, the
differences with the stratum fixed effects (in column 8) are significant in a few cases. However,
the magnitude of these differences is small, and their significance is attributable to the very small
standard errors obtained from including the stratum fixed effects.20 The focus of our analysis
will be on school-level ITT estimates (using all teachers), and on IV estimates of being taught by
a certified teacher (using the sample of "target" teachers).
We also test for differential attrition and entry of students over the period of the study. Table
A.2 shows the different cohorts in our study, the years in which they were tested, and which
cohorts are in our estimation sample at different points of the study. We find that there is no
differential attrition among students who were in our baseline test and who continue to be in our
estimation sample over time (Table A.3 – Panel A), and also find that there is no difference in
attrition rates across treatment and control groups as a function of baseline test scores (Panels B
and C). We also test that the treatment did not induce any compositional changes in incoming
student cohorts over time as measured by a household asset index (Table A.4).

There is a significant difference in the fraction of teachers with a bachelor's degree, but this is only one out of
twelve pre-intervention characteristics and is likely attributable to sampling variation.
20
Teachers in treatment schools were slightly more likely to have a bachelor's degree, but slightly less likely to have
a senior civil-service rank. These factors offset each other in determining eligibility for certification, and we see no
difference in the fraction of teachers who are eligible for certification across treatment and control schools (56% vs.
57% - columns 1 and 2). There are also small differences in base pay and other allowances across target teachers in
treatment and control schools, but these are very small in magnitude relative to the certification allowance itself (as
we will see in Table 4).
19

14

5. Results
5.1 First-Stage
The time path of the fraction of teachers in treatment and control schools who had entered the
certification process over the three years of the study is shown in Figure 3. Three points are
noteworthy. First, there was no difference in the rate of teacher certification between treatment
and control schools before the start of the experiment in 2009. Second, the intervention
introduced a sharp increase in the fraction of teachers admitted to the certification process in
treatment schools in 2009, even as the trend in control schools remained constant. Third, the gap
in fraction of admitted teachers narrowed over time, as the eligible teachers in the control schools
gained access to the certification process at a "business as usual" rate. Thus, the difference in the
fraction of teachers admitted to the certification process across treatment and control schools is
higher at the time of the baseline survey (Y0) than at the end of Y2 and Y3.21
As described earlier, teachers entered the certification process at the start of each school year,
completed the process over the course of the year, got certified by the end of the year, and started
receiving their payments at the start of the next year. Thus, at the time of the baseline there was
no difference between treatment and control schools in the fraction of teachers who were
certified or who had received the extra certification allowance. However, there was a sharp
increase in both of these indicators at the end of Y2 and Y3 (Figure 4).
Table 3 - Panel A shows the differences in Figures 3 and 4, along with tests of equality. In
the first year, the share of teachers in treatment schools who had entered the certification process
was 32 percentage points higher (or more than double) than that in the control group, while there
was not yet any difference in the fraction certified or paid the certification allowance. At the end
of Y2 and Y3, the difference in the fraction of teachers who had entered the certification process
falls to 17 and 8 percentage points respectively (since the control schools "catch up" over time).
At the end of Y2 (Y3), the fraction of teachers in treatment schools who report being certified is
23 (14) percentage points higher, and the fraction who report being paid the certification
allowance is 28 (23) percentage points higher.

Some of the teachers who were not eligible for certification at the start of the study (typically because they lacked
college degrees) do become eligible over time as they complete the eligibility requirement. However, teachers who
become eligible for certification in treatment schools in later years did not receive accelerated access.

21

15

Note that the difference in fraction of teachers who are paid their certification allowance is
higher than the difference in the fraction who are certified (at the end of both Y2 and Y3). This is
expected: many eligible teachers in the control schools would have entered the certification
process at the start of Y2 and Y3 and then been certified at the end of Y2 and Y3 respectively,
but would only have started getting paid their allowances at the start of the next school year.
These teachers will therefore report being certified but will not yet have started getting paid their
allowance at the time of the Y2 and Y3 surveys, respectively. On the other hand, teachers in
treatment schools who gained access to the certification process at the start of Y1 will have
completed getting certified by the end of Y1, and started getting paid their allowances in Y2.22
Since most of the posited mechanisms by which the pay increase would be expected to improve
teacher effort and student outcomes are based on teachers actually receiving the extra pay, the
most relevant metric of the "effective difference" between treatment and control schools for our
study is the difference in the fraction of teachers who have been "paid their certification
allowance".
We present the corresponding figures for the teachers who were "eligible but not certified" at
the start of the study, and were the "targets" of the intervention, in Table 3 – Panel B. As
expected, the differences are more pronounced for this group. The "target" teachers in treatment
schools are 54 percentage points more likely to have entered the certification process at the time
of the baseline survey. At the end of Y2 (Y3), they are 43 (24) percentage points more likely to
be certified, and 54 (45) percentage points more likely to have been paid their certification
allowance (Table 3 - Panel B).
5.2 Teacher-level Outcomes
We find that the accelerated access to the certification process and the additional allowance
had several positive impacts on teachers that persisted both two years and three years into the
experimental study. At the end of Y2 (Y3), teachers in treatment schools received 96% (54%)
more certification pay and 13% (10%) more total pay compared to those in control schools. They
were also 14% (12%) more likely to report being satisfied with their total income, 18% (16%)
less likely to report facing financial problems and stress, 18% (18%) less likely to be holding a
22

Thus, the difference between treatment and control groups across measures reflects variation in the year of entry
into the certification process and the time lag in the process. Once we control for year of entry into certification, the
difference between treatment and control schools in the fraction of teachers who are certified and the fraction who
are "certified and paid" is the same.

16

second job, and spent 19% (16% - not significant) less time working on second jobs (Table 4 –
columns 1-8).23
As we would expect, the impacts are stronger within the universe of "target" teachers. At the
end of Y2 (and Y3), "target" teachers in treatment schools received 271% (102%) more
certification pay and 25% (18%) more total pay compared to those in control schools. Note that
the certification allowance was 100% of base pay for teachers, but that in practice, the increase
over their total pre-certification pay was around 63-67% because the total pay (prior to
certification) included allowances in addition to their base pay.24 "Target" teachers in treatment
schools were also 29% (23%) more likely to report being satisfied with their total income, 27%
(31%) less likely to report facing financial problems and stress, 19% (12%) less likely to be
holding a second job, and spent 26% (10%) less time working on second jobs at the end of Y2
(Y3) (Table 4 – Columns 7-12).25
Since eligible teachers in control schools would also become eligible for certification over
time, our experiment did not induce a doubling in permanent income. Rather, it accelerated a
permanent doubling of base pay, and increased lifetime income for target teachers by 2 to 3 years
of base pay. Further, while eligible teachers in control schools may have been able to anticipate
their future increase in income, credit constraints may have limited the extent to which they
could borrow against future income. Thus, the effects we report above on increased job
satisfaction, reduced financial stress, and reduced outside jobs should be interpreted as the result

These figures are presented in percentage changes relative to the mean in the control group. The tables present the
changes in percentage points. We maintain a parallel format to Table 3 and report the differences across treatment
and control schools both without stratum fixed effects (columns 3 and 7) and with stratum fixed effects (columns 4
and 8). The former are presented to enable a simple comparison of means, whereas the latter correspond to our main
estimating equations and the numbers discussed in the text are based on columns 4 and 8.
24
It is easy to back this out from the numbers in Tables 3 and 4. In the sample with all teachers, we see in Table 3
that 55% of teachers in the treatment group had been paid the certification allowance in Y2, and see in Table 4 that
the mean certification pay received was 1.11 million IDR (Indonesian Rupiah). Thus, average certification pay
conditional on receiving it was 1.11M/0.55, which is 2.01 million IDR. This is, as it should be, a 100% increase
over the mean base pay of 2.02 million IDR. Base pay plus allowances equals 2.79 million IDR, so certification pay
was 67% of pre certification pay (2.01/2.97). The calculation can also be done with the "target" teachers, where we
see that the average certification pay conditional on receiving it in Y2 was 1.40M/0.72, which is similar at 1.94
million IDR. But since other allowances for civil service teachers were higher, the pre-certification pay for the
"target" teachers was 3.10M. Thus, certified teachers received a 63% increase (1.94/3.10) in their total pay.
25
Results on incidence of second jobs and time spent on second jobs are not significant in Y3 (perhaps reflecting
the weaker "first stage" of the treatment in Y3 as certification rates in the control schools catch up over time).
23

17

of an increase in 2 to 3 years of permanent income as well as the liquidity effects of actually
receiving the extra income on hand.
Overall, the teacher pay increase induced by our experiment was successful in achieving the
stated objectives of the certification policy regarding teachers' financial situation, job
satisfaction, and ability to better focus on teaching by reducing the need to hold outside jobs.
However, we find no evidence to suggest that teachers in treatment schools put in greater effort
in response to this pay increase. We find no difference between treatment and control schools on
teacher test scores or the likelihood of pursuing further education, suggesting that teachers did
not use the extra time available for their primary teaching job to upgrade their skills in any
meaningful way. We also find no difference in self-reported absence rates, suggesting that
teacher effort was also unchanged. These results hold for both the overall sample of teachers and
the sample that is restricted to "target" teachers, who received an even larger increase in pay.
Nevertheless, as per the theoretical mechanisms described in section 3, it is possible that the
reduced financial stress, reduced incidence of second jobs, and increased motivation could have
led to an improvement in teacher effectiveness as measured by student learning outcomes; we
test this possibility in the next section.
5.3 Student Outcomes
5.3.1 Intention to Treat (ITT) Estimates
Since the randomization was conducted at the school level, we first present school-level
intention-to-treat estimates of the impact on student learning outcomes of being in a school that
had a sharp increase in the fraction of certified teachers who had received a large unconditional
increase in pay. Our main estimating equation takes the form:
∙ Tijks

∙

∙

∙

(1)

The dependent variable of interest is Tijksd , which is the normalized test score of student i on
subject s, where j, k, denote the grade and school respectively. T (Y0 ) indicates the baseline tests,
while T (Yn ) indicates a test at period Y2 or Y3. Including the normalized baseline test score
improves efficiency, due to the autocorrelation between test scores across multiple periods.26
As we show in Table A.2, some of the cohorts included in our analysis did not have a baseline test. We set the
normalized baseline score to zero for these students (similarly for students who may have been absent at the time of
the baseline test but are present in the Y2 and Y3 tests) and include a dummy variable in equation (1) that takes the
26

18

We also include a set of stratum fixed effects (

, to absorb geographic variation and increase

efficiency, and to account for the stratification of the randomization (which was done within
district-level "triplets" of schools as described in section 3.1). Finally, we also include the mean
normalized baseline test scores across all students in the school for the corresponding grade and
subject ( Tijks ), which further increases efficiency (Altonji and Mansfield 2014). The main
estimate of interest is

, which provides an unbiased estimate of the impact of being in a

"Treatment" school (the intent-to-treat or ITT estimate) since schools were assigned to
"Treatment" status by lottery.
We present these ITT results in Table 5—first combined across school types (columns 1-5),
and then separated by primary schools (columns 6-9) and junior secondary schools (columns 1014). We present results individually for each subject, and also pooled across subjects, and
present results separately by Y2 and Y3 (Panel A and B respectively). Overall, we find no
evidence that students in treatment schools (which experience a significant increase in the
fraction of certified teachers) scored any better than those in control schools. Not a single effect
(in any subject, in either type of school, or at either of the two time periods) is significantly
different from zero, and the pooled effects across subjects and school types have a point estimate
of 0.00σ at the end of Y2 and 0.01σ at the end of Y3. These zero effects are very precisely
estimated with standard errors of 0.025σ, which provides us adequate power to detect effects as
low as 0.05σ at the 5% level. Thus, not only are the point estimates close to zero, but we can
also reject effect sizes greater than 0.042σ at the end of Y2 and effect sizes greater than 0.061σ at
the end of Y3.
Figure 5 presents quantile treatment effects of being in a treatment school, by plotting student
test scores at each percentile of the control and treatment school test score distribution after Y2
and Y3 (left hand side plots). We see that the treatment effects are not only zero on average, but
close to zero at every part of the test score distribution. On the right-hand side, we plot the
corresponding "first stage" quantile plots where we show the number of years that a student at
each quantile of the test-score distribution spent with a certified teacher in a treatment and
control school. The figure makes clear that students at every percentile of the test-score

value 1 when the lagged test score is missing and 0 when it is present. We also allow the coefficient on the lagged
test score to vary by grade.

19

distribution after Y2 and Y3 experienced a significant increase in their exposure to a certified
teacher, but that nevertheless there was no impact on learning outcomes.
One issue in interpreting our school-level ITT estimates is that it is possible that the
estimated zero effects result from a combination of positive effects on students taught by
teachers who were "targets" of the experimental intervention (who may be motivated to increase
effort by the pay raise) and negative effects on students taught by "non-target" teachers
(especially those who were not eligible for certification), who may have withdrawn effort in
response to the perceived "unfairness" of not receiving the certification allowance.27 We test for
this possibility by decomposing the composite results shown in Table 5 by students taught by
"target" teachers and those taught by non-target teachers (across treatment and control schools)
and present the results in Table 6.
For the Y2 data, we simply consider whether a student was taught by a target teacher in Y2
(since none of the teachers affected by the treatment would have been paid the certification
allowance in Y1), and find no significant difference in the outcomes of these students across
treatment and control schools in any subject or in either type of school (Table 6 - Panel A). We
test for equality of test scores of students taught by target and non-target teachers and cannot
reject equality.28
For the Y3 data, we consider the four possible combinations of teacher type that a student
could have had in Y2 and Y3 (target – target; target – non-target; non-target – target; and nontarget – non-target) and again find no significant different in test-score outcomes across these
categories between treatment and control schools. When we focus on the most extreme
comparison of students in treatment schools, by comparing those who were taught by a target
teacher in both Y2 and Y3 with those taught by a non-target teacher in both Y2 and Y3, we still
find no evidence that the former did better.
5.3.2 Instrumental Variable (IV) Estimates
The ITT estimates presented above are at the school level, and are based on a 28 (23)
percentage point increase in the fraction of "certified and paid" teachers in the treatment schools
27

As described earlier, the design of the experiment would have mitigated against this possibility, because the
experiment did not change any of the certification norms stipulated in the law, and thus there is no reason for noneligible teachers to feel such resentment. But we still test for this possibility.
28
The table separately reports outcomes for the small fraction of students (around 5% of observations) for whom we
are not able to verify the target status of their teacher (reported as “missing”).

20

at the end of Y2 (Y3) (Table 3 – Panel A). To estimate the direct impact of being taught by a
certified teacher, we restrict ourselves to the students who were taught by a "target" teacher and
instrument for being taught by a certified teacher using the random assignment of treatment
across schools. Specifically, we aim to estimate:
∙ Tijks

∙

∙ Tijks

∙

∙

∙
ϒ∙

(2b)

∙

where the coefficient of interest is

(2a)

, which estimates the impact on student test-scores for

each year of being taught by a Certified teacher (with the additional pay), and the rest of the
variables are defined as in Eq. (1).
One technical consideration in estimating Eq. (2b) is the issue of test-score decay (or
incomplete persistence) over time. Estimates from several settings suggest that there is
considerable annual decay in test scores, with the persistence parameter ϒ (estimated as the
coefficient on the lagged test score in a standard value-added model) typically being around 0.5
(Andrabi et al. 2013, Muralidharan 2012). Since it is not possible to jointly estimate the
persistence parameter and obtain an unbiased experimental treatment effect at the same time (see
Andrabi et al. 2013 and Muralidharan 2012 for further discussion), we estimate Eq. (2b) for
different values of ϒ and present estimates of

, along with standard errors for a range of values

of ϒ in Table 7. The estimates with ϒ = 0 correspond to complete decay of any test score gains in
a year by the end of the next year, while those with ϒ = 1 correspond to complete persistence.
Based on several prior studies, our preferred estimates assume ϒ = 0.5.
The main threat to interpreting these estimates as the annual impact of being taught by a
certified teacher is the possibility of endogenous re-assignment of certified teachers within
treatment schools to potentially weaker students. We test for this in Table A.5 and find that there
is no significant difference in the probability of a student being assigned to target teachers across
treatment and control schools during either Y2 or Y3 (Table A.5 – Panel A). We also find no
difference in the probability of students being assigned to a target teacher as a function of their

21

incoming test scores (based on comparing Y0 scores in Y2 and Y2 scores in Y3), and whether
they are above or below the median asset ownership (Table A.5 – Panels B-G).29
Table 7 presents IV estimates of being taught by a certified teacher for both the full sample
of students, as well as for the sample of students taught by target teachers (which will give us
more precise IV estimates, since the first-stage is higher in this case). Focusing on students who
were taught by target teachers, we can reject a positive effect greater than 0.065σ at the 95%
level in the Y2 data. In the Y3 data, our preferred estimate is the one where the sample includes
students who were taught by a target teacher in either Y2 or Y3, and we find that we can reject a
positive effect greater than 0.1σ at the 95% level.30
Finally, we examine heterogeneity of treatment effects as a function of several school-level
characteristics, including the fraction of all teachers who were target teachers, the total number
of target teachers, average student affluence, several measures of school size, as well as mean
baseline test scores in the school. We find no evidence of heterogeneous effects by any of these
characteristics (Table 8). Thus, we find that doubling teacher base pay had almost no impact on
improving student test scores, either in aggregate or in any subset of the data.
6. Cost Effectiveness and Policy Implications
Viewed as a program to improve learning outcomes in developing countries, increasing
teacher salaries across the board as was done in Indonesia is clearly very expensive. Of course,
most of the costs of the program do not represent a social cost, because the salary increase
mostly represents a transfer to teachers. The actual social cost of the program would be the
deadweight loss of raising tax revenue, and the cost of implementing the certification program.
However, developing countries often face hard budget constraints because of limited ability to
run deficits and the cost of ineffective public spending should also include the opportunity cost
of potentially higher-return public spending that was crowded out.31 To simplify our analysis,
Note that we test for differential assignment of students to target teachers as a function of the household asset
index because we do not have baseline test scores for many of the cohorts in our final estimation sample.
30
We also show the ITT effects for each estimation sample in Table 7 to enable a clear comparison between ITT and
IV estimates. These are almost identical because we find very little difference in outcomes across students taught by
target and non-target teachers (as seen in Table 6). Note that these ITT estimates are slightly different from those in
Table 5 because they exclude cases where we cannot determine the “target” status of teachers teaching a particular
grade and subject (these are the “missing” observations in Table 6), to enable a comparison of ITT and IV estimates
in the same estimation sample.
31
In principle, governments should be able to borrow to finance any project that has a higher rate of return than the
cost of borrowing. In practice, financial markets find it difficult to evaluate the quality of public spending and
29

22

we limit the use of this "opportunity cost" framework to education. We assume that there is a
fixed education budget, and compare this program to other education interventions that may have
been possible to implement with the same resources.
For this experiment, the additional salary costs due to accelerated certification were about 66
US dollars per student per year in the treatment schools.32 The cost of implementing the
certification program should be added to this figure, but we have too little information to make a
credible estimate. Doing so would require assessing the time costs of teachers, assessors, and
trainers--who have to prepare and assess portfolios and possibly attend training--as well as other
administrative costs. But even without including those costs, it is clear that other salary-related
interventions have been able to achieve substantial positive effects on learning at much lower
cost. For instance, a multi-year experimental program providing performance-based incentive
pay to teachers in India (Muralidharan and Sundararaman 2011) had additional yearly salary
costs of only about 4 US dollars per student (including implementation costs)33, yet it achieved
student learning gains of 0.27σ and 0.17σ in math and language respectively. Over a 5-year
period, the performance-pay experiment yielded gains of 0.54σ and 0.35σ in math and language
for a cohort exposed to the performance-pay intervention for five years (Muralidharan 2012).
These calculations focus only on the intensive margin, and it is possible that education
quality in Indonesia could improve over time as a result of higher-quality professionals entering
the teaching profession.34 However, there are three considerations to keep in mind while
weighing this extensive-margin argument.
impose a sovereign risk interest rate penalty when fiscal deficits exceed a threshold. Thus, ineffective public
spending will typically reduce the fiscal space for more productive public investments.
32
Costs were calculated by adding up impacts on monthly certification allowance in Y2 and Y3
(0.543+0.476=1.019mln IDR, Table 4, all teachers), multiplying this by 12 and the average number of teachers (9.3,
Table 1) and dividing by the average number of children in a school (190, Table 1), using a 9000 IDR/US dollar
exchange rate from the duration of the experiment was 2009-2012.
33
Incentive treatments cost up to Rupees 10,000 per school. Per student costs obtained by dividing by average
student in school (113), and using an exchange rate of 44 Rupees to the dollar (in the years of the experiment 20052007), yielding a cost of 2 US Dollars per student. The authors conservatively estimate the cost of implementing the
program as equal to the costs of the bonuses, and so including the implementation cost would double the per-child
cost to 4 USD per student, which is the figure we use.
34
Chang et al. (2014) provide some suggestive evidence that the quality of applicants to education faculties of some
tertiary institutions has risen. It is too early to tell, however, whether this has meant higher quality of new entrants
into the teaching force, in part because there has not been a good measure of quality of entrants into the teaching
force. At the system-wide level, if there have been improvements in quality of new teachers, it has not yet increased
scores on international assessments of lower-secondary students. Indonesia’s average PISA scores in math and
science fell between 2006 and 2012, while reading scores were stagnant, and average TIMSS scores fell
substantially between 2007 and 2011. Note that the large budgetary cost of teacher salary increases may have also
crowded out fiscal space for other more cost-effective policies for improving education quality.

23

First, even if the policy improved the quality of teachers entering the profession, there would
still be a very large intensive-margin cost of the policy. For instance, if we assume a uniform
distribution of civil-service teachers between ages 24 and 60, the intensive-margin cost of a
policy of doubling teacher pay across the board would be equal to 18 years of the annual teacher
wage bill in Indonesia. Discounting at 5% (assuming conservatively that nominal wages increase
with inflation, and not with growth rates), the present discounted cost would be over 10 years of
the annual teacher wage bill, or nearly 100% of the annual government budget. Since it is
politically challenging for higher salaries to apply only to new entrants, it may be difficult to
avoid the large intensive-margin costs of an unconditional across-the-board pay increase.
Second, even if such an increase raises the general ability of new entrants into the teaching
profession, it is not obvious that this would improve social welfare because that talent would be
getting displaced from other sectors in the economy. While it is possible that the social returns of
attracting more talented individuals to teaching may be higher than the costs to the sector they
are displaced from, there is no evidence that this is the case. Further, since public-sector
management quality and productivity is typically lower than that of the private sector (Bloom
and Van Reenen 2010), it is possible that higher-quality human capital may be less productive in
the public sector and that such a displacement may reduce aggregate output.35
Third and finally, an alternative policy that links at least some of the pay increases to
performance is likely to be more effective on the extensive margin as well, since increasing the
spread of worker pay to more closely reflect their productivity is also likely to attract higherability candidates than an across-the-board increase in salaries on a compressed schedule that is
not linked to performance (Lazear 2000). In the context of education, Muralidharan and
Sundararaman (2011b) find that teachers who are ex ante more willing to accept a meanpreserving spread in pay linked to their performance are the ones who are more effective ex post,
suggesting that a similar argument may apply for teachers in Indonesia as well.
Thus, while increasing teacher compensation across the board may have some positive longterm effects on education quality by increasing teacher quality, our results and the discussion
above suggest that there may be much more cost-effective ways of doing so.

For instance, Schuendeln and Playforth (2014) present evidence from India suggesting that educated workers
prefer to join the government sector (which has high wages and high private returns) even though the social returns
of the government sector are low.
35

24

7. Discussion and Conclusion
This paper has offered new evidence on a key question in labor and personnel economics:
How does a large, unconditional increase in salary affect employee job performance on the
intensive margin? Answering this question is especially important in public sector contexts
where arguments are often made that unconditional increases in salary will improve the
performance of incumbent workers. However, not only is there little evidence on this question,
but also there is also no market test of whether this is true in practice when implemented. Thus, it
is possible for policies to be misguided for a long time without a credible feedback mechanism
on the effectiveness of expensive policies such as unconditional increases in employee pay.
This paper contributes to answering this question with a large-scale randomized experiment
in the context of a unique policy change in Indonesia that led to a permanent doubling of base
teacher salaries. The experiment was implemented successfully, and it significantly accelerated
the process of certification for eligible teachers in treatment schools, leading to a large increase
in teacher incomes in treated schools. We find that the experiment also substantially improved
the intermediate variables through which policymakers hoped that the increase in salary would
lead to better education quality: teachers in treated schools were significantly more likely to be
satisfied with their income, significantly less likely to report financial stress, and significantly
less likely to hold a second job than teachers in control schools.
Yet despite this improvement in teachers' pay and satisfaction, there was no impact on
teacher effort towards upgrading their own skills, on teacher effort in the classroom, or on the
ultimate outcome of student learning. The test score impact of being in a treated school is close
to zero, and we can rule out effects as small as 0.05σ at the 95% level in treated schools.
Similarly, the test score impact of being taught by a certified teacher who had received the pay
increase was also close to zero, and we can rule out positive test score effects larger than 0.1σ at
the 95% level. Thus, it appears that the large increase in teacher salaries was mostly a transfer to
teachers without any corresponding improvement in productivity.
While we find no impact on student test scores from being taught by incumbent teachers with
a pay increase at the end of two and three years, it is possible that the large increase in teacher
base pay could improve the quality of entrants into teaching and improve student learning in the
longer-run through such an extensive margin channel. However, given the ratio of new entrants
to incumbents, any such extensive-margin effect would take many years to show significant
25

effects on aggregate learning scores - and in fact, no improvement in students' average
performance on international assessments is yet evident.
Thus, policymakers hoping to increase the quality of government service delivery by
increasing salaries across the board need to trade off these potential benefits on the extensive
margin against the large intensive-margin costs of unconditional increases in public sector pay
that may not yield any performance improvement. Our results are likely to be relevant in a broad
range of public sector settings – and especially so in developing countries. For instance, the
decadal Pay Commissions in India routinely recommend large unconditional across-the-board
increases in public employee salaries that are not linked to performance in any way.
Our results suggest that this may not be a very effective use of scarce public funds if the goal
is to improve the quality of public service delivery in a cost-effective manner. They are also
consistent with a small but emerging literature showing that there is a considerable public-sector
wage premium in developing countries (Finan et al. 2015), and that wages of public-sector
workers in these settings are typically not correlated with productivity (see Das et al. 2016 for an
example in the context of public-sector healthcare workers, and Muralidharan 2016 for a policyoriented synthesis of the evidence). They also highlight the importance of more research on the
personnel economics of the public sector and of generating more evidence on the effectiveness of
policies to improve public-sector worker productivity (see Finan et al. 2015 for a recent review
of this evidence).
References:
AKERLOF, G. A. (1982): "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 97, 543-569.
ALLCOTT, H. (2015): "Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 130, 1117-1165.
ALTONJI, J. G., and R. K. MANSFIELD (2014): "Group-Average Observables as Controls for
Sorting on Unobservables When Estimating Group Treatment Effects: The Case of
School and Neighborhood Effects," National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER
Working Papers: 20781.
ANDRABI, T., J. DAS, A. I. KHWAJA, and T. ZAJONC (2011): "Do Value-Added Estimates Add
Value? Accounting for Learning Dynamics," American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3 3, 29-54.
BALLOU, D., and M. PODGURSKY (1998): "The Case against Teacher Certification," Public
Interest, 17-29.
BETTS, J. R. (1995): "Does School Quality Matter - Evidence from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth," Review of Economics and Statistics, 77, 231-250.
26

BLOOM, N., and J. VAN REENEN (2010): "Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms
and Countries?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24, 203-224.
CHANG, M. C., S. AL-SAMARRAI, A. B. RAGATZ, J. DE REE, S. SHAEFFER, and R. STEVENSON
(2013): Teacher Reform in Indonesia: The Role of Politics and Evidence in Policy
Making. Washington, DC: World Bank.
CIOTTI, P. (1998): "Money and School Performance: Lessons from the Kansas City
Desegregation Experiment," Cato Policy Analysis No. 298.
COTLEAR, D. (2006): "Improving Education, Health Care, and Social Assistance for the Poor," in
A New Social Contract for Peru: An Agenda for Improving Education, Health Care, and
the Social Safety Net, ed. by D. Cotlear. A World Bank Country Study. Washington,
D.C.: World Bank, xxii, 303.
DAL BÓ, E., F. FINAN, and M. A. ROSSI (2013): "Strengthening State Capabilities: The Role of
Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service*," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
128, 1169-1218.
DAS, J., A. HOLLA, A. MOHPAL and K. MURALIDHARAN (2016): "Quality and Accountability in
Healthcare Delivery: Audit-Study Evidence from Primary Care in India" American
Economic Review, Forthcoming
DOLTON, P., O. D. MARCENARO-GUTIERREZ, L. PISTAFERRI, and Y. ALGAN (2011): "If You Pay
Peanuts Do You Get Monkeys? A Cross-Country Analysis of Teacher Pay and Pupil
Performance," Economic Policy, 5-55.
ESTEVES–SORENSON, C., and R. MACERA (2015): "Gift Exchange in the Workplace: Addressing
the Conflicting Evidence with a Careful Test," Yale.
FALK, A. (2007): "Gift Exchange in the Field," Econometrica, 75, 1501-1511.
FEHR, E., S. GACHTER, and G. KIRCHSTEIGER (1997): "Reciprocity as a Contract Enforcement
Device: Experimental Evidence," Econometrica, 65, 833-860.
FEHR, E., G. KIRCHSTEIGER, and A. RIEDL (1993): "Does Fairness Prevent Market Clearing - an
Experimental Investigation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 437-459.
FERRAZ, C., and F. FINAN (2011): "Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary Incentives
on Quality and Performance," UC Berkeley.
FINAN, F., B. OLKEN, and R. PANDE (2015): "The Personnel Economics of the State," NBER
Working Paper 21825.
GNEEZY, U., and J. A. LIST (2006): "Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift
Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field Experiments," Econometrica, 74, 1365-1384.
GROGGER, J. (1996): "School Expenditures and Post-Schooling Earnings: Evidence from High
School and Beyond," Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 628-637.
HANUSHEK, E. A. (1986): "The Economics of Schooling - Production and Efficiency in PublicSchools," Journal of Economic Literature, 24, 1141-1177.
HANUSHEK, E. A., J. F. KAIN, and S. G. RIVKIN (1999): "Do Higher Salaries Buy Better
Teachers?," National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers: 7082.
HECKMAN, J. J., and J. A. SMITH (1995): "Assessing the Case for Social Experiments," Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 9, 85-110.
JALAL, F., M. SAMANI, M. C. CHANG, R. STEVENSON, A. B. RAGATZ, and S. D. NEGARA (2009):
"Teacher Certification in Indonesia: A Strategy for Teacher Quality Improvement,"
Jakarta: World Bank.
JAYARAMAN, R., D. RAY, and F. D. VERICOURT (2015): "Anatomy of a Contract Change,"
American Economic Review, Forthcoming.
27

KUBE, S., M. A. MARECHAL, and C. PUPPE (2013): "Do Wage Cuts Damage Work Morale?
Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment," Journal of the European Economic
Association, 11 4, 853-70.
LAZEAR, E. (2000): "Performance Pay and Productivity," American Economic Review, 90, 134661.
LEVITT, S. D., and J. A. LIST (2007): "What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social
Preferences Reveal About the Real World?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 153174.
LOEB, S., and M. E. PAGE (2000): "Examining the Link between Teacher Wages and Student
Outcomes: The Importance of Alternative Labor Market Opportunities and NonPecuniary Variation," Review of Economics and Statistics, 82 3, 393-408.
MAS, A. (2006): "Pay, Reference Points, and Police Performance," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 121, 783-821.
MULLIS, I. V., M. O. MARTIN, P. FOY, and A. ARORA (2012): Timss 2011 International Results
in Mathematics.
MURALIDHARAN, K. (2012): "Long-Term Effects of Teacher Performance Pay," UC San Diego.
— (2016): "A New Approach to Public Sector Hiring in India for Improved Service Delivery,"
India Policy Forum 2015-16, Vol 12
MURALIDHARAN, K., J. DAS, A. HOLLA, and A. MOHPAL (2015): "Quality and Accountability in
Healthcare Delivery: Audit-Study Evidence from Primary Care in India," NBER
Working Paper 21405.
MURALIDHARAN, K., and V. SUNDARARAMAN (2011): "Teacher Opinions on Performance Pay:
Evidence from India," Economics of Education Review, 30, 394-403.
— (2011): "Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental Evidence from India," Journal of Political
Economy, 119, 39-77.
OECD (2013): "Pisa 2012 Results in Focus: What 15-Year-Olds Know and What They Can Do
with What They Know."
RAFF, D. M. G., and L. H. SUMMERS (1987): "Did Henry Ford Pay Efficiency Wages?," Journal
of Labor Economics, 5 4, S57-86.
SHAPIRO, C., and J. E. STIGLITZ (1984): "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device," American Economic Review, 74, 433-444.
SCHUNDELN, M., and J. PLAYFORTH (2014): "Private Versus Social Returns to Human Capital:
Education and Economic Growth in India" European Economic Review, 66, 266-283.
UNESCO (2014): Teaching and Learning: Achieving Quality for All. Efa Global Monitoring
Report 2013/14. . Paris, France: UNESCO.
VSO (2008): "Teaching Matters: A Policy Report on the Motivation and Morale of Teachers in
Cambodia," London: VSO International.
WEBB, R., and S. VALENCIA (2006): "Human Resources in Public Health and Education in Peru,"
in A New Social Contract for Peru: An Agenda for Improving Education, Health Care,
and the Social Safety Net, ed. by D. Cotlear.
WORLD BANK (2010): Transforming Indonesia's Teaching Force. Jakarta: Human Development
Department, World Bank East Asia and Pacific Region.

28

Table 1: Balance on school and student level variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A: Balance on school level variables
Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

8.892
(4.883)

8.321
(4.485)

0.571
(0.531)

0.571
(0.353)

190.850
(133.797)

184.492
(135.322)

6.358
(15.006)

6.358
(10.414)

Class size

20.598
(6.764)

20.991
(7.156)

-0.394
(0.771)

-0.394
(0.645)

Number of teachers per school

9.350
(5.198)

9.075
(4.591)

0.275
(0.559)

0.275
(0.357)

120

240

Number of classes per school
Number of students per school

Observations

Panel B: Balance on student level variables
Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Raw math score

0.408
(0.229)

0.405
(0.232)

0.004
(0.020)

-0.000
(0.009)

Raw science score

0.512
(0.214)

0.515
(0.210)

-0.003
(0.015)

-0.001
(0.008)

Raw Indonesian score

0.584
(0.206)

0.585
(0.205)

-0.002
(0.013)

-0.007
(0.007)

Raw English score

0.398
(0.176)

0.391
(0.172)

0.007
(0.023)

0.012
(0.014)

Student assets index

0.555
(0.233)

0.540
(0.229)

0.015
(0.019)

0.003
(0.009)

20,970

41,192

Observations
∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

p < 0.10,
p < 0.05,
p < 0.01. Table compares average values between treatment and control schools. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Standard
deviation values reported in parenthesis in columns (1) and (2). Standard error of the estimated difference between treatment and control is reported in parenthesis in columns
(3) and (4). Column (3) reports simple differences in means between treatment and
control schools; column (4) reports these differences after including district-triplet fixed
effects (which are the strata used for randomization).

28

Table 2: Balance on teacher level variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

All teachers

(6)

(7)

(8)

Target teachers only

29

Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Raw test score

0.556
(0.165)

0.556
(0.163)

-0.000
(0.014)

0.000
(0.008)

0.554
(0.167)

0.564
(0.166)

-0.010
(0.015)

-0.008
(0.009)

Target at Y0

0.555
(0.497)

0.570
(0.495)

-0.015
(0.025)

-0.014
(0.017)

1.000
(0.000)

1.000
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.000)

Already certified at Y0

0.193
(0.395)

0.181
(0.385)

0.012
(0.022)

0.015
(0.014)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

Not eligible for certification at Y0

0.248
(0.432)

0.246
(0.430)

0.002
(0.030)

-0.001
(0.015)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

Bachelor’s degree

0.619
(0.486)

0.590
(0.492)

0.029
(0.041)

0.043∗∗∗
(0.015)

0.694
(0.461)

0.647
(0.478)

0.048
(0.041)

0.064∗∗∗
(0.019)

Rank 4 in civil service

0.415
(0.493)

0.438
(0.496)

-0.023
(0.027)

-0.030
(0.019)

0.477
(0.500)

0.508
(0.500)

-0.031
(0.037)

-0.045∗∗
(0.021)

Certified and paid the certification allowance

0.113
(0.317)

0.121
(0.326)

-0.008
(0.016)

-0.006
(0.012)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

Base pay (in MIL IDR)

1.873
(0.830)

1.921
(0.798)

-0.048
(0.058)

-0.051
(0.032)

2.024
(0.730)

2.070
(0.690)

-0.046
(0.052)

-0.068∗∗
(0.031)

Other allowance (in MIL IDR)

0.527
(0.343)

0.539
(0.334)

-0.012
(0.020)

-0.019
(0.012)

0.546
(0.311)

0.587
(0.308)

-0.042∗∗
(0.020)

-0.044∗∗∗
(0.014)

Certification pay (in MIL IDR)

0.210
(0.593)

0.220
(0.602)

-0.010
(0.030)

-0.007
(0.022)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

Second job

0.336
(0.473)

0.336
(0.472)

0.001
(0.027)

-0.003
(0.019)

0.334
(0.472)

0.350
(0.477)

-0.016
(0.030)

-0.016
(0.023)

Hours worked on second job (last week)

3.500
(8.038)

3.403
(7.693)

0.098
(0.398)

0.124
(0.293)

3.176
(6.989)

3.396
(7.477)

-0.220
(0.398)

-0.187
(0.338)

Started or completed the certification process

0.606
(0.489)

0.288
(0.453)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.034)

0.327∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.726
(0.446)

0.185
(0.388)

0.541∗∗∗
(0.031)

0.541∗∗∗
(0.026)

1,142

2,190

607

1,194

Observations

p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. Table compares average values between treatment and control schools. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Standard
deviation values reported in parenthesis in columns (1), (2), (5) and (6). Standard error of the estimated difference between treatment and control is reported in
parenthesis in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8). Columns (3) and (7) report simple differences in means between treatment and control schools; columns (4) and (8)
report these differences after including district-triplet fixed effects (which are the strata used for randomization).

∗

Table 3: First stage process - teacher level
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Y0

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Y2

(11)

(12)

Y3

Panel A: All teachers
Control Difference Difference (F.E)

30

Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Treatment

Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Started or completed
the certification process

0.606
(0.489)

0.288
(0.453)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.034)

0.327∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.648
(0.478)

0.480
(0.500)

0.167∗∗∗
(0.034)

0.167∗∗∗
(0.022)

0.713
(0.452)

0.638
(0.481)

0.075∗∗
(0.032)

0.072∗∗∗
(0.021)

Certified teachers

0.194
(0.395)

0.181
(0.385)

0.012
(0.022)

0.015
(0.015)

0.612
(0.487)

0.382
(0.486)

0.230∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.234∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.647
(0.478)

0.505
(0.500)

0.142∗∗∗
(0.036)

0.141∗∗∗
(0.022)

Certified teachers
who have been paid the certification allowance

0.113
(0.317)

0.121
(0.326)

-0.008
(0.016)

-0.006
(0.012)

0.554
(0.497)

0.273
(0.446)

0.281∗∗∗
(0.034)

0.285∗∗∗
(0.021)

0.616
(0.487)

0.385
(0.487)

0.231∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.236∗∗∗
(0.024)

1,142

2,190

1,372

2,699

1,142

2,180

Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Treatment

Treatment

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Started or completed
the certification process

0.726
(0.446)

0.185
(0.388)

0.541∗∗∗
(0.031)

0.541∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.856
(0.351)

0.550
(0.498)

0.307∗∗∗
(0.031)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.902
(0.297)

0.825
(0.380)

0.078∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.077∗∗∗
(0.022)

Certified teachers

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.810
(0.392)

0.389
(0.488)

0.421∗∗∗
(0.031)

0.435∗∗∗
(0.028)

0.859
(0.348)

0.623
(0.485)

0.236∗∗∗
(0.031)

0.243∗∗∗
(0.026)

Certified teachers
who have been paid the certification allowance

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.716
(0.451)

0.176
(0.381)

0.540∗∗∗
(0.030)

0.545∗∗∗
(0.026)

0.830
(0.376)

0.399
(0.490)

0.431∗∗∗
(0.032)

0.446∗∗∗
(0.029)

607

1,194

634

1,238

550

981

Panel B: Target teachers
Control Difference Difference (F.E)

p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. Table compares average values between treatment and control schools across different subpopulations of teachers and across the periods of measurement Y0 (November 2009),
Y2 (April 2011), and Y3 (April 2012). Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Standard deviation values reported in parenthesis in columns (1), (2), (5), (6), (9), and (10). Standard errors of the estimated
differences between treatment and control are reported in parenthesis in columns (3), (4), (7), (8), (11), and (12). Columns (3) and (7), and (11) report simple differences in means between treatment and control schools;
columns (4), (8), and (12) report these differences after including district-triplet fixed effects (which are the strata used for randomization).

∗

Table 4: Teacher level impact
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Y2

(7)

(8)

Y3
Panel A: All teachers
Difference (F.E)
Treatment

Treatment

Control

Difference

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Standardized test scores

0.033
(1.057)

0.007
(0.991)

0.025
(0.083)

0.002
(0.049)

-0.034
(1.071)

0.007
(0.988)

-0.041
(0.088)

-0.061
(0.054)

Bachelor’s degree

0.713
(0.453)

0.677
(0.468)

0.036
(0.034)

0.045∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.778
(0.416)

0.730
(0.444)

0.048
(0.029)

0.051∗∗∗
(0.015)

Pursuing further education

0.178
(0.383)

0.184
(0.388)

-0.006
(0.022)

-0.011
(0.013)

0.140
(0.347)

0.159
(0.366)

-0.019
(0.021)

-0.026∗∗
(0.013)

Second job

0.264
(0.441)

0.322
(0.467)

-0.058∗∗∗
(0.021)

-0.063∗∗∗
(0.016)

0.218
(0.413)

0.266
(0.442)

-0.048∗
(0.026)

-0.053∗∗
(0.021)

Hours worked on second job last week

2.393
(6.910)

2.982
(7.412)

-0.589∗
(0.314)

-0.559∗∗
(0.261)

2.129
(6.533)

2.524
(6.149)

-0.395
(0.306)

-0.398
(0.259)

Base pay (in MIL IDR)

2.021
(0.944)

2.083
(0.935)

-0.062
(0.059)

-0.087∗∗
(0.037)

2.570
(0.794)

2.592
(0.741)

-0.022
(0.049)

-0.039
(0.032)

Other allowances (in MIL IDR)

0.773
(0.814)

0.765
(0.746)

0.007
(0.093)

-0.012
(0.020)

0.578
(0.504)

0.622
(0.635)

-0.044
(0.029)

-0.049∗
(0.027)

Certification allowance (in MIL IDR)

1.111
(1.030)

0.567
(0.969)

0.543∗∗∗
(0.066)

0.549∗∗∗
(0.044)

1.354
(1.257)

0.878
(1.235)

0.476∗∗∗
(0.081)

0.485∗∗∗
(0.060)

Total Pay

3.909
(2.270)

3.412
(1.969)

0.497∗∗∗
(0.171)

0.445∗∗∗
(0.079)

4.736
(1.953)

4.293
(1.952)

0.444∗∗∗
(0.119)

0.428∗∗∗
(0.088)

Financial problems

0.404
(0.491)

0.495
(0.500)

-0.091∗∗∗
(0.028)

-0.086∗∗∗
(0.019)

0.468
(0.499)

0.557
(0.497)

-0.089∗∗∗
(0.033)

-0.091∗∗∗
(0.021)

Satisfied with total income

0.691
(0.462)

0.604
(0.489)

0.087∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.088∗∗∗
(0.018)

0.666
(0.472)

0.596
(0.491)

0.070∗∗
(0.031)

0.067∗∗∗
(0.019)

Absent from school at least once in the past week

0.134
(0.341)

0.135
(0.342)

-0.001
(0.019)

-0.001
(0.013)

0.125
(0.331)

0.126
(0.331)

-0.000
(0.019)

0.009
(0.015)

1,106

2,096

1,087

2,081

Treatment

Control

Difference

Control

Difference

Difference (F.E)

Standardized test scores

0.023
(1.086)

0.008
(0.980)

0.015
(0.094)

0.030
(0.058)

-0.035
(1.082)

0.047
(0.982)

-0.082
(0.098)

-0.078
(0.062)

Bachelor’s degree

0.778
(0.416)

0.723
(0.448)

0.056
(0.034)

0.048∗∗
(0.019)

0.808
(0.395)

0.750
(0.433)

0.058∗
(0.033)

0.052∗∗
(0.021)

Pursuing further education

0.098
(0.297)

0.085
(0.279)

0.013
(0.018)

0.009
(0.014)

0.100
(0.300)

0.076
(0.265)

0.024
(0.020)

0.029∗
(0.016)

Second job

0.261
(0.439)

0.315
(0.465)

-0.054∗∗
(0.027)

-0.061∗∗
(0.025)

0.198
(0.399)

0.247
(0.432)

-0.050
(0.031)

-0.034
(0.027)

Hours worked on second job last week

2.043
(5.904)

2.625
(6.274)

-0.582∗
(0.330)

-0.688∗∗
(0.318)

1.815
(5.864)

2.274
(5.762)

-0.459
(0.362)

-0.229
(0.349)

Base pay (in MIL IDR)

2.272
(0.773)

2.348
(0.752)

-0.075
(0.055)

-0.084∗∗
(0.037)

2.741
(0.636)

2.773
(0.586)

-0.032
(0.049)

-0.041
(0.032)

Other allowances (in MIL IDR)

0.858
(0.810)

0.901
(0.789)

-0.042
(0.118)

-0.026
(0.027)

0.630
(0.541)

0.690
(0.591)

-0.060
(0.039)

-0.080∗∗
(0.038)

Certification allowance (in MIL IDR)

1.403
(0.940)

0.380
(0.833)

1.023∗∗∗
(0.062)

1.028∗∗∗
(0.051)

1.825
(1.070)

0.925
(1.251)

0.900∗∗∗
(0.084)

0.937∗∗∗
(0.076)

Total Pay

4.538
(1.883)

3.624
(1.578)

0.914∗∗∗
(0.165)

0.916∗∗∗
(0.078)

5.342
(1.559)

4.477
(1.697)

0.866∗∗∗
(0.119)

0.886∗∗∗
(0.096)

Financial problems

0.339
(0.474)

0.477
(0.500)

-0.138∗∗∗
(0.029)

-0.129∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.356
(0.479)

0.508
(0.500)

-0.153∗∗∗
(0.035)

-0.156∗∗∗
(0.029)

Satisfied with total income

0.777
(0.417)

0.603
(0.489)

0.173∗∗∗
(0.028)

0.168∗∗∗
(0.024)

0.798
(0.402)

0.649
(0.478)

0.149∗∗∗
(0.029)

0.128∗∗∗
(0.023)

Absent from school at least once in the past week

0.101
(0.302)

0.119
(0.324)

-0.018
(0.021)

-0.029∗
(0.017)

0.117
(0.322)

0.104
(0.305)

0.013
(0.024)

0.003
(0.017)

565

1,049

532

941

Observations

Observations
∗

Panel B: Target teachers
Difference (F.E)
Treatment

p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. Table compares average values between treatment and control schools for all teachers (Panel A) and for target teachers only
(Panel B) and evaluates these differences separately for the two moments of measurement Y2 (April 2011) and Y3 (April 2012). Standard errors are clustered at the
school level. Standard deviation values reported in parenthesis in columns (1), (2), (4), and (5). Standard error of the estimated difference between treatment and
control is reported in parenthesis in columns (3) and (6). Columns (3) and (6) report differences after including district-triplet fixed effects (which are the strata used
for randomization).

31

Table 5: Intent to treat effects on student test scores
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

All school types

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Primary school only

Science

Indonesian

Treatment school

0.00
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.03)

0.00
(0.02)

-0.03
(0.05)

-0.01
(0.02)

0.04
(0.03)

0.03
(0.03)

0.04
(0.03)

Observations
R2

79,510
0.28

79,373
0.29

79,510
0.28

40,673
0.34

279,066
0.28

38,700
0.25

38,700
0.28

38,700
0.27

(12)

(13)

(14)

Junior secondary school only

Panel A: Student test score data measured at Y2
English Pooled
Math Science Indonesian Pooled

Math

(11)

Math

Science

Indonesian

English

Pooled

0.03
(0.02)

-0.05
(0.05)

-0.05
(0.04)

-0.04
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.05)

-0.04
(0.04)

116,100
0.25

40,810
0.33

40,673
0.32

40,810
0.30

40,673
0.34

162,966
0.31

Panel B: Student test score data measured at Y3

32

Math

Science

Indonesian

English

Pooled

Math

Science

Indonesian

Pooled

Math

Science

Indonesian

English

Pooled

Treatment school

0.01
(0.03)

0.02
(0.03)

0.02
(0.02)

-0.03
(0.05)

0.01
(0.03)

0.04
(0.03)

0.04∗
(0.03)

0.03
(0.03)

0.03
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.05)

0.01
(0.04)

0.00
(0.04)

-0.03
(0.05)

-0.01
(0.04)

Observations
R2

78,164
0.26

78,126
0.25

78,164
0.21

40,539
0.34

274,993
0.24

37,587
0.23

37,587
0.23

37,587
0.22

112,761
0.22

40,577
0.29

40,539
0.27

40,577
0.21

40,539
0.34

162,232
0.26

∗

p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. Table reports intent-to-treat (ITT) effects . Outcome test scores are standardized so that the mean and standard deviation are 0 and 1
in the control group. The outcome score is then regressed on a dummy variable indicating a treatment school. The following control variables are included in the regression
model: a full set of district-stratum dummy variables, individual standardized Y0 test scores (which is set to 0 for observations for which they are not observed), school
averaged standardized Y0 test score (which is set to 0 for observations for which it is not observed), and two dummy variables indicating observations for which either the
individual Y0 scores or the school level averaged Y0 score are not observed. The parameter on the dummy variable indicating a treatment school is reported in the table as
the intent to treat effect. Panel A reports results based on Y2 test score data and panel B reports results based on Y3 test score data. Standard errors, in parenthesis, are
clustered at the school level. English language was not tested for primary school students. Weights are applied in the pooled regressions, where subject level test scores for
primary students receive a weight of 1/3 and subject level test scores for junior secondary students receive a weight of 1/4.

Table 6: Intent to treat effects on student test scores – breakdown by target status

Target * Treatment (β1 )

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)
All school types

Math

Science

Indonesian

English

0.012
(0.034)

-0.009
(0.032)

0.006
(0.022)

-0.033
(0.045)

(5)

(6)

(7)
(8)
Primary school only

(9)

Panel A: Student test score data measured at Y2
Pooled
Math
Science Indonesian Pooled
-0.004
(0.026)

0.066∗
(0.037)

0.024
(0.034)

0.042
(0.032)

0.034
(0.030)

(10)

(11)
(12)
(13)
Junior secondary school only

(14)

Math

Science

Indonesian

English

Pooled

-0.050
(0.056)

-0.019
(0.054)

-0.027
(0.033)

-0.033
(0.045)

-0.033
(0.038)

∗∗

Nontarget * Treatment (β2 )

-0.015
(0.034)

-0.016
(0.037)

0.015
(0.028)

0.009
(0.076)

-0.001
(0.030)

0.029
(0.037)

0.047
(0.041)

0.045
(0.037)

0.038
(0.034)

-0.087
(0.059)

-0.121
(0.060)

-0.039
(0.038)

0.009
(0.076)

-0.050
(0.048)

Missing * Treatment (β3 )

-0.062
(0.090)

0.008
(0.093)

-0.147∗∗
(0.070)

-0.143
(0.149)

-0.092
(0.056)

-0.094
(0.098)

-0.072
(0.103)

-0.193∗∗
(0.087)

-0.119
(0.083)

0.356
(0.266)

0.178∗∗
(0.086)

-0.113
(0.112)

-0.143
(0.149)

-0.028
(0.071)

p-value: H0 : β1 = β2

0.49

0.88

0.79

0.60

0.91

0.45

0.65

0.96

0.91

0.58

0.19

0.80

0.60

0.62

79,510

79,373

79,510

40,673

279,066

38,700

38,700

38,700

116,100

40,810

40,673

40,810

40,673

162,966

0.52
0.42
0.06

0.51
0.45
0.04

0.54
0.42
0.05

0.52
0.38
0.09

0.52
0.42
0.06

0.48
0.48
0.05

0.48
0.48
0.05

0.48
0.48
0.04

0.48
0.48
0.05

0.56
0.36
0.07

0.53
0.42
0.04

0.59
0.36
0.05

0.52
0.38
0.09

0.55
0.38
0.06

Math

Science

Indonesian

English

Pooled

Math

Science

Indonesian

Pooled

Math

Science

Indonesian

English

Pooled

Target-Target * Treatment (β1 )

-0.014
(0.047)

-0.001
(0.046)

-0.029
(0.037)

-0.051
(0.052)

-0.023
(0.033)

0.033
(0.051)

-0.009
(0.046)

0.020
(0.044)

0.009
(0.038)

-0.072
(0.079)

0.061
(0.082)

-0.069
(0.057)

-0.051
(0.052)

-0.043
(0.049)

Target-Nontarget * Treatment (β2 )

0.060
(0.058)

0.018
(0.051)

0.086∗
(0.051)

-0.013
(0.068)

0.055
(0.041)

0.126∗∗
(0.054)

0.129∗∗∗
(0.048)

0.178∗∗∗
(0.058)

0.136∗∗∗
(0.045)

-0.068
(0.114)

-0.229∗∗
(0.108)

-0.079
(0.087)

-0.013
(0.068)

-0.067
(0.064)

Nontarget-Target * Treatment (β3 )

0.024
(0.053)

0.034
(0.044)

0.005
(0.042)

-0.014
(0.056)

0.020
(0.039)

0.049
(0.060)

-0.001
(0.060)

-0.033
(0.051)

-0.001
(0.050)

-0.005
(0.079)

0.110∗
(0.056)

0.040
(0.068)

-0.014
(0.056)

0.038
(0.053)

∗∗

∗

Observations
Proportion
Target
Nontarget
Missing

Panel B: Student test score data measured at Y3

∗

Nontarget-Nontarget * Treatment (β4 )

0.011
(0.050)

0.025
(0.040)

0.078
(0.039)

-0.056
(0.072)

0.029
(0.036)

0.031
(0.047)

0.082
(0.043)

0.046
(0.044)

0.054
(0.040)

-0.026
(0.110)

-0.080
(0.061)

0.139
(0.071)

-0.056
(0.072)

-0.001
(0.059)

Missing * Treatment (β5 )

-0.043
(0.050)

-0.015
(0.040)

-0.110∗∗
(0.051)

-0.033
(0.128)

-0.045
(0.049)

-0.046
(0.056)

-0.001
(0.046)

-0.099∗
(0.057)

-0.055
(0.046)

-0.012
(0.109)

-0.026
(0.075)

-0.139
(0.106)

-0.033
(0.128)

-0.019
(0.096)

0.70
0.73

0.94
0.65

0.12
0.05

0.86
0.95

0.26
0.23

0.54
0.98

0.18
0.14

0.02
0.68

0.09
0.39

0.92
0.75

0.03
0.20

0.06
0.03

0.86
0.95

0.32
0.54

78,164

78,126

78,164

40,539

274,993

37,587

37,587

37,587

112,761

40,577

40,539

40,577

40,539

162,232

0.21
0.13
0.25
0.28
0.13

0.22
0.13
0.24
0.30
0.11

0.24
0.13
0.24
0.28
0.11

0.23
0.07
0.25
0.29
0.17

0.22
0.12
0.24
0.29
0.12

0.20
0.15
0.20
0.32
0.14

0.19
0.15
0.19
0.32
0.14

0.19
0.16
0.20
0.32
0.14

0.20
0.15
0.19
0.32
0.14

0.23
0.11
0.30
0.24
0.12

0.24
0.11
0.28
0.29
0.07

0.27
0.11
0.28
0.25
0.08

0.23
0.07
0.25
0.29
0.17

0.24
0.10
0.28
0.27
0.11

p-value: H0 : β1 = β2 = β3 = β4
p-value: H0 : β1 = β4
Observations
Proportion
Target-Target
Target-Nontarget
Nontarget-Target
Nontarget-Nontarget
Missing

p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The parameters reported in the table are the intent-to-treat (ITT) effects for different subpopulations of students. Panel A reports results based on Y2 test
score data and panel B reports results based on Y3 test score data. The effects are broken down by type of teacher. The first row in panel B – Target-Target – for example measures the difference in
learning outcomes between treatment and control for the subpopulation of students who had a target teacher in Y2 and in Y3. These are the students most (differentially) affected by our intervention.
Outcome test scores are standardized so that the mean and standard deviation is 0 and 1 in the control group. The following control variables are included in the regression model: a full set of
district-stratum dummy variables, individual standardized Y0 test scores (which is set to 0 for observations for which they are not observed), school averaged standardized Y0 test score (which is set
to 0 for observations for which it is not observed), and two dummy variables indicating observations for which either the individual Y0 scores or the school level averaged Y0 score are not observed.
Standard errors, in parenthesis, are clustered at the school level. Weights are applied in the pooled regressions presented in column [4], where subject level test scores for primary students receive a
weight of 1/3 and subject level test scores for junior secondary students receive a weight of 1/4.

∗

33

Table 7: IV results measuring the causal impact on annual test score gains of being taught by a “certified and paid” teacher
Panel A: Student test score data measured at Y2
[1]

[2]

Intent to treat estimate on subsample

[3]

Instrumental Variable estimates

Full sample

-0.0049
(0.024)

-0.016
(0.078)

Observations

267,792

267,792

Target teacher in the current year Y1-Y2

-0.014
(0.025)

-0.025
(0.046)

Observations

138,749

138,749

Effects larger than
these are statistically rejected at 5%
0.137

0.065

Panel B: Student test score data measured at Y3
[1]

[2a]

Intent to treat estimate on subsample
Persistence parameter

[2b]

[2c]

Instrumental Variable estimates

0

0.5

1

Full sample

0.014
(0.026)

0.060
(0.11)

0.039
(0.070)

0.029
(0.052)

Observations

241,438

241,438

241,438

241,438

Target teacher in current year Y2-Y3

-0.012
(0.029)

-0.028
(0.068)

-0.021
(0.050)

-0.016
(0.040)

Observations

116,490

116,490

116,490

116,490

Target teacher in current OR previous year

0.0047
(0.026)

0.013
(0.072)

0.0086
(0.047)

0.006
(0.035)

Observations

151,788

151,788

151,788

151,788

Target teacher in current AND previous year

-0.036
(0.032)

-0.084
(0.076)

-0.051
(0.046)

-0.037
(0.033)

Observations

54,463

54,463

54,463

54,463

∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

[3]
Effects larger than
these are statistically rejected at 5%

0.176

0.077

0.101

0.039

p < 0.10,
p < 0.05,
p < 0.01. The parameters reported in the table are estimates of the effect of approximately
doubling teachers’ base pay on a year of learning. Column 1 corresponds to equation (1), and has intent-to-treat effects
(ITT), column (2) has treatment on the treated (TOT) effects using instrumental variable regressions. The estimates based
on Y3 data depend on fixing the persistence parameter at a specific value, i.e. 0 (column [2a]), 0.5 (column [2b]), and 1
(column [2c]). This table uses the same controls as used for Table 5 and 6. Standard errors, in parenthesis, are clustered at
the school level. Column [3] reports whichever effects are statistically rejected at a persistence parameter of 0.5. The value
is calculated by adding 1.96 times the standard error to the point estimate.

34

Table 8: Heterogenous treatment effects
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: Student test score data measured at Y2
Fraction
target
teachers

Total
target
teachers

Student
asset
index

Number of
students

Size relative
to
biggest
school

Log number
of students

Log size
relative
to biggest
school

School
level Y0
score

Treatment

-0.03
(0.07)

-0.03
(0.04)

-0.08
(0.09)

0.00
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.04)

0.08
(0.18)

-0.02
(0.06)

-0.01
(0.02)

Covariate

0.02
(0.08)

0.02∗∗∗
(0.00)

0.20∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.00∗∗∗
(0.00)

0.39∗∗∗
(0.09)

0.12∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.12∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.21∗∗∗
(0.03)

Treatment*Covariate

0.05
(0.13)

0.00
(0.01)

0.02
(0.02)

-0.00
(0.00)

0.01
(0.12)

-0.02
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.04)

0.04
(0.04)

Observations
R2

279,066
0.28

279,066
0.28

279,066
0.29

279,066
0.28

279,066
0.28

279,066
0.28

279,066
0.28

275,183
0.28

Panel B: Student test score data measured at Y3
Fraction
target
teachers

Total
target
teachers

Student
asset
index

Number of
students

Size relative
to
biggest
school

Log number
of students

Log size
relative
to biggest
school

School
level Y0
score

Treatment

-0.10
(0.07)

-0.05
(0.04)

-0.06
(0.08)

-0.00
(0.04)

-0.01
(0.04)

0.03
(0.20)

0.01
(0.07)

0.01
(0.02)

Covariate

0.00
(0.08)

0.01∗∗∗
(0.00)

0.19∗∗∗
(0.02)

0.00∗∗∗
(0.00)

0.30∗∗∗
(0.09)

0.10∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.10∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.22∗∗∗
(0.03)

Treatment*Covariate

0.21
(0.13)

0.01
(0.00)

0.02
(0.02)

0.00
(0.00)

0.06
(0.14)

-0.00
(0.04)

-0.00
(0.04)

0.01
(0.04)

Observations
R2

274,993
0.24

274,993
0.24

274,993
0.25

274,993
0.24

274,993
0.24

274,993
0.24

274,993
0.24

270,578
0.23

∗

p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. The table examines the heterogeneity in treatment effects. Outcome test scores are
standardized so that the mean and standard deviation are 0 and 1 in the control group. The outcome score is then regressed on a
dummy variable indicating a treatment school, a SCHOOL LEVEL covariate, and the interaction between the treatment indicator
and the covariate. The parameters on these three regressors are reported in the table. The following additional (control) variables
are included in the regression model: a full set of district-stratum dummy variables, individual standardized Y0 test scores (which
is set to 0 for observations for which they are not observed), school averaged standardized Y0 test score (which is set to 0 for
observations for which it is not observed), and two dummy variables indicating observations for which either the individual Y0
scores or the school level averaged Y0 score are not observed. All testing data is pooled across subjects and school type. The models
are therefore generalizations of the model of which the results are presented in Table 5 column [5]. Panel A reports results based on
Y2 test score data and panel B reports results based on Y3 test score data. Standard errors allow for dependence within schools.
Standard errors are reported in parenthesis. Weights are applied, where subject level test scores for primary students receive a
weight of 1/3 and subject level test scores for junior secondary students receive a weight of 1/4. The interaction variables used in
analysis are the fraction of target teachers in the school at Y0, the total number of target teachers in the school at Y0, a student
asset index constructed as the sum of 8 different asset availability dummies constructed from Y0 data, the number of students per
school at Y0, the total number of students per school in proportion to the largest primary (for primary schools) or secondary school
(for secondary schools), the natural log of the number of students per school, the natural log of the relative measure of size, and the
school averaged student level test score obtained at Y0.

35

Figure 1: map of the 20 selected districts in Indonesia

Figure 2: Project time line
Oct 2009 : Letter sent
to eligible teachers in
treatment schools

April/May 2011: Y2
survey

Nov 2009: Y0 survey

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

school year 1

1-Jan-11

1-Jan-12

school year 2

school year 3

36

April/May 2012: Y3
survey

31-Dec-12

Figure 3: Fraction of teachers admitted to the certification process, at or before the indicated
year.
.8

.6

.4

.2

0

2006

2007

2008

2009

control

2010

2011

2012

treatment

Notes: Teachers have been admitted to the certification process at different times. The first batch of
teachers was admitted in 2006. The intervention took place in 2009, which created a difference between
treatment and control schools in terms of the fraction of teachers admitted to the certification program.
The bars represent fractions of teachers who were admitted to the certification program at, or before
the indicated year. For example, around 60% of teachers in treatment schools were admitted to the
certification program in the year 2009 or before, against roughly 30% in control. (Y0 data used to
construct the 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 bars, Y2 data used to construct the 2010 and 2011 bars, Y3 data
used to construct the 2012 bar.)

Figure 4: Completing the certification process and being paid the certification allowance
.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

Y0 DATA

Y2 DATA
control

0

Y3 DATA
treatment

Y0 DATA

Y2 DATA
control

Y3 DATA
treatment

Notes: The left panel presents the fraction of teachers who completed the certification process. The
right panel presents the fraction of teachers who completed the certification process and were paid the
certification allowance.

37

Years with a certified teacher between Y0-Y2

Figure 5A: Quantile treatment effects (LEFT) and quantile first stage (RIGHT), based on Y2 DATA
1.5

Standardized Y2 Score

1
.5
0
-.5
-1
-1.5
0

.2

.4
.6
Percentile of Y2 Score
Control
Difference

.8

1.4
1.2
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0

1

0

.2

Treatment
95% Confidence Band

.4
.6
Percentile of Y2 Score
Control
Difference

.8

1

Treatment
95% Confidence Band

Years with a certified teacher between Y0-Y3

Figure 5B: Quantile treatment effects (LEFT) and quantile first stage (RIGHT), based on Y3 DATA
1.5

Standardized Y3 Score

1
.5
0
-.5
-1
-1.5
0

.2

.4
.6
Percentile of Y3 Score
Control
Difference

.8

1

1.4
1.2
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
0

Treatment
95% Confidence Band

.2

.4
.6
Percentile of Y3 Score
Control
Difference

.8

1

Treatment
95% Confidence Band

Notes: Percentiles on the horizontal axis are constructed separately for treatment and control groups. Nonparametric plots are constructed as follows. First the
outcome variable is regressed on a full set of district-stratum fixed effects, the school averaged Y0 score (which is set to zero when not observed) and a dummy
variable indicating observations for which the school averaged Y0 test scores are not observed. The residuals of this regression are linked to the percentiles
based on a local polynomial smoother. The confidence bands are estimated using a bootstrap method, and allow for residual dependence within schools.

38

Table A1: Strata and sampled districts
Strata

Sampled districts

Eastern Indonesia (Maluku and Papua)
Nusa Tenggara
Western Java
Central Java
Eastern Java + Bali
Kalimantan
Sulawesi
Northern Sumatra
Western Sumatra
Southern Sumatra

Maluku Tenggara Barat
Lombok Timur
Ciamis, Jakarta Timur, Purwakarta
Bantul, Kudus, Semarang
Lamongan, Lumajang, Probolinggo, Tuban
Hulu Sungai Selatan
Gowa, Toli Toli
Deli Serdang, Tapanuli Tengah
Tebo
Bengkulu Utara, Ogan Ilir

Regions (the strata) are approximate descriptions. Western Java, for example, includes the provinces West Java, Jakarta and Banten, all three located on the western
side of the island of Java

Table A2: Estimation sample

Cohort

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Grade level
observed in
Y0

Grade level
observed in
Y2

Grade level
observed in
Y3
grade 1
grade 2
grade 3
grade 4
grade 5
grade 6

Cohort used in ITT
estimation on the
Y2 sample
.
1
1
1
1
1
1
.
.
1
1
1
.

Cohort used in ITT
estimation on the
Y3 sample
1
1
1
1
1
1
.
.
1
1
1
.
.

Y0
values
available at
Y2
.
0
0
1
1
1
1
.
.
0
0
1
.

Y0
values
available at
Y3
0
0
0
1
1
1
.
.
0
0
0
.
.

School average Y0
values available at
Y2
.
1
1
1
1
1
1
.
.
1
1
1
.

School average Y0
values available at
Y3
1
1
1
1
1
1
.
.
1
1
1
.
.

grade
grade
grade
grade
grade

2
3
4
5
6

grade 8
grade 9

grade
grade
grade
grade
grade
grade

1
2
3
4
5
6

grade 7
grade 8
grade 9

grade 7
grade 8
grade 9

“1”: yes, “0”: no, “.”: Does Not Apply. The table shows, by cohort, in which grades we observe them throughout the period of measurement (columns [1]-[3]), in which
types of analysis we use their test score data (columns [3]-[4]), and whether Y0 test scores are available for the respective cohorts when we observe them in period Y2 and Y3
respectively (columns [6]-[7]). The cohorts P1-P8 are the primary school cohorts and the cohort S1-S5 are the secondary school cohorts in our data.

Table A3: Testing for differential attrition
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Y2

Treatment

Control

Fraction staying in the sample

0.871
(0.335)

0.870
(0.336)

Observations

42,980

85,658

Treatment

Control

Fraction staying in the sample

0.893
(0.309)

0.896
(0.305)

Observations

21,910

43,104

(6)
Y3

Panel A: Pooled
Difference (F.E)
Treatment
-0.006
(0.014)

Control

Difference (F.E)

0.855
(0.352)

0.867
(0.339)

0.015
(0.010)

18,974

36,255

Panel B: High scoring students
Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control
-0.013
(0.018)

0.874
(0.332)

0.896
(0.305)

10,907

20,343

Difference (F.E)
0.016∗
(0.009)

Panel C: Low scoring students
Treatment

Control

Difference (F.E)

Treatment

Control

Difference (F.E)

Fraction staying in the sample

0.848
(0.359)

0.843
(0.363)

0.001
(0.012)

0.831
(0.375)

0.831
(0.375)

0.012
(0.013)

Observations

21,070

42,554

8,067

15,912

∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

p < 0.05,
p < 0.01. The table presents tests on differential attrition. Different cohorts (defined in
p < 0.10,
table A.3) stay in the sample for multiple rounds of the survey. We have attrition, but these attrition rates do not
differ between the treatment and control groups. Standard errors allow for dependence within schools.
Table A4: Testing for differential entry into the sample schools
(1)

Treatment

(2)

New cohorts Y2
Control Difference (F.E)

Average household asset index

4.693
(1.746)

4.632
(1.732)

Observations

56,058

111,033

∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

(3)

-0.025
(0.087)

(4)

Treatment

(5)

(6)

New cohorts Y3
Control Difference (F.E)

4.759
(1.718)

4.630
(1.725)

75,392

151,931

0.045
(0.105)

p < 0.10,
p < 0.05,
p < 0.01. New cohorts of students enter our sample schools after the intervention. The
table reports tests on whether the socioeconomic backgrounds of students entering are the same between treatment and
control. Students were asked 8 simple questions on household assets. Specifically, they were asked whether they have
a TV, a fridge, a hand phone, a bicycle, a motor bike, a car, a computer, or a children’s books at their home. The
asset index we construct is the total number of items and may take on values from 0 to 8. Cohort P1 (first graders
entering the sample schools for the first time at Y3) are not considered here, as they were not asked the asset questions
for budgetary reasons. The table shows that there is no significant differential entry into the sample schools. Standard
errors allow for dependence within schools.

Table A5: Test for endogenous matching from students to (target) teachers
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Y2

Treatment

(5)

(6)
Y3

Panel A: Student Assignment to a Target Teacher
Control Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)

Fraction of students with a target teacher

0.540
(0.486)

0.513
(0.488)

Observations

96,571

189,764

0.020
(0.020)

0.398
(0.482)

0.363
(0.472)

80,882

160,938

0.024
(0.017)

Panel B: Raw Math scores of students with target teachers
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Raw score

0.371
(0.196)

0.367
(0.187)

Observations

15,129

30,086

0.002
(0.009)

0.397
(0.179)

0.394
(0.175)

19,964

10,033

0.004
(0.011)

Panel C: Raw Science scores of students with target teachers
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Raw score

0.485
(0.208)

0.481
(0.198)

Observations

14,481

25,225

-0.004
(0.009)

0.420
(0.204)

0.410
(0.197)

10,607

17,722

0.003
(0.008)

Panel D: Raw Indonesian scores of students with target teachers
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Raw score

0.592
(0.190)

0.597
(0.188)

Observations

16,161

29,697

-0.008
(0.007)

0.526
(0.166)

0.523
(0.164)

11,225

20,383

-0.002
(0.006)

Panel E: Raw English scores of students with target teachers
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control Difference (F.E)
Raw score
Observations

0.380
(0.156)

0.391
(0.168)

7,625

15,295

Treatment
0.555
(0.484)

0.544
(0.486)

Observations

31,703

59,443

0.533
(0.487)

0.498
(0.488)

Observations

64,868

130,321

∗∗

∗∗∗

0.409
(0.173)

4,435

8,832

0.003
(0.026)

0.418
(0.487)

0.391
(0.479)

27,737

51,482

Panel G: Students with low asset levels
Control Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control

Fraction of students with a target teacher

∗

0.408
(0.162)

Panel F: Students with high asset levels
Control Difference (F.E)
Treatment Control

Fraction of students with a target teacher

Treatment

-0.001
(0.012)

0.030
(0.021)

0.388
(0.479)

0.350
(0.468)

53,145

109,456

0.019
(0.015)

Difference (F.E)
0.004
(0.023)

Difference (F.E)
0.033∗
(0.017)

p < 0.10,
p < 0.05,
p < 0.01. Panel A tests whether target teachers teach more classes. Panels B-E test whether the test
scores of students with target teachers are differential across treatment and control. Panel F/G tests whether targets are more
likely to be matched to students from higher/lower socioeconomic backgrounds. The results suggest that there is no endogenous
matching of teachers to students, in response to the intervention. Standard errors allow for dependence within schools.

Appendix A: Who thinks higher salaries will improve performance of incumbent teachers?
As Appendix B notes, the standard economic model does not predict that unconditionally higher
salaries will improve the performance of incumbent teachers; that is, it does not predict effects
on the intensive margin. But there is considerable evidence that stakeholders in education often
believe that such intensive-margin effects matter. This appendix gives examples of that view,
taken from both developing-country and developed-country contexts. Because of the focus of
this study, the majority of the quotations are taken from the education sector, but we also include
other quotes to show that the argument is applied more broadly to the civil service.
Appendix B formalizes the intuition implicit in these quotes and derives comparative statics.
Teachers in Indonesia
Before the Teacher Law and in the early years of its implementation, it was commonly argued in
Indonesia that low pay corrodes the motivation and performance of teachers, even when they
have some intrinsic motivation. Teachers’ union officials pressed this argument through the
media in the year before the Teacher Law was passed1:
The high absence rate of elementary school teachers is understandable, as they are
paid far below their monthly cost of living, said the head of an educators union.
Indonesian Teachers Union (PGRI) chairman Mohammad Surya said on Thursday the
government lacked appreciation for teachers, who, like other professionals, needed good
salaries and a clear status.
. . . A recent study by the SMERU Research Institute for the World Development Report
2004 showed that Indonesia ranked third in the average absence rate of elementary
school teachers at 19 percent, following Uganda at 39 percent and India at 25 percent. . .
.
. . . Surya said the government's failure to improve teachers' quality of life would keep
the absence rate high, . . . (Santoso 2004)2
The Jakarta Post echoed this argument in another article in the same year entitled “Low Salaries
Force Teachers to Moonlight”, saying that:
Subur and Wawan are two of millions of teachers in the country, who have to take side
jobs to make ends meet. Some say it is noble. However, others blame their side jobs for
the increasing absenteeism among teachers in the country. (Suwarni 2004)

Throughout this appendix, we have bolded text for emphasis.
The minister of education is quoted in the same article as dismissing this argument, but the second sentence of his
rebuttal implicitly accepts that teachers’ pay influences their performance: "Teachers should realize they need to
discipline themselves, as they are carrying out a duty to improve the standard of national education, regardless of
their salary. Besides, they also receive allowances.” (For clarification, the various financial allowances received by
teachers were not generally performance-based, but were top-ups to salaries that were either unconditional or
conditional on being in certain locations.)

1
2

1

That article, too, cited the country’s high teacher absence rates. In November 2005, just before
the Teacher Law was passed, “man in the street” interviews by the newspaper encountered
similar arguments. See, for example, quotes from these two respondents, neither of whom was a
teacher:
Especially in this day and age when the cost of living is so high, Indonesian teachers
simply cannot rely on their salaries to make ends meet. That explains why many
teachers look for side jobs to supplement their income. As a consequence, this
hampers teachers' ability to focus on teaching. How can teachers be expected to give
their best to students when they don't know where their family's next meal will come
from?
How can we expect to have a better quality education system if teachers are busy looking
for additional income outside their schools? While we may have poor facilities or a bad
curriculum, as long as we have dedicated and creative teachers we can still have a good
education system. Aristotle and Plato only needed to explain subjects in front of their
students without having to bother about classrooms or other equipment. So, I believe that
with good books and good teachers, we can achieve good quality education. But to get a
good teacher, we must pay them enough to allow them to focus on students and the
teaching process. (Jakarta Post 2005)
A World Bank report notes this argument in Indonesia, soon after the Law was passed:
Supriadi and Hoogenboom (2004) argue that low teachers’ salaries have contributed
significantly to the decline in status of the profession. Given their low salaries, teachers
are often forced to find part-time jobs to supplement their incomes. These part-time jobs
are often in low status occupations, such as motorcycle driver, tricycle (becak) driver,
street vendor, etc6 . Also, the need to seek extra income causes some teachers to neglect
their teaching obligations. The high rate of teacher absenteeism demonstrates this
phenomenon. (Jalal et al. 2009)
By the same token, if low pay worsens performance, it makes sense that increasing pay should
improve teacher performance. And indeed this is the argument made by many. For example,
another newspaper article published as the certification program was phased in asserted that:
the certification remains good news for most, if not all, teachers. They welcome the new
policy with expectations that it can indeed improve their welfare. . . . . Despite all the
issues and the flaws, the teacher certification program remains a hope for many people
concerned with education in the country. Thanks to the promised doubled base
payment, the educators will compete to improve their quality and the classic problems
of welfare will no longer give them an excuse not to do their best before their students.
(Maulia 2008)
Some of those involved in the planning also had high hopes for the intensive-margin effects of
the salary increase:

2

[Professor] Riyanto, who helped the Education and Culture Ministry design the
procedure for the teacher certification program in 2008, admitted that the program’s
results failed to meet his expectations. “We initially assumed that a salary increase
would encourage teachers to perform better in schools. However, it turned out that most
certified teachers have done almost nothing to improve their [teaching] skills or
competency, making them no different than uncertified ones,” he recently told The
Jakarta Post. (Widhiarto 2014)

Teachers in the global education discussion
It is not only in Indonesia that we find this argument that low salaries worsen teachers’
motivation and the quality of their teaching, and that conversely higher salaries will improve
teaching. At the global level, the same argument appears in numerous recent reports.
The International Labour Organisation’s “Handbook of good human resource practices in the
teaching profession” gives two rationales for setting teacher compensation high enough, which
we can recognize as encompassing both the extensive-margin and intensive-margin rationales for
higher pay:
“All countries need to provide teachers with rewards which meet the two equally
important strategic objectives mentioned above: (1) the recruitment, retention and
performance needs as defined by the relevant education authority; and (2) the incentives
for individuals to become and remain teachers over the full length of a professional
career as defined by the education system, as well as foster dedication to professional
responsibilities by enabling teachers and their dependents to live in dignity without
taking second jobs. . . . .
Together with a tendency for late or non payment of teachers‘ salaries, these are
amongst the factors which lead teachers in many countries to take on second jobs, to
the detriment of their teaching, morale and well being, or to leave teaching altogether.
(ILO 2012)
UNICEF’s report on Protecting Salaries of Frontline Teachers and Healthcare Workers argues
that:
Studies suggest that low pay is a key factor behind teacher absenteeism, informal fees,
and brain drain, which in turn is a cause for poor child outcomes especially in rural
areas. For example, staff absenteeism in the early 2000s was as high as 35 percent in
rural Bangladesh, Lesotho, Ghana, Mozambique and Zambia . . . . (UNICEF 2010)
The report proposes as one policy response:
Paying attention to real pay levels to ensure that compensation keeps up with increases
in the cost of living in order to minimize the risk of staff absenteeism, brain drain and
coping strategies such as informal fees.
3

Similarly, the UNESCO “Methodological Guide for the Analysis of Teacher Issues” says that:
Status, career, and salary issues all have an impact on the attractiveness of the
teaching profession, and therefore on the profile of new teachers, their motivation once
hired, as well as on teacher attrition and the social context. Absenteeism levels are also
influenced both by teacher motivation and by the dispositions through which the teacher
has been hired . . . .
UNESCO’s Global Monitoring Report 2009 (UNESCO 2009), although focused on governance
issues, also reflects this view of intensive-margin effects:
In Malawi, average teacher salaries are too low to meet basic needs. There, and in many
other countries, teachers often have to supplement their income with a second job, with
damaging consequences for the quality of their teaching. . . .
Poor morale and weak motivation undermine teacher effectiveness. Teacher retention
and absenteeism and the quality of teaching are heavily influenced by whether teachers
are motivated and their level of job satisfaction. Evidence suggests many countries face
a crisis in teacher morale that is mostly related to poor salaries, working conditions and
limited opportunities for professional development (Bennell and Akyeampong, 2007;
DFID and VSO, 2008). . . .
One consequence of low relative pay in Central Asia has been an increase in the number
of teachers seeking to supplement their income through a second job – a phenomenon
that has been extensively documented in most Central Asian countries (Education
Support Program, 2006). This practice can have damaging consequences for the
quality of education, with some teachers withholding curriculum to pressure students
into private tutoring (Bray, 2003).
Similarly, the Global Monitoring Report 2014 (UNESCO 2014) notes that
[w\hen salaries are too low, teachers often need to take on additional work – sometimes
including private tuition – which can reduce their commitment to their regular teaching
jobs and lead to absenteeism.
It is important to stress that these reports by international organizations all advocate
multipronged approaches to improving teacher performance. None expresses the belief that
raising salaries alone will be enough. Yet in each case, embedded somewhere in the argument is
the view that salary increases and decreases have intensive-margin effects on the quality of
teaching, as these quotes show.
Teachers in other countries
We encounter this argument at the country level in countries other than Indonesia as well.
In the United States, advocates for raising teacher pay commonly cite these intensive-margin
effects on teachers’ ability to better serve their students. A San Francisco Chronicle opinion
piece by the co-founder of Teacher Salary Project (TSP) argues that
4

Teachers want to give their all, but being financially stressed and moonlighting does not
allow them to teach their best. (Calegari 2015)
To bring this problem alive, the TSP has produced a short documentary about Laney,
a public middle school teacher who works two after-school jobs and spends her nights
bartending just so she can afford to stay in the classroom. Laney fears she won’t make
enough to pay her bills—and fears even more that she can’t give 100 percent to her
students because she is so over-worked and exhausted. . . .
If teachers like Laney were appropriately compensated they would no longer need to
work two and three jobs outside of the classroom. Instead of struggling to pay rent,
they would be able to fully devote themselves to our nation’s children.
“It makes me really upset to think I’m not giving them my best,” Laney says in the film.
(Teacher Salary Project 2015)
In Peru, a survey and study of teachers finds that they too argue that low pay inhibits
performance:
77.5 per cent of the Peruvian teachers interviewed consider that they are “badly” or
“very badly” paid. Very often, they need to complement their income with other jobs,
which results in less time available for lesson preparation and a focus on teaching.
Better salaries could benefit the professionalisation of teaching and would allow
teachers to focus more on their careers. (van der Tuin and Verger 2013)
In Ethiopia, teachers surveyed for a study also make this argument:
The issues raised by the research were numerous, but the most significant and most
often-mentioned causes of demotivation and low morale were: • inadequate salaries •
low respect for and low status of teachers • poor management and leadership. These
issues have a significant impact on classroom performance, that is, teachers’ ability to
deliver good quality education, as well as on levels of teacher retention.
In the case of Cambodia, an NGO study (VSO 2008) cited by some international agencies
recommends:
[i]ncreasing the salaries of teachers, school directors and staff of the provincial and
district offices of education to a level appropriate to the cost of living and linked to
inflation. In every focus group conducted with teachers, the issue of pay emerged as the
most powerful de-motivating factor. It is impossible to earn a living on a teacher’s
salary in Cambodia. This basic need is going to remain the top priority over and above
any other aspirations teachers have for the quality of their teaching practice until it is
fulfilled.
It goes on to say that
a reasonable salary would make the pressure to earn a living wage less intense, which
should have a positive effect on teachers’ commitment and practice. (VSO 2008)
5

And in the case of the Caucasus and Central Asia, UNICEF (2011) finds that
The need to rely on additional income from economic activities outside of school applies
specifically to teachers in rural areas. . . . . [T]eacher absences during harvesting
season are common and tolerated by the school and the community. For a few weeks of
the year, the second job absorbs so much of the teachers’ time that they temporarily
redefine their professional identities and primarily see themselves as farmers or
merchants, and only secondarily as teachers with a part-time teaching job at school.
Other civil servants
Similar intensive-margin arguments have been made for other civil servants in Indonesia. One
argument is that (consistent with model 3 in Appendix B) because civil servants’ salaries have
been seen as too low, the Indonesian government has not been able to enforce standards of
performance. Commenting on a 2009 Law on Public Services, one scholar writes that
Enforcement of the sanctions contained in the law implicitly takes for granted the power
of senior bureaucrats within the state apparatus. This may not accurately reflect the
power dynamics within Indonesian public service providers. Examining power relations
within the bureaucracy more than three decades ago, one observer noted:
In their routine efforts to gather information, implement decisions, and mobilize
employees, superiors were faced with the fact that they often did not have
sufficient authority to do these things ... [Civil servants often argued] to
outsiders, and to themselves, that because government salaries were so low,
superiors did not have a right to demand more than a minimum of obedience
from them ... It was recognized at the top, just as it was widely claimed at the
bottom, that the government did not have the right to demand more than semiobedience and half-effort ... On paper, Indonesian superiors ... had the power to
act against transgressors and to require subordinates to work every hour of each
day, but it was recognized by everyone that what was written down was not
conceded in fact, and that it would be futile to act as if it were. The natural
response of employees who suffered cuts in honoraria or incentive money was to
work less ... The incapacity, or extreme reluctance, of superiors to punish
transgressions occurring at others’ or even their own expense permitted a chronic
crisis of authority to infect every pore of the government bureaucracy. The result
was to work at a snail’s pace or, commonly, not to work at all (Conkling 1979:
443–550)
. . . . Weak authority among superiors is likely to persist despite the nominal availability
of formal means of punishment, as civil servants will continue to seek refuge in the
rhetoric of insubordination because of low pay. (Buehler 2011)
Many Indonesians believe that higher salaries should reduce corruption, while also improving
performance along other dimensions. Note that some aspects of poor teacher performance –

6

such as excessive absenteeism – straddle the line between underperformance and corruption, and
so would be covered by both avenues for improving performance:
“Appropriate compensation will not only have an impact on staff turnover and on
employees’ productivity and quality of work, but will also reduce tendencies for civil
servants to engage in corrupt practices.” (Tjiptoherijanto 2008)
A survey of business executives, household, and civil servants in Indonesia published in 2000,
several years before the Teacher Law of 2005, showed that this view was widely shared:
“Respondents were asked to rank the main causes of corruption in society from amongst
a list of possible reasons. The results showed a strong consensus among all three
groups with more than one-third of households (36%) and business enterprises (37%)
attributing the main cause of corruption to low civil servant salaries. Public officials
were even more strongly of this view with over half of them (51%) putting this reason
first.
. . . . almost half of the public officials reported receiving unofficial payments. The
argument that low salaries are a cause of corruption assumes that wages are
inadequate to meet daily needs, and thus income has to be supplemented with bribes.”
(Partnership for Governance Reform3 2000)
The report’s authors go on to challenge this assumption, saying “While low salaries as a cause of
corruption may be the most widely held belief, the accuracy of this relationship is disputed in the
corruption research literature.” Nevertheless, a view that was so prevalent may have contributed
to the legislature’s decision to raise teacher salaries.
This argument that higher (unconditional) salaries lead to better civil-servant performance is not
unique to Indonesia either. In the case of Cambodia, Korm (2011) argues that:
The prevailing opinion is that the low incomes of public servants have led them to pay too
little attention to their official tasks and duties as they have diverted their time and effort
to obtaining additional sources of income. They have become involved in corruption and
„moonlighting‟ in other jobs. Furthermore, it is thought that public servants have
rationalised such behaviour using the argument that low pay justifies their poor
performance. Whatever the reason, public service delivery is thought to have suffered
significantly . . . .
In Cambodia, civil servants are paid sums that cannot support a decent standard of
living. Securing adequate income may then become the first priority in their minds as
they need to meet their necessary costs of living. Chew (1997) emphasised that if civil
servants were well paid in relation to the cost of living, their performance would be
good because they could concentrate on their work. When they are paid reasonably,
they are happy and they perform to the required standard without being constantly
This partnership included the World Bank, United Nations Development Program, the Asian Development Bank
(ADB), and a Governing Board comprising “a number of reform minded individuals including ministers, senior
public officials and private entrepreneurs.”
3

7

concerned about finding more money to support their living. However, where public
servants’ pay is very low in relation to the cost of living, their productivity and quality
of performance are similarly low.
As Korm points out, McCourt (2003), in his Global Human Resource Management book,
summarizes this situation using the old joke: “you pretend to pay us, and we pretend to
work.” Describing the situation in “many developing and transitional countries”, McCourt says
that as a result,
It is difficult for a supervisor to criticize an employee’s poor attendance record when
the supervisor knows that it is almost forced on the employee (and supervisors are
probably in the same position themselves).

8

Appendix B: Theoretical framework
In this section, we develop three classes of models that illustrate possible mechanisms
through which an unconditional salary increase on the primary teaching job could increase a
teacher’s effort on that job. The models are extensions of a standard model where, given that
the salary on the primary job is unrelated to performance, the teacher will always exert the
minimum level of effort. We extend this model by recognizing that: (1) teaching is a prosocial task from which teachers could derive utility through the learning gains they contribute
to; (2) there may be reciprocity and gift exchange in employment contracts (Akerlof 1982;
Fehr and Gachter 2000); and (3) communities and administrators may provide non-pecuniary
sanctions or rewards based on actual performance relative to expectations (Webb and
Valencia 2006, Cotlear 2006).
The standard model
We assume that salary ( ) on the primary teaching job is not dependent on performance, and
that teachers exert at least a minimum amount of effort
(where the p indexes the
primary job). This minimum level of effort may exceed the effort threshold at which the
teacher would be dismissed, because the teacher is assumed to have some level of
professionalism or intrinsic motivation (varying across individuals) that sets her minimum
level of effort under low-powered incentives (as in Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991). Thus,
the
could vary across teachers and should be thought of as the default level of teacher
effort when there are no financial incentives.
We also allow for the possibility of secondary jobs. Secondary jobs pay a piece-rate wage ( )
for each unit of effort ( ). Workers are endowed with a fixed amount of effort ( , which
, on the secondary job ( ), and on
they can distribute over effort on the primary job (
1
leisure (
.
(B.1)
In this standard setup, a worker derives utility from consumption—which in this static
framework (we abstract from savings) is assumed to be equal to total earnings derived from
the primary and secondary jobs—and from the effort that is devoted to leisure, . The utility
and are worker-specific with standard properties. Substituting the effort
functions
constraint for
, the utility function of the teacher is
(B.2)

We prefer to model effort allocation rather than time allocation, since time spent at school does not necessarily
imply that effort is put into making children learn. Teachers could be away from their classroom chatting with
their colleagues, and in fact fieldwork shows that this phenomenon of “shirking while at work” is quantitatively
important in some settings, as in India and Indonesia (Kremer et al 2005, McKenzie et al 2014). We would
consider this as effort spent on leisure.
1

In this setting, the teacher will work at his or her default effort level (
on the primary
job. Extra effort beyond this level provides no additional income and reduces leisure.
Further, in this standard model, an unconditional increase in salary will lead to a reduction in
hours spent on the secondary job, an increase in leisure, and no change in , consistent with
a positive income elasticity of leisure.
We introduce three possible extensions of this standard model, each of which could yield an
increase in effort on the primary teaching job in response to an unconditional increase in
salary . As discussed in the text, our policy experiment does not correspond to a precise test
of any of these particular extensions. Rather, our aim is to illustrate the theoretical models of
worker behavior that predict increased teacher effort in response to an unconditional increase
in base salary.
Pro-social preferences
The first extension is to assume that the teacher also derives utility from her contribution to
the human capital (ΔHC) of students in her classroom. In other words, the teacher is assumed
to have pro-social preferences (Levitt and List 2007). While not all workers may exhibit such
preferences, it is widely believed that teachers partly select into their jobs because they hold
such preferences. We model utility from pro-social preferences as
Δ

(B.3)

where HC is the human capital accumulated by children in the classroom of the teacher, and
is assumed to depend positively on the effort exerted by the teacher on her primary job:
Δ

(B.4)

have decreasing marginal returns to inputs (and
We assume that either one or both of and
that neither has increasing returns). Hence, the reduced form
also has positive and
decreasing marginal returns with respect to effort on the primary teaching job:
(B.5)
With this addition to the standard model, a teacher with pro-social preferences would
typically exert more than the default minimum effort
on the primary teaching job,
because she derives utility from contributing to learning of children.2 It is easy to see, then,
how such a set-up generates a positive income elasticity of effort on the primary teaching job.
Basically, there are now two kinds of effort: "grunt" work ( ) that yields no intrinsic utility
The main reason for not incorporating the variation in the extent of pro-social preferences into the variation in
the teacher's default effort is that pro-social preferences generate a positive income elasticity of effort on the
pro-social task, whereas variation in the teacher's default effort level due to variation in their effort norms will
not.
2

and is only done for income (and the consumption made possible by it), and "meaningful"
work ( ) that also provides some positive utility. In equilibrium, effort is allocated across
, , and
so that the marginal costs and returns are equalized.
Now, if there is an increase in salary on the primary job (S), the marginal utility through
decreases, which should lead to a reduction in
and an increase in
consumption from
and . Thus,
and
are both normal goods. Less necessity to earn money reduces
the need for second jobs, and it results in the teacher shifting attention to the other things in
life that she appreciates: leisure and the learning of the children in the classroom.
Note that there are also situations where the model does not predict an increase in effort as a
result of an increase in the income from the primary job. If before the salary increase the
teacher already devotes the minimum effort to the teaching job, or if she does not have
second job, a marginal wage increase will not lead to additional effort on the primary
teaching job.
Gift exchange
We model the idea of gift exchange (Akerlof 1982, Fehr and Gächter 2000) by assuming that
the teacher also includes in her utility function the employer’s utility ( , where the subscript
G refers to Government), and that the weight the teacher attaches to the employer’s utility
depends on the salary received from the employer. When the teacher receives a gift of
additional salary, she reciprocates with additional consideration for the objectives of the
employer—in this case the Education Ministry, which derives utility from the learning of
children in Indonesian schools. In other words, the teacher becomes more motivated to do her
job as a result of the salary increase. The teacher can increase learning of children in the
classroom by increasing effort on the primary job. The utility function of the teacher in this
case can be represented as:
(B.6)
where

is the weight the teacher attaches to the objectives of the employer and
is the utility that the employer derives from student learning, which
in turn is a function of the effort the teacher devotes to her primary job.
increases with
S, the unconditional salary paid to the teacher.
This model yields predictions similar to those generated by the pro-social preferences model.
As with the teacher’s utility in that model, in this gift-exchange model the employer’s utility
is positively related to effort devoted to the primary job. In this case, however, the weight
that the teacher places on the employer’s utility increases with the salary paid on the primary
job. Because the model’s formulation is an extended version of the social preference model,
the prediction that effort on the primary job can act as a normal good also holds for the gift
exchange model. The effect of a salary increase on leisure, by contrast, is ambiguous in this

case. If, as a result of the increase in salary, the weight that the teacher attaches to her
employer’s utility increases a lot, then the effort she devotes to leisure could fall.
Informal pressure
A third possible mechanism for a positive effort response to an unconditional increase in
salary is because communities or head masters will expect better performance from teachers
who are paid better. Communities or head teachers may provide teachers with non-pecuniary
rewards or sanctions that depend on performance relative to expectations. For example,
communities or head masters may be willing to accept shirking from teachers if those
teachers are seen as underpaid3, while they would be willing to apply sanctions for the same
level of effort if teacher salaries were raised.
Recognizing this as a possible way of rewarding teachers makes the unconditional salary
increase conditional. Pay for performance is introduced by making the non-pecuniary rewards
dependent on salary.
Let the function
denote the effort expected by the community given a teacher’s salary
(with increasing in S), and let
represent the amount by which effort on the
primary teaching job exceeds this expectation. The reward the community provides to the
teachers in terms of utility of the teacher is modeled by the function
(which is assumed to
be positive with decreasing marginal utility). The utility function of the teacher can then be
represented by:
(B.7)
Comparative statics results
We derive the effect of a marginal increase in salary on the primary teaching job (S) on effort
devoted to the primary teaching job, the second job and leisure. The results are summarized
in table B.1. Depending on the allocation of effort before the salary increase, and the model
used, the effect of a marginal increase in salary on the primary teaching job on effort devoted

3
This model of behavior, while not described in any prior formal economic model that we know of, is
commonly cited by public-sector employees, supervisors, and even beneficiaries in developing countries. For
the health sector in Peru, this behavior was formulated by a hospital manager as: “By 10:30 a.m. most of my
doctors have skipped out to their second or third jobs. But, how can I demand [compliance] when I know that on
their salary they can’t make ends meet?” Cotlear (2006). In the Indonesian civil service generally, it has been
argued that “[Civil servants often argued] to outsiders, and to themselves, that because government salaries were
so low, superiors did not have a right to demand more than a minimum of obedience from them . . . It was
recognized at the top, just as it was widely claimed at the bottom, that the government did not have the right to
demand more than semi-obedience and half-effort. . .” Writing on human resource management in developing
and transition economies, McCourt (2003) argues that “[w]here low pay persists over a period of years,
moonlighting becomes institutionalized, with many employees openly absent for several hours of the working
day. It is difficult for a supervisor to criticize an employee’s poor attendance record when the supervisor knows
that it is almost forced on the employee . . .”

to the primary teaching job is either zero or positive. Effort devoted to second jobs moves in
the opposite direction, while the effect on effort devoted to leisure is ambiguous.
Table B.1. Comparative statics results: How a marginal increase in salary at the primary
teaching job affects effort allocation
if in the optimum
=0
=0
0
0
Effect on effort on the primary teaching job
Pro-social preferences 0
0
0
+
Gift exchange
0
+
0
+
Informal pressure
0
+
0
+
Effect on effort on the secondary job
Pro-social preferences 0
0
Gift exchange
0
0
Informal pressure
0
0
Effect on effort devoted to leisure
Pro-social preferences 0
0
+
+
Gift exchange
0
+
ambiguous
Informal pressure
0
+
ambiguous
In the remainder of the appendix we derive the results presented in Table B.1. Note that all of
the extensions of the standard model discussed in this appendix can be written in the general
form:
,

(B.8)

Table B.2 shows the partial derivatives of the function V, depending on the model that is
chosen. In all cases, effort on the primary teaching job contributes positively to utility, but the
effect of salary varies depending on the model. The cross-partial derivative is positive, except
in the model with pro-social preference, where it does not appear.
Table B.2. Partial derivatives for W

Pro-social preferences +
Gift exchange
+
Informal pressure
+

0
+
-

0
+
+

The maximization problem for the teacher can be expressed as:

Maximize

(B.9)

,

max
,

subject to

, and denote the values at which the teacher obtains maximum utility before the
Let
salary increase. We would like to know how a marginal change in S affects these chosen
effort levels of the teacher. In the initial equilibrium, the effort levels could be either at or
above the minimum values.
If effort on the primary teaching job is at its minimum level, then this indicates that the
marginal utility of effort on the primary job (through W) is less than the marginal disutility of
extra effort on the primary job (through the utility from leisure):
(B.10)

if

,

0—then this
If the teacher does not work in a secondary job in the optimum—that is, if
means that the marginal utility (through additional consumption) of providing effort on the
second job is less than the marginal disutility of that effort through the utility from leisure:
if
The first order conditions for the interior solution - that is

and

and

if

0 are
(B.12)

if

,

(B.11)

0

0

(B.13)

These conditions yield four possible outcomes for the optimal levels of effort provided to the
primary teaching job and to the secondary job. Below, the effects of an increase in S are
derived separately for each of these four scenarios:
Scenario 1:

and

0

Consider the effect of a marginal change in income on the primary teaching job if the teacher
has no secondary jobs and exerts the minimum effort on the primary job. Because a marginal
change in S will not affect the inequality conditions (B.10) and (B.11), the effect of a
marginal change in income on the effort provided to the teaching job is equal to zero.

Scenario 2:

and

0

Consider the scenario where in the optimum the teacher has no secondary job, but does work
more than the minimum number of hours. In this scenario, conditions (B.11) and (B.12)
hold. A marginal change in the salary at the primary teaching job will have no effect on
effort in secondary jobs, as (B.11) will still hold. To see the effect on the primary teaching
job, differentiate (B.12) with respect to S as follows:
,

,

,

(B.14)

,
,

(B.15)

,
,

,

In the social preferences model, this is equal to zero, as the numerator is zero. In the other
models, it will always be positive.
Scenario 3:

and

0

Consider the scenario where in the optimum the teacher has a secondary job, but provides
minimum effort to the primary teaching job. In this scenario, conditions (B.10) and (B.13)
hold. A marginal change in income on the primary teaching job will have no effect on effort
on the primary teaching job, as (B.10) will still hold. To see the effect on the secondary job,
differentiate (B.13) with respect to S:
(B.16)

1

(B.17)

In all models, this derivative is negative, meaning that the salary increase reduces effort on
the secondary job.
Scenario 4:

and

0

Now consider the scenario where in the optimum the teacher has a secondary job and also
provides more than the minimum effort to the primary teaching job. In this scenario,
conditions (B.12) and (B.13) hold. To see the effect on the secondary job, differentiate (B.12)
and (B.13) with respect to S
=

(

) = (B.18)

,

,

,

Solving these two equations with two unknowns for

,
(and omitting for the remainder the

arguments of the functions to simplify notation) yields
,

,

,

,

(B.19)

Inserting the signs of the elements of the equation above reveals the sign of the partial
derivative of effort on the primary job with respect to salary.
/0
/0

Under this scenario, for all models, raising the teacher’s salary increases the effort that she
exerts on the primary job. To see the effect of a marginal wage increase on effort devoted to
secondary jobs, note that the first equality of (B.18) can be rewritten as
= -

Noting that

0 , it follows that

(B.20)

0; in other words, effort on secondary jobs will

fall. Finally, to see the effort devoted to leisure, note that the first equation of (B.18) can also
be written as
(B.21)
,
,

,
= 0, as in the social preference model, leisure will increase. In the
It follows that when
other models, the effect on leisure is ambiguous.

References for Appendix A and Appendix B
BUEHLER, M. (2011): "Indonesia's Law on Public Services: Changing State-Society Relations or
Continuing Politics as Usual?," Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies, 47 1, 65-86.
CALEGARI, N. (2015): "Why Do Teachers Need Side Jobs to Pay Bills?."
HOLMSTROM, B., and P. MILGROM (1991): "Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts,
Asset Ownership, and Job Design," Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7, 24-52.
ILO (2012): Handbook of Good Human Resource Practices in the Teaching Profession. Geneva:
International Labour Organization.
JAKARTA POST (2005): "'Most Teachers Are Gravely Underpaid'."
JALAL, F., M. SAMANI, M. C. CHANG, R. STEVENSON, A. B. RAGATZ, and S. D. NEGARA (2009):
"Teacher Certification in Indonesia: A Strategy for Teacher Quality Improvement," Jakarta:
World Bank.
KORM, R. (2011): "The Relationship between Pay and Performance in the Cambodian Civil Service,"
Doctoral thesis, University of Canberra.
KREMER, M., K. MURALIDHARAN, N. CHAUDHURY, F. H. ROGERS, and J. HAMMER (2005): "Teacher
Absence in India: A Snapshot," Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, 658-67.
MAULIA, E. (2008): "Teacher Certification a Hope Amid Concerns About Quality ".
MCCOURT, W., and D. ELDRIDGE (2003): Global Human Resource Management: Managing People in
Developing and Transitional Countries. Cheltenham, U.K. and Northampton, Mass.: Elgar.
MCKENZIE, P., D. NUGROHO, C. OZOLINS, J. MCMILLAN, S. SUMARTO, N. TOYAMAH, V. FEBRIANY, R.
J. SODO, L. BIMA, and A. A. SIM (2014): "Study on Teacher Absenteeism in Indonesia 2014,"
Jakarta : Education Sector Analytical and Capacity Development Partnership (ACDP).
PARTNERSHIP FOR GOVERNANCE REFORM (2000): "A Diagnostic Study of Corruption in Indonesia,"
Jakarta.
SANTOSO, D. (2004): "Govt Expects Too Much from Poverty-Line Teachers: Union."
SUWARNI (2004): "Low Salaries Force Teacher to Moonlight."
TEACHER SALARY PROJECT (2015): "New Short Documentary Reveals Tradeoffs of Teachers’ Second
Jobs: Teacher Salary Project Continues Push for Equity, Professionalism."
TJIPTOHERIJANTO, P. (2008): "Civil Service Reform in Indonesia," Emerald Group Publishing Limited,
39-53
UNESCO (2009): Efa Global Monitoring Report 2009. Overcoming Inequality: Why Governance
Matters. Paris: UNESCO.
— (2010): "Methodological Guide for the Analysis of Teacher Issues," Teacher Training Initiative for
Sub-Saharan Africa (TTISSA) Teacher Policy Development Guide.
— (2014): Teaching and Learning: Achieving Quality for All. Efa Global Monitoring Report 2013/14. .
Paris, France: UNESCO.
UNICEF (2010): "Social and Economic Policy Working Brief: Protecting Salaries of Frontline Teachers
and Health Workers," UNICEF.
— (2011): Teachers: A Regional Study on Recruitment, Development and Salaries of Teachers in the
Ceecis Region. Geneva: UNICEF.
VAN DER TUIN, M., and A. VERGER (2013): "Evaluating Teachers in Peru: Policy Shortfalls and Political
Implications," in Global Managerial Education Reforms and Teachers: Emerging Policies,
Controversies and Issues in Developing Countries, ed. by A. Verger, H. K. Altinyelken, and M.
de Koning: Education International Research Institute.
VSO (2008): "Teaching Matters: A Policy Report on the Motivation and Morale of Teachers in
Cambodia," London: VSO International.
— (2010): "How Much Is a Good Teacher Worth? A Report on the Motivation and Morale of Teachers
in Ethiopia," London: VSO International.
WIDHIARTO, H. (2014): "Amid Soaring Education Budget, Performance Remains Low."

