                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ESTIMATING MODELS WITH
                 INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION USING
                    AGGREGATE TIME SERIES DATA




                       Martin S. Eichenbaum

                        Lars Peter Hansen




                      Working Paper No. 2181




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                              March 1987




An earlier version of this research was presented at the National
Bureau of Economic Research meetings on Economic Fluctuations,
November 1983. This research was supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation and the Sloan Foundation. Helpful
comments were made by John Heaton, Joe Hotz, Dale Jorgenson,
Barbara Mace, Masao Ogaki, and Grace Tsaing. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2181
                                                   March 1987




                Estimating Models with Intertemporal Substitution
                         Using Aggregate Time Series Data



                                     ABSTRACT

   Inconducting empirical investigations of the permanent income model of
consumption and the consumption-based intertemporal asset pricing model,
various authors have imposed restrictions on the nature of the
substitutability of consumption across goods and over time. In this paper we
suggest a method for testing some of these restrictions and present
empirical results using this approach. Our empirical analyses focuses on
three questions: (1) Can the services from durable and nondurable goods be
treated as perfect substitutes? (ii) Are preferences completely separable
between durable and nondurable goods? (iii) What is the nature of
intertemporal substitutability of nondurable consumption? When consumers'
preferences are assumed to be quadratic, there is very little evidence
against the hypothesis that the services from durable goods and nondurable
goods are perfect substitutes. These results call into question the practice
of testing quadratic models of aggregate consumption using data on
nondurables and services only. When we consider S branch specifications,
we find more evidence against perfect substitutability between service
flows, but less evidence against strict separability across durable and
nondurable consumption goods. Among other things, these findings suggest
that the empirical shortcomings of the intertemporal asset pricing model
cannot be attributed to the neglect of durable goods.



Martin Eichenbaum                                   Lars Peter Hansen
Graduate School of                                  Department of Economics
Industrial Administration                           University of Chicago
Carnegie Mellon University                          Chicago, Ii 60637
Pittsburgh, P.A. 15213
INTRODUCTION
   In conducting    empirical investigations of the permanent income model of
consumption and the consumption-based interternporal asset pricing model.,
various authors have imposed restrictions on the nature of the substitutability of
consumption across goods and over time. The purpose of this paper is to
suggest a method for testing some of these restrictions and to present empirical
results using this approach. Our empirical analysis focuses on three questions:

(1) Can the services from durable and nondurable consumption goods be treated
as perfect substitutes?

(ii)   Are preferences completely separable between durable and nondurable
consumption goods?

(iii) What is the nature of intertemporal substitutability of nondurable
consumption?

Several researchers have added the services from durables to nondurables to
form a composite time series on consumption [e.g. see Darby (1975) and Sargent
(1978)1. A justification for this practice is that the answer to question (I) is
yes. Other researchers have ignored durables when studying models of aggregate
consumption and asset returns [e.g. see Hall (1978), Flavin (1981), Grossman
and Shiller (1981), and Hansen and Singleton (1982,1983)). A justification for
this practice is that the answer to question (ii) is yes. The third question is of
interest because Sims (1980) and Novales (1986) have suggested that the usual
practice of modeling nondurable consumption goods as being time separable may
be inapproriate when studying the co-movements of consumption and interest
rates. They argue that consumers may face adjustment costs in changing their
consumption patterns as suggested by Houthakkar and Taylor (1970). A
competing hypothesis is that what are classified as nondurable goods for
measurement purposes have some degree of durability.
                                        2

   To    investigate these questions, we use a class of empirically tractable
models   of aggregate expenditures on consumption goods, relative prices, and
asset returns. In the models we consider, consumers solve dynamic optimization

problems subject to lifetime budget constraints. Real interest rates are allowed
to vary over time. Since the consumers face an environment with uncertainty,
they have incentives to trade assets other than riskiess securities, e.g.
equities. Some of the goods which consumers can purchase are durable. We
follow Peck (1970) in modeling durable goods as assets that generate
consumption services (dividends) in current as well as subsequent time periods.
Consequently, intertemporal asset pricing theory can be used to deduce durable
goods prices in the same way that the prices of equities paying dividends in
current and future time periods are deduced. The formal theoretical underpin-
nings of the models we consider are given in Eichenbaurn, Hansen, and Richard
(1984) and Hansen (1987). Those papers derive equilibrium relations between
variables such as aggregate expenditures on goods, relative prices of goods, and
prices of other securities. The resulting class of empirical models is suffi-
ciently broad to encompass many of the empirical models that have been used to
date.
   In  our empirical analysis, it is necessary to maintain a set of auxiliary
assumptions.     We maintain three types of assumptions: functional form
restrictions on the preferences over service flows from consumption goods,
functional form restrictions on the form of the nonseparabilities over time, and
restrictions on growth in prices and aggregate quantities.
   We use functional forms for consumers' preferences over service flows that
satisfy two criteria. First, they rationalize the existence of a representative
consumer in the sense of Gorman (1953). Second, they nest, as special cases,
many of the preference specifications which have been used in the literature.
The first criterion is imposed for tractability so that equilibrium prices do not
depend on the initial distribution of resources among consumers in the economy.
Furthermore, the three empirical questions of interest translate directly from
properties of the preferences of the individual consumers to properties of the
preferences of the corresponding representative consumer.
                                         3

     We model nonseparabilities over time in preferences for consumption goods
by   viewing consumption goods as risk-free   claims to consumption services in
current and future time periods. Hence, consumption goods are intemporal
bundles of consumption services. These goods are priced in terms of prices of
the consumption service streams that they generate. Thus we are able to obtain
convenient representations for the prices of newly acquired consumption goods.
While this model of temporal nonseparabilities is admittedly extreme, it serves
as an important benchmark for models in which utilization of durable goods is
endogenized and/or private information and monitoring costs are introduced.
Such extensions make the relation between the prices of consumer services and
the purchase prices of consumption goods considerably more complicated.
Consequently, our benchmark model has many computational advantages over
these other models.
   In this paper we abstract from modeling explicitly the production of new
consumption goods. Instead, we allow for relatively general processes for
equilibrium consumption. We do, however, take an explicit stand on the impact
of economic growth and technological progress on the equilibrium prices and
quantities. In so doing, it is important that we model growth in prices and
quantities in a way that is internally consistent and allows for statistically
consistent estimation of parameters governing substitution across goods and
over time. We consider two specifications of growth that have been commonly
used in applied time series analyses. One is a model in which geometric
detrending induces stationarity, and the other is a model in which logarithmic
differencing induces stationarity. Each of these approaches has some advantages
and disadvantages. The first approach allows for more general specifications of
preferences and service technologies. The second approach allows for additional
forms of growth but can only be used for a smaller set of preferences and
Gorman-Lancaster technologies. Both approaches imply a set of testable
restrictions across the growth rates in quantities and prices.
     As a practical matter, we can use only a limited array of prices on
consumption goods and assets to estimate preference parameters and test
restrictions. Conventional approaches used in consumer demand theory such as
estimating demand functions are not applicable to our setting.
                                         4


Instead  we follow an approach suggested by Hansen and Singleton (1982) and
Hansen and Richard (1987). This approach restricts the preference shock
process of the fictitious representative consumer and exploits conditional
moment representations of equilibrium prices to obtain a set of unconditional
moment restrictions. We then use the generalized method of moments (GMM)
methodology as developed by Hansen (1982) to estimate preference parameters
and test the over-identifying unconditional moment restrictions. This approach
does not require a complete set of data on prices or a complete specification of
the conditioning information used by consumers. On the other hand, as
implemented in this paper, the approach does not permit unobservable time
varying preference shocks for the representative consumer and does not account
for time aggregation in prices and quantities.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section one we
present a version of the theoretical model analyzed by Eichenbaum, Hansen, and
Richard (1984) and Hansen (1987) and describe the equilibrium processes for
economy-wide averages of the multiple consumption goods. In section two we
display the equilibrium prices of claims to durable consumption goods and the
implied restrictions on the growth rates of quantities and prices. In section
three we show how to estimate parameters and test restrictions implied by the
model.   In section four we report empirical results obtained using quadratic
preferences. In section five we report our empirical results using a version of
the S branch utility Function suggested by Brown and Heien (1972). Finally, in
section six we report our conclusions.
                                         5

I. ThE MODEL

    Eichenbaurn, Hansen, arid Richard (1984) analyzed an explicit equilibrium
model with heterogeneous consumers and multiple durable consumption goods.
They considered specifications of consumers' preferences and trading opportuni-
ties that rationalize the existence of a representative consumer in the sense of
Gorrnan (1953). Consequently, their model implies econometrically tractable
relations between aggregate consumption of durable goods, prices of durable
goods, and asset returns.     In this section we describe briefly a particular
version of their economic model which accommodates growth.

A. INFORMATION
   Consumers have a common sequence of information sets indexed by time.
Let 1(t) denote the set of information available to consumers at time t. We
assume that 1(t) is generated by {x(r) : rt} where x(t) is a state vector at time
t.

B. PREFERENCES
     Thepreferences of consumers for durable goods are defined in two stages.
First, preferences are defined over a vector of consumption services. These
preferences are separable over time and states. Then a dynamic Gorman-
Lancaster technology is defined that maps acquisitions of durable consumption
goods into current and future consumption services.
   Let s3 (t) denote an rn-dimensional vector of services, and u- (t) denote an m-
dimensional vector of shocks to consumer j's preferences at time t. Both s' (t)
and uJ (t) are restricted to be in 1(t). At time zero, consumer j ranks alternative
consumption service processes using the utility function:

(1.1)      (1/6c)E[ {U[s (t)-u (t)}U1flI(O)J

where ó (1-o) and
                                            6



(i.2)   Us(t)-u(t)) =       {    G{6[S1J(t)U1J(t)I}a)l/a
                                i=1

The parameter 8 is a subjective discount factor between zero and one and
nonnegative for each i.           There are two branches of this utility function
corresponding to whether o- is less than or greater than one. When o- is less than
one, a is less than or equal to one and U13 (t) can be viewed as a stochastic
subsistence point of consumer j for service I at time t. On the other hand, when
o- is greater than one, a is greater than or equal to one and u1 (t) can be viewed
as a stochastic bliss point.
   This specification of preferences is a version of the S branch utility function.
Brown and Heien (1972) proposed the S branch utility function as a
generalization of the linear expenditure system, and used these preferences to
study consumption behavior in a certainty environment. This class of
preferences has a number of special cases, some of which we focus on in our
empirical analysis in section four. When a and a are the same, preferences are
completely separable across the services in each time period and state. When o
is less than one and a is zero, the function U has the Cobb-Douglas form:

(1.3)   U[s3 (t) -Ui (t)J   T{{6[sjJ (t)   (t)J} e1


Finally, when both a and a are two, consumers' utility functions are quadratic.
   Several authors have used special cases of these preferences in studying
aggregate consumption behavior. For instance, Telser and Craves (1972), Hall
(1978), Flavin (1981), and Mankiw (1982) use quadratic preferences in their
empirical analyses. Grossman and Shiller (1981) and Hansen and Singleton
(1982, 1983) use a single consumption good version (m1) and consider values
of ci that are less than one and subsistence points that are zero. Muellbauer
(1981) uses a specification in which both o- and a are zero so that preferences
are logarithmically separable. Finally, Kydland and Prescott (1982) use
preferences with      less than one and a equal to zero in which one of the
consumption services depends on current and past leisure.
                                             7

    Consumption goods are modeled as generating consumption services in current
and future time periods. It is convenient to represent the interternporal
mapping from consumption goods into consumption services by introducing
household capital stocks. Let k3 (t- I) be a vector of household capital stocks of
consumer j which are brought into time t. At time t consumer j augments
these stocks by a choice of n consumption goods which we denote c3 (t). The
time t vector of household capital is then given by

(1 .4)       k3 (t) =   k3 (t- 1) + ®c (t)
for some matrices of real numbers i and ®. We restrict the matrix to have
eigenvalues that are strictly less than one in absolute value. The corresponding
time t consumption services are given by

(i.5)       s3(t) = Fk3(t).

for some matrix F. Relations (1.4) and (1.5) can be used to construct a process
for consumption services (s3(t) : t=1,2,...} given an initial level k3(0) of the
household capital stocks and a process for consumption goods {c (t) : t1 ,2,..
The matrices , 0, and F are assumed to be common across all consumers.
   This mapping from consumption goods into consumption services can be
viewed as a dynamic version of the household technology suggested by Gorman
(1980) and Lancaster (1966). More precisely, consumption goods are bundled
claims to consumption services in current and future time periods since a
vector of consumption goods c(t) generates a vector of consumption services
rtec(t) at time t+r for r0,1            Hence, the dynamic Gorrnan-Lancaster
technology induces time nonseparabilities into consumers' indirect preferences
for goods. This form of nonseparabilities is consistent with specifications used
by Telser and Graves (1972) and Kydland and Prescott (1982).
   One obvious rationale for (1.4) and (1.5) is that consumption goods are
durable and are purchased in order to augment the stocks of household capital. In
this case the matrix dictates the rates at which the capital stocks depreciate.
Specifications like (1.4) and (1.5) also appear in the consumer demand literature
                                        8

where the household capital stocks are introduced to accommodate habit
formation, adjustment costs in consumption, or committed consumption
expenditures [e.g. see Houthakker and Taylor (1970), Pollack (1970), and Boyce
(1975)].

C. EQUILIBRIUM CONSUMPTION PROCESS
   For convenience, we calculate equilibrium prices as if the economy were an
endowment economy. The time t vector of the n economy-wide averages of new
consumption goods is denoted e*(t). The pricing relations we study also apply to
economies In which new consumption goods are produced using intertemporal
technologies with capital accumulation. For such economies e*(t) becomes the
time t average level of new consumption goods. The stochastic law of motion
for e*(t) can be calculated by solving an optimal resource allocation (Pareto)
problem.1
   Historical time series data on aggregate consumption and relative prices
display pronounced growth. This complicates both model specification and
econometric estimation. Consistent estimation of substitution parameters is not
feasible with arbitrary patterns of growth. A common strategy is to model
growth so that there exist transformations for the time series data that induce
stationarity. Such a strategy is adopted in this paper. Although we will not
present a model in which growth is determined endogenously, we will be explicit
about the growth processes that are accommodated. We consider models of
growth that are consistent with two stationary-inducing transformations. The
first transformation entails logarithmic detrending and the second entails taking
ratios of variables (differencing logarithms). Each of these approaches has been
used extensively in applied time series analysis, and for our purposes, each
has some distinct advantages and disadvantages.
   Suppose the economy-wide average consumption of each good grows
geometrically over time. Let p1 denote the growth rate in consumption good i
for i = 1,2,...,n. Then,

(1.6)       e*(t) = A(t) e(t)
                                              9

for tO where A(t) is a diagonal matrix with exp(p1t +         in the 1th diagonal
position, e*(t) is the vector of unscaled equilibrium consumption goods, and e(t)
is a vector of detrended equilibrium consumption goods with properties that will
be specified subsequently. Taking logarithms of (1.6) gives

(1.7)         log[e*(t)J = + pt + logfe(t)J

where q5 and p are M-dimensional vectors with entries                and   p1 in the
position.
   In our first model of growth, we assume that e(t) is a component of the state
vector x(t) and the stochastic process {x(t) : -<t<+co} is strictly stationary.
The parameter c is introduced for convenience so that

(1.8)         E{log(e(t)1} = 0

Given the assumption of stationarity, (1.8) holds for all time periods.
  Suppose we take first differences of (1.7). Then

(1.9)         loge*(t) - 1og[e*(t1)] = p + log[e(t)} - log[e(t-1)}

In our second model of growth we assume that log[e(t)1 - log[e(t-i)] is a
component of x(t) where again {x(t) -a<t<+o} is a stationary stochastic process.
The parameter p is identified by assuming that

(1.10)       E{log[e(t)] — log[e(t—1)]} = 0

The components of this process have deterministic growth rates given by the
corresponding components of p, but the corresponding detrended process must
now be treated differently to account for borderline nonstationarity in
{log[e(t)1 : t0}.
                                          10

D. EQUILIBRIUM SERVICE PROCESS
   To construct the economy-wide average level of consumption services in
equilibrium, we let g(O) be the economy-wide average detrended vector of
household capital stocks brought into the initial time period zero. Using (1.4)
and (1.5), we define recursively

(1.11)       g(t) = g(t—1) + ee(t)

and

(1.12)       1(t) = F'g(t)

for t=1,2%...   where (1(t) : t1} is the detrended economy-wide average
consumption service process and (g(t) : t1} is the detrended economy-wide
average process for household capital. These latter two processes inherit any
borderline nonstationarities in the equilibrium detrended consumption goods
process.
   The preference specifications (1.1) and (1.2) and the time-invariant
household technology specification (1.4) and (1.5) are presumed to apply to
detrended consumption goods and services.     In appendix A we describe
specifications of preferences and household service technologies that are
consistent with our analysis but apply to unscaled quantities.
                                          :11

 II. EQUILIBRIUM PRICES

    Eichenbaum, Hansen, and Richard (1984) described alternative trading
opportunities that in conjunction with the specification of consumers'
preferences are sufficient to rationalize a representative consumer version of
the economy described in section one. The preferences of the representative
consumer are given by (1.1) with the average preference shock u(t) replacing
u(t). In our analysis we assume that all uncertainty with respect to individual
preference shocks is diversifiable. Hence we model u(t) as a constant u over
time.
   For our purposes, it is most convenient to suppose that there are markets in
existence at some initial trading period for consumption services in each date
and state. This does not imply that trading must take place in all of these
markets to implement the equilibrium. Our focus is not on implementation but
rather on the implied equilibrium prices. The introduction of markets in
services (or attributes) as opposed to goods simplifies our calculation of
equilibrium prices vis-a-vis standard analyses of static Gorman-Lancaster
technologies.
   Given a rich collection of markets and preferences that are time and state
separable, consumers have no incentives to engage in additional trading in
subsequent time periods. Nevertheless, the equilibrium prices of consumption
services in the initial trading period imply shadow prices of claims to new and
used consumption goods that clear hypothetical markets in an economy with
sequential trading opportunities. In this section, we report the equilibrium
shadow prices. The interested reader is referred to Eichenbaum, Hansen, and
Richard (1984) for a formal derivation of these results.
   In representing the equilibrium prices we proceed in two steps. First we
abstract from growth in consumption and represent equilibrium prices as if {e (t)
  -co<t<+co} is the economy-wide average consumption process. We then
consider the Implications of growth in the endowments for equilibrium prices.
In particular, we use the equilibrium prices for the detrended quantities to
deduce prices of the actual (unscaled) quantities. In this way growth in prices
and quantities is modeled in a manner that is internally consistent.
                                         12

   We first define the marginal utilities of a fictitious representative consumer
and then use these marginal utilities to construct the equilibrium prices. The
time t marginal utility vector of the hypothetical representative consumer is
mu(t) = {mu1(t),mu2(t), ...,mum(t)]' where

(2.1)
                                                        (-a)/a
        mu1 (t)            (t)-u1]}t {e{[F (t) U1]}a}
These marginal utilities define the equilibrium prices of the consumption
services. Since consumption goods are just bundled claims to consumption
services, we can use these marginal utilities to construct the prices of new
consumption goods.
   Let q(t) be the time t relative spot price vector of new consumption goods,
and let the first element of the new consumption goods vector at time t be the
numeraire. Then

                  Ef r-t(J-,rte)/mu(r) 11(t))
(2.2)    q(t) =    rt
                  Ef V_t(FttGh)mu(r) 11(t)]
                     r=t
where h is a vector of zeroes except in the first position where there is a one.
Notice that the numerator of the right-hand side of (2.2) is the discounted
consumption service flow generated by a vector of new consumption goods.
Likewise, the denominator is the discounted service flow of the first new
consumption good at time t. The marginal utility vector enters both the
numerator and denominator as a stochastic discount factor.
   Also, consider a security that pays off y(t+i) units of the first new
consumption good at time period t+1. The time t relative price of this security,
denoted ir[y(t+1),t}, is given by
                                                 13


                            Efy(t+1)         tt(Ttti9h)/mu(r)tI(t)J
                                         r=t+1
(2.3)     iry(t+i),t) =
                            E[         t_t(FATtêh)/mu(t)1I(tfl
                                 r=t
As in (2.2), the numerator and denominator of the right-hand side of (2.3) are
discounted service flows.
   We now use the equilibrium prices for the detrended quantites to deduce
prices for the unscaled quantities. Let q*(t) be the vector of spot prices for the
unscaled new consumption goods at time t. We take the first new unscaled
consumption good at time t to be the time t numeraire. Then the relation
between q*(t) and q(t) is

(2.4)        1og[q(t)} = (41 - •) + (ptl - p)t              + Log(q(tYl

where I is an M-dimensional vector of ones and q(t) is given by (2.2). In (2.4)
the subtraction of c + pt adjusts for the transformation of quantities given in
(1.7) and the addition of ptt + c ensures that the first unscaled new consumption
good is nurneraire instead of the first detrended new consumption good.
Similarly, let y(t+1) be the payoff on a security expressed in units of the first
unscaled consumption good, and let lr*1:y(t+ 1) ,t) be the time t price of this
security expressed in time t units of the first unscaled consumption good. Then

(2.5)        lr*[y(t+1),t} =      lr[y(t+1),tlexp[(t+1)J.4j + cPt — t/.Jt   —




                                  ir[y(t+1),t}exp(p)
where iry(t+1),t} is given in (2.3).
   If e(t) and y(t) are components of the vector x(t) and {x(t) : -co<t<+x} is a
stationary process, then the price processes {q(t) : -<t<+co} and (ir{y(t+i),t)
-<t<+co} are jointly stationary with {x(t) : -<t<+}. Since the process {q(t)
-o<t<+co} is stationary, (2.4) gives a set of stationary-inducing transformations
for equilibrium relative prices. Hence there is a set of restrictions implied on
the growth rates of prices and quantities. Among other things, these restrictions
have the testable implication that expenditures on each consumption good grow at
the same rate p.
                                                14

    If instead, only log[e(t)} - log[e(t-IY1 and y(t) are components of x(t) where
{x(t)   : -<t<+} is a stationary process, then additional complications arise.
While the economic model may still remain valid, in general there will not be
a simple transformation, such as differencing logarithms of prices, that will
induce stationarity. For particular pararneterizations of our model., however,
such differencing will in fact induce stationarity. Suppose u is zero, n = m, a =
0 (so that U is Cobb-Douglas), and that each consumption service is generated
by a distinct consumption good so that Ftg is diagonal for all r0. In this
case the ratios of equilibrium consumption services to the corresponding
consumption goods are stationary. The equilibrium marginal utilities of
consumption services are

(2.6)          mu1 (t) = e1u [f(tfl °/f1 Ct)

where U is given by (1.3). Notice that log[mu(t)} can be expressed as a linear
function of logf:f(t)j plus a translation factor. It follows from (2.2) and (2.3)
that (logq (t) 1 + I og[e (t) I - 1. log [et (t)] : - <t <+c} and {ir [y(t+ 1) ,t) : -cz <t (+co}
are jointly stationary with {x(t) : -w<t<+a}. Hence logarithmic differences of
expenditures on each good relative to good one are jointly stationary. The same
conclusions follow for the unscaled quantities and prices. Consequently, the
vector of logarithms of consumption goods and relative prices are co-integrated
as defined by Cranger (1981).
    In summary, our general strategy for accommodating growth is first to
deduce time-invariant relations among quantities and prices. We then ask under
what set of circumstances can these time-invariant relations be studied using
detrended time series data. In appendix A we describe a specification of
technological progress in the mapping from unscaled goods to services that is
consistent with our approach. Not suprisingly, for this specification to be valid
one must impose a set of restrictions across the growth rates in equilibrium
aggregate consumption and technological progress in the mapping from goods to
services.
                                          15

III. ECONOMETRIC ESTIMATION
    In this section we describe how to estimate the parameters of the model and
test the over-identifying moment restrictions using GMM estimation metHds.
First, we deduce a set of unconditional moment restrictions expressed in terms
of the detrended data. Then we derive a corresponding set of equations involving
the growth parameters and the unscaled data. Finally, we describe a method for
estimating all of these parameters simultaneously and testing the unconditional
moment restrictions.

A. UNCONDITIONAL MOMENT RESTRICTIONS
    Relations (2.2) and (2.3) can be used to construct two sets of econometric
equations. Using notation involving the forward shift or lead operator F, an
alternative representation of (2.2) is

(3.1')       q(t)E{[T(I —pF)eh)'mu(t) 11(t)) — E{[F(1 —8iFY1E]'mu(t) 11(t)) = 0.

Removing conditional expectations, we obtain

(3.2)            q(t){[F(1 - $FY19hJ'mu(t)} - {V(1 - 18FY1]'mu(t)      w(t)
where E[w*(t) 11(t)] = 0. Let be a complex number with absolute value that is
less than or equal to one. Then

(3.3)            (1 -         adj(I - 18)/det(I -

where    adj()   det() denote the adjoint and the determinant of the matrix
                  and
argument respectively. Applying the scalar forward operator det(I - F) to
both sides of (3.2) gives

(3.4)        det(I - 6F){q(t){V(I - 1&FY1Gh]'mu(t)} - {Fadj(1 - 16F)e]'mu(t)
                         =
                              w1(t)
where E(w1 (t)tI(t)] = 0.    The matrix function adj(I -      is always a finite
                                             16

order polynomial. We assume that the first consumption good only generates
services in a Finite number of time periods implying that [(l -         ztehJ   is
also a finite-order polynomial. Consequently, equation (3.4) only depends on a
finite number of future equilibrium marginal utility and price vectors. Also
the first equation in this system is trivial because the first consumption good is
taken as numeraire. We omit this equation from our analysis.
   Next, consider relation (2.3). Using lead operator notation, this equation
can be expressed as

(3.5)       ir[y(t+1),tJE{IF(I 1SFY1®h]'mu(t) II(t)}
                                —


                            —
                                18E{y(t+1) [f'(I —   i.FYehJ'mu(t+1) I I(t)} = 0.
Thus, we have

(3.6)       ir[y(t+i),tfl[r(l - eFY1ehJ'mu(t)}
                             -
                               {y(t+i)[V(I - pFy1ehJ'mu(t÷l)} = w2(t)
where E(w2(t)(I(t)} = 0.
    It is convenient for us to think of (3.4) and (3.6) as a system of econometric
equations with an extensive set of cross-equation restrictions. The composite
vector w (t) = [w1 (t) ',w2 (t) 1' can be viewed as the disturbance vector which
satisfies

(3.7) E(w(t) tI(t)1 = 0.

Hence w(t) 'is a multi-period forecast error. Relation (3.7) is a conditional
moment restriction implied by our theoretical model. To study the econometric
implications, it is convenient to replace the conditional moment restriction by a
corresponding unconditional moment restriction. Let z(t) be a matrix of
variables in 1(t) that is conformable with w(t) such that z(t)w(t) have a finite
absolute first moment. Then by the Law of Iterated Expectations, (3.7) implies
that
                                         17

 (3.8)   Efz(t)w(t)J = 0.

We assume the process {z(t) : -<t<+a} is jointly stationary with {x(t)
-cx<t<+cx}. Then the parameters of the model can be estimated using time series
versions of the GMM estimators suggested by Hansen (1982). A necessary
condition for identification is that the number of free parameters does not
exceed the number of rows of z(t). When the number of rows of z(t) exceeds the
number of free parameters, the model is over-identified so that there are
additional moment restrictions that can be tested. Hansen describes a procedure
for testing these restrictions.
   The estimation approach suggested by Hansen is not directly applicable
because the equilibrium marginal utility vectors for consumption services
depend on the initial specification of the economy-wide capital g(0). In many
circumstances, this initial vector depends on the entire past history of economy-
wide averages of new consumption goods. When the admissible parameters
determining are constrained so that the eigenvalues of are strictly less than
i€ in absolute value for some pre-specified positive €,          the asymptotic
inferences are not sensitive to misspecification of g(0). On the other hand,
more accurate guesses for g(0) will probably result in higher quality asymptotic
approximations. In our empirical analysis, we use other data sources to obtain
an approximation for g(0).

B. PARAMETER ESTIMATION IN THE PRESENCE OF GROWTH
   When growth is present in the time series data, relations (1.7) and (2.4) can
be used to deduce estimation equations for the parameters p and p. The
expectation of the logarithm of the detrended quantities has mean zero by
construction, but the expectation of the detrended price is not necessarily zero.
We introduce an additional vector of parameters to accommodate this latter
nonzero expectation. The two blocks of equations we add to our system are:

(3.9)        log[e*(t)} = + pt + log[e(t)}
and
                                              18

(3.10)       log[q*(t)J =   ++      I   —
                                            ,u)t + (log[q(t)J - ELog{q(t)J})

where log[e(tfl and (log[q(t)} - E{log[q(tfl} are now treated as unobservable and
   = E{log [q(t)}}.   The first equation in (3.10) is trivial because the first
consumption good is used as numeraire. Consequently, this equation is removed
fx-orn the block. Notice that the parameter vector p enters equation blocks (3.9)
and (3. 10). This cross-equation restriction is by itself testable, and we report
results of such a test in section four.
   Equation systems (3.9) and (3.10) can be estimated using least squares. For
us it is convenient to use GMM estimation since the remaining econometric
relations are estimated using this estimation methodology. Let v(t) contain
loge(t)1 and the nontrivial components of log[q(t)1 - E{log[q(t)]}. Then

(3.11)       E[(1,t/T)'     v(t)] = 0.

The choice of T in (3. 11) is equal to the sample size. Heuristically, we can
think of (1 .,t/T) as a vector of instrumental variables to be used in estimating
p, q, and p. The division of t by T is done so that the resulting variable
behaves more like a stationary process.
   We are interested in studying unconditional moment restrictions (3.8) and
(3.11) simultaneously. Hansen (1986) provides a set of sufficient conditions
for the composite vector

               T ru,t/T)' 0 v(t) 1
(3.12)     (1/T) [        z(t)w(t)j
                                    : T1


to converge in distribution to a normally distributed random vector with mean
zero and covariance matrix Q where Q is partitioned as:


(3.13)   Q=     [c211     i2
                [21 22
                                                   19

The   partitions of 2 can be expressed as the following limits:
             ri
 (3.14) 11 = '1L''2 1/2J
                                                  .9

                       '3 ® 1m
                    1' .1                I-*u t-.9
                                                       EC9 - IrD/fl Eiv(t)v(t-r)'J


 (3.15)    l2 = ri1/2d®j-urnr-.9
                     L
                              > [(1 - )rD/fl E[v(t)w(t-r)'z(t-r)')
and
                               .9
(3.16) I22 =          urn           {(1 —   IrD/1 J E{z(t)w(t)w(t-r)'z(t—r)'J
                     .9 -+a r=-

The limiting (asymptotic) covariance matrix 2 in (3.13) is assumed to be
nonsingular.
   It turns out that the limits in (3.15) and (3.16) simplify substantially.
Since the disturbance term process {w(t) : -<t<÷} is a process of multi-
period forecast errors conditioned on current (time t) information, all but a
finite number of terms in the sums in (3.15) and (3.16) are zero. The number
of nonzero terms is determined by the length of the forecast horizon.
   Let p0 denote the vector of parameters which we seek to estimate. This
vector contains the preference parameters for consumption services, the
parameters of the matrices , 9, r, and the growth parameters p, , and p.
Given a hypothetical value of the parameter vector, we can construct an
approximation to the vector

            1(1, t/T)' 0 v(t)
(3.17)           z(t) w(t)

The only reason this approximation may not be exact is that the initial conditions
for the household capital stocks may not be known a priori. The parameter
vector p0 is not known a priori but is restricted to be In an admissible
parameter space P. Let hT(t,p) be the approximating function for any p in P.
Define

(3.18)    -r (p) =   (1 /T)         hT (t , p)
                              t=1
                                        20

Under appropriate regularity conditions, {g(p0) : T1} has the same asymptotic
distribution as the sequence in (3.12) [see Hansen (1986)]. We then estimate p
using a 0MM estimator that minimizes:

(3.19)    g(p)' WT g(p)
by choice of p in P. The sequence {WT : Ti} of distance matrices converges
almost surely to a positive definite matrix of real numbers.
    There is great flexibility in the choice of the sequence of distance matrices.
It turns out sequences which converge almost surely to            result in GMM
estimators with the smallest asymptotic covariance matrix among the class of
0MM estimators that minimize quadratic forms like (3.19). Furthermore, the
sequence of minimized values of such asymptotically optimal 0MM estimators,
denoted      : T1}, converges in distribution to a chi-square distributed random
variable with degrees of freedom equal to the difference between the total
number of unconditional moment restrictions and the number of coordinates of p.
Hence T can be used to test the over-identifying moment restrictions.
   To implement this procedure, one must estimate 2 consistently. This can be
accomplished in the following two steps. First obtain an initial estimate  for
p0 using some nonsingular specification for WT. Then form the sample
counterparts to the terms in (3.14) - (3.16) using h(t)p) to approximate the
vector given in (3. 17). Appropriate zero restrictions should be imposed, and a
choice of . considerably less than T should be used to obtain an estimate of Q
[e.g. see Newey and West (1987)1. In practice, it is a good idea to check for
sensitivity with respect to since the asymptotic theory provides very little
guidance for choosing 1.
   The questions posed in the introduction to this paper can be translated into
restrictions on the parameter vector p0. These restrictions can be tested by
taking the difference between the minimized value of objective (3.19) when the
restrictions are imposed and the minimized value of the objective when the
restrictions are not imposed. The same distance matrix should be used for both
runs.    This matrix should be a consistent estimate of 21 even when the
restrictions are not satisfied. The resulting test statistic, which we denote
                                             21

is distributed asymptotically as a chi-square random variable with degrees of
freedom equal to the number of restrictions that are being tested. This test is
an analogue to the one suggested by Gallant and Jorgenson (1979) for examining
parameter restrictions using nonlinear three-stage least squares estimation.
      In sections one and two we described a second model of growth. For this
model we consider the following alternative set of equations to estimate p:

(3.20)        v(t) =   log(e*(t)} - 1oge*(t1)] -

where E[v(t)1 = 0 is used in place of (3.1 i) The parameters (p and (p are
normalized to be zero. Then estimation and inference can be conducted as
before except that expressions (3.14) and (3.15) are modified to be

(3.21)              = urn          [(1 -
                       1-co r-)
and
                              I
(3.22)            = 1m            ((I - Irt)/I}E[v(t)w(t-r)'z(t-r)'I
                       t-w r-1
   There is one additional complication that arises in this second model of
growth. The matrix Q1 given in (3.21) is zero if the first model is the
appropriate one for any of the individual equilibrium consumption processes. In
this case the corresponding estimated growth rates should be imposed as if they
were the true rates, and the corresponding equations in (3.20) should be
removed from the system. A similar strategy can be employed if the vector
process {e(t) : t1} is co-integrated.
                                              22

IV QUADRATIC PREFERENCES
   Several researchers have used quadratic preferences to analyze permanent
Income models of consumption, e.g. Hall (1978), Flavin (1981), Mankiw (1982),
Bernanke (1985), and Novales (1985). In this section we consider the questions
posed in the introduction when preferences are quadratic (crcr2), and there are
two consumption goods (nz2). Although we used data on nondurables and
services for one good and durables for the other good, to avoid confusion we
refer to the first good as nondurables rather than nondurables and services.
Associated with these goods is a four-dimensional vector of household services.
The matrices and G are parameterized as


(4.1)
                         0000
                         6000
                         00620
                                                   e    10
                                                        00
                                                        01
                         0010                           00
The first    household     capital stock   is nondurable consumption, and the second
household    capital stock    is the one period lag of nondurable consumption scaled by
a depreciation parameter 6. The third household capital stock is the stock of
durable goods, and the fourth stock is the one period lag of the stock of durable
goods. The stock of durable goods depreciates by a factor         and the second
consumption good is the new addition to this stock.
  We assume that there are three consumption services obtained from the four
household capital stocks. The matrix F governing this transformation is given
by
                           I 1)' 0
(4.2)          F= OOiO
                         0   0 1 -1


Specification
                (4.2) implies that the first service can be obtained from any of the
first    three household     capital stocks. The parameter y dictates the substituti-
bility    between the capital stocks obtained from durable             and nondurable
consumption     goods. The second service can only be obtained from the stock of
durable goods. The third service is the change In the stock of durable goods.
                                         23

 The   ideal or bliss level for this third service is assumed to be zero so that,
 when combined with a quadratic preference specification, this service captures
 adjustment costs in durable goods.
     The interpretation of the parameter 8 as capturing depreciation relies on 81
 being positive. When y is zero and there are costs to adjusting nondurables, 8
 will be negative.2 Sims (1980) and Novales (1985) have suggested that such
adjustment costs might be important in explaining co-movements of nominal
 interest rates and real economic variables.
    As for the parameters governing preferences over consumption services, we
imposed the normalization that 01u1 = I and estimated the pariJ.urs, 0, 02,
03 ii = 02u2, and &. This parameterizatlon allows the preferences to be linear
in the services when either     or 02 is zero.
    Since the second service is the stock of durable goods, we used estimates
from Musgrave (1979) as initial conditions for this service. Given this initial
condition, an initial observation on nondurables, and hypothetical parameters of
the Gorman-Lancaster technology, we can construct a time series for equilibrium
consumption services as suggested in section three.
    rn reporting our empirical results, we show how much the objective function
used in estimation increases when various interesting restrictions are imposed
on the parameters of the model. As we indicated in section three, the increase
in the objective function can be used as a formal statistic to test restrictions on
the parameters. We considered three hypotheses pertaining to the substitut-
ability of consumption across goods and over time. Each of these hypotheses can
be represented as a set of restrictions on the parameters of preferences and the
household service technology.
   The first hypothesis is

H1: 03_Q.
Under this hypothesis there are no adjustment costs in changing the stock of
durables.  Bernanke (1985) has suggested that such adjustment costs in
consumption of durables might be present.
                                        24

        The   second hypothesis is

H2: O203IO•
Under this hypothesis there is a single consumption service so that the services
from durables and riondurables are perfect substitutes and can be aggregated. In
this case movements in the relative price of durable goods reflect movements in
the implicit term structure of risk-free interest rates for the single consumption
service. The practice of aggregating the services from durables and nondurables
to form a composite time series on aggregate consumption can be justified
under this hypothesis. Such procedures have been used, for example, by Darby
(1975) and Sargent (1978).
   The third hypothesis is

1-13:     03=1=0.
Under this hypothesis there are two consumption services, each depending on a
single consumption good. Hence, preferences are separable across durable and
nondurable goods.     If this hypothesis were true, then interternporal marginal
rates of substitution for nondurables would not depend on the level of durables.
The practice of ignoring durables in testing the relationship between aggregate
consumption and asset returns often can be rationalized by this hypothesis.
Examples of papers which abstract from durable goods when studying quadratic
models of aggregate consumption and asset returns include Hall (1978) and
Flavin (1981).
   To estimate parameters and test restrictions, we used aggregate time series
data on purchases of nondurable goods plus services,, durable goods, and the
relative price of new durable goods as measures of e1*(t), e2*(t) and q2*(t)
respectively. The two quantity series were measured by monthly, seasonally
adjusted real aggregate purchases of nondurable goods plus services, and durable
goods for the time period 1959:1 through 1978:12. A time series on relative
prices was constructed by dividing the implicit price deflator for nondurable
goods and services by the implicit price deflator for new durable goods. These
data were obtained from the CITIBASE data tape. In addition, we used one-month
                                            25

 returns on Treasury Bills for a security payoff. Hence, y(t+1) is the ex post
real return on one-month Treasury Bills, and ir{y(t+1),tJ is one for all t. The
time series of Treasury Bill yields were taken from Ibbotson and Sinquefeld
(1979). Nominal returns were converted to real returns using the implicit
price deflator for nondurables and services. We terminated our time series at
the end of 1978 because of the change in operating procedures of the Federal
Reserve Bank in 1979.
      The matrix z(t) was chosen to be
                                               -T
                                     1


(4.3)          z(t) =   11   01 ®    e(t)
                        [            e1(t-i)

                                     y(t)

Hence, z (t) is dimensioned twelve by two, and      has eighteen components.
   The results from estimating the parameters of the model are presented in
Table 4.1 as the base run.4 The estimated values of e2, e3, and v are all small
relative to their standard errors and have incorrect signs. This suggests that
hypotheses H1 and H2 may be empirically plausible. The         statistic indicates
that there is definite evidence against the over-identifying restrictions, but the
evidence is not overwhelming.
      Table 4.1 also reports results obtained from testing hypotheses H1, H2, and
H3.     According to the RT statistics, there is very little evidence against
hypotheses H1 and H2 while there is a substantial amount of evidence against
hypothesis H3. Also, the estimates of     are consistently around .5 implying
there is some degree of durability in goods classified as nondurable, and no
adjustment costs.
                                        26

                                     TABLE 4.1


Parameters*               Base               H1        H2        H3
                           .994            .994      1.010      1.005
                          (.007)          (.007)     (.007)     (.001)
0x  1
                          6.01.          6.07        5.72        6.61.
                         (9.29)              (.23)    (.21)      (.29)
            10            -.84              -.79     0.00        -.12
                         (1.18)              (.99)    ————
                                                                 (.10)
e       x   i0           -1.40
                         (3.09)
                                         0.00
                                            ----
                                                     0.00
                                                      ----
                                                                 5.87
                                                                (4.43)

 1
        x 10             4.87            4.74        5.37        2.67
                          (.72)              (.52)    (.41).     (.40)
o2 x 10                  9.78            9.77        9.83       9.90
                          (.04)           (.04)       (.05)      (.04)
    x                    5.64            5.59        5.37       0.00
                          (.68)              (.61)    (.41)
i x 10                  -3.45           -3.24        0.0
                                                      ---
                                                                2.06
                         (5.32)          (4.38)                 (3.72)
        x 1O3            2.80            2.80        2.80       2.82
                          (.04)             (.04)     (.05)      (.04)
        x                4.37            4.37        4.37        4.33
                          (.09)             (.09)     (.09)      (.07)
                        17.54           17.65        20.63      33.57
                         (.996)          (.993)        (.992)   (1.00)
                                          .11         3.09      16.03
                                         (.260)       (.622)    (1.00)



asymptotic standard errors in parentheses
**confidence levels in parentheses
                                        27

     Table4.2 reports additional results pertaining to hypothesis H2. Under this
 hypothesis the services from durables and nondurables are perfect substitutes.
 The only difference between the base run in Table 4.2 and the H1 run in Table
 4. 1, is that the weighting matrix WT for the base run in Table 4.2 was
 estimated imposing all of the restrictions implied by H2. Given our estimates
 of the parameters of the Gorrnan-Lancaster technology, durables produce on
 average 13% of the first consumption service. Also, the estimated value of
 is sufficiently small that the esimated marginal utilities for the first
consumption service are positive for all time periods in the sample.
   To investigate the impact of trend estimation on our analysis, we estimated
the parameters of the model under the presumption that the trend estimates in
the base run are equal to the true trend parameters and that these parameters
are known a priori. The resulting estimates and estimated standard errors are
reported in Table 4.2. Note that for some of the parameters, the estimated
standard errors are notably reduced so that trend estimation can have an
important impact on inference.
    Table 4.2 also reports results pertaining to the timing convention used to
align the consumption and return data. In analyzing discrete time models there
 is an element of arbitrariness in how the data matches the model. Initially, we
used the same timing convention as Hansen and Singleton (1982, 1983). They
assume that in making consumption decisions in a given month, consumers know
their end-of-month returns on assets and have access to the proceeds from these
returns. In this paper we also considered an alternative convention in which
consumers are presumed only to know and have access to the returns from the
previous month in making consumption decisions. In the first timing convention,
consumption is viewed as an end-of-month decision while in the second timing
convention, consumption is viewed as a beginning-of-month decision.          The
results from estimating the model under the second timing convention are
reported in Table 4.2. As can be seen, the choice of timing convention has
little effect on our results.
                                           28

                                       TABLE 4.2

                                           = i.i = 0
                                 02 = 03
                                                   No Trend      Alternative
Parameters*                   Base                 Estimation      Timing
                              1.010                    1.010       1.012
                              (.008)                   (.007)       (.008)
01 x IO                       5.40                     5.40        5.28
                              (.10)                     (.06)       (.09)
o 1 x 10                      6.18                     6.18        6.49
                              (.22)                    (.14)        (.22)
o2x 10                        9.79                     9.79        9.78
                              (.03)                    (.03)        (.03)
y x IO3                       4.86                     4.86        5.34
                               (.81)                    (.77)       (.94)
p x 1O                        2.80                                  2.80
                              (.08)                                  (.08)
p2 x 1O                      4.39                                   4.37
                             (.08)                                  (.08)
                            19.77                      13.68      22.43
                             (.989)                     (.942)      (.996)

*asymptotic standard errors in parentheses.
**confidence levels in parentheses.
                                          29

        In   Table 4.3 we report the results from estimating the model under
hypothesis H2 when two asset pricing equations were studied simultaneously.
Let y1(t+l) and y2(t+1) denote the ex post real returns on one-month Treasury
Bills and a value-weighted index of stocks on the New York Stock Exchange,
respectively. The time series of stock returns was taken from the CRSP
(Center for Research in Securities Prices) data tapes. The riatrix z(t) was
chosen to be


                         z1(t)    0      0
(4.4)           z(t) =   0
                                 z2(t)   0
                         0       0       z2(t)

where z1 (t)' = [1,q2(t)] and z2(t)' =
                                       [1,q2(t),e(t)'y1(t).y2(t)1. Hence z(t) is
dimensioned fourteen by three, and     has twenty components. The results are
reported in Table 4.3 and are quite similar to those reported in the first column
of Table 4.2. The function value is somewhat higher as might be expected since
more orthogonality conditions are used in the estimation procedure.
                                          30

                                      TABLE 4.3
                                   MULTIPLE ASSETS


                  Parameters*                        Estimates
                                                     1.009
                                                      (.010)
                          x                          5.63
                                                      (.17)

                      £
                          x 10                       5.32
                                                      (.53)
                    t52
                          X   10                     9.75
                                                     (.04)
                    yx                               6.25
                                                     (.95)
                   Mi x       10                      2.81
                                                      (.04)
                          X                           4.36
                                                      (.09)
                                                     25.13
                                                       (.995)
*asymptotic standard errors in parentheses.
**confidence levels in parenthesis.
                                         31

    To  study the role of nonseparability across consumption goods in the asset
 pricing equations, we eliminated the relative price equations from the system of
 econometric equations. Consequently, two unconditional moment restrictions
 were removed from consideration. We found it to be very difficult to estimate
 both    and y in this case. In fact when y is zero, ceases to be identified in
 the reduced equation system. Recall that preferences over consumption
acquisitions are strictly separable when y is zero. For this reason we imposed
the constraint that    be .975, considered a range of values For y, and estimated
the remaining parameters. This constraint on         is consistent with the results
reported in Table 4.3.
    In Table 4.4 we report values of the criterion function used in estimation for

several specifications of y. The values of y ranged from the point estimate
reported in Table 4.3 to zero. Notice that the drop in the criterion function over
the range of y specifications is only 1.69. A chi-square statistic of this
magnitude with one degree of freedom has a confidence level of .81. This
indicates that the introduction of durable goods into the subset of econometric
equations involving asset prices does not reduce the criterion function very
dramatically.

                                  TABLE 4.4
                              MULTIPLE ASSETS

                                   oa=2
                                        .975
                                  62

Values of   yx         6.25 5.00       4.00 3.00 2.00 1.00 0.00
Function Values      24.05 24.11 24.25 24.44 24.75 25.18 25.74
                                          32

   Finally, we report evidence regarding the restrictions on the growth rates of
quantities and prices. Recall that the first block of six unconditional moment
restrictions depends only on the five parameters pi, p2, 1 - '2          and the•
two parameters of 4,. Consequently, these five parameters can be estimated
separately. Furthermore, these six moment restrictions are the source of one
of the over-identifying restrictions that were tested using the   test statistic.
It is of interest to examine these six moment conditions in isolation.
   In Table 4.5 we report the constrained estimates of p1, 2 and i_P2.
using only these six orthogonality restrictions. In addition, we report the
unconstrained estimates obtained by relaxing the restriction that the growth rate
in relative prices equals p1-p2. The T statistic provides some evidence
against the restrictions on the growth rates, but the evidence is not overwhelm-
ing. This is consistent with the results reported In Table 4.2 indicating that
there is more evidence against the over—identifying restrictions when trend
estimation is taken into account.6
                                   TABLE 4.5
                        INFERENCE ON GROWTh RATES
Pararn eters*            Constrained         Unconstrained

p1 x 1O                     2.80                     2.92
                            (.05)                    (.08)

   X    10                  4.37                     4.87
                            (.09)                    (.25)

(p1 - p2)    x   IO        -1.57                    -1.45
                            (.07)                    (.09)

   **
                           4.43
                          (.965)

*standard errors are in parentheses.
**probability values of test statistics are in parentheses.
                                         33

   Summarizing    the results in this section, we found a high degree of
substitutability between nondurable goods and the services from the stock of
durable goods. Also, we found that goods which are classified as nondurable
generate service flows which extend beyond the purchase date in monthly data.
On the other hand, we found very little evidence in support of adjustment costs in
either the stock of durable goods or in nondurable goods. All of these results
were obtained under the maintained assumption that the preferences of
consumers are quadratic. In the next section we investigate these empirical
hypotheses using other specifications of preferences.
                                        34

V. S BRANCH PREFERENCES
  In this section we consider results obtained when a is estimated although
constrained to be less than one. The household technology is modified from that
used in section four by eliminating the fourth capital stock and the third service

,
and setting the parameter y to zero. Hence n and m are both two. The matrices
   e, and r are parameterized as

                   oo0                 [1 OJ                  11      o
(5.1)           = c5 0       0   ê= 0        O
                                                        F=
                                                              LO 0     1
                   o o 62              [
Although   y is zero, a is no longer required to be equal to a. Hence, in this
specification, a dictates the substitutability between the services from durable
and nondurable consumption goods.           Finally, the economy-wide average
subsistence point u is set to zero, and the preference parameters & and      are
normalized so that their sum is one.
   We report results pertaining to four hypotheses. The first hypothesis is



Under this hypothesis the function U used in representing preferences for
consumption services has the Cobb-Douglas form given by (1.3).
   The second hypothesis is

H2:a1
Under this hypothesis the services from durables and nondurables are perfect
substitutes. This hypothesis is the analogue to the second hypothesis in section
four.
   The third hypothesis is

H3 : a = a
                                           35

Under this hypothesis the implied preferences for consumption goods are
strictly separable across durable and nondurable consumption goods. This
hypothesis is the analogue to the third hypothesis in section four and was
maintained by Grossman and Shiller (1981)        and   Hansen and Singleton (1982,
1983).
   The fourth hypothesis is

H4:cra=O
Under this hypothesis preferences are logarithmically separable over the two
consumption services as was assumed by Muellbauer (1981).
   In our empirical analysis, we transformed the original econometric equations
as follows. We formed w1 + (t) = w1 (t) /mu2 (t) and w2(t) = w2 (t) /rnu1 (t).
Since mu (t) and mu2 Ct) are in 1(t), E [w1 (t) 11(t)] = 0 and E [w2 + (t) 11(t)] = 0.
Hence the unconditional moment restriction

(5.2)        E[z(t)w(t)j    0

is satisfied where z(t) is a matrix comfortable to w(t) with elements that are
in 1(t) such that Iz(t)w(t)I has a finite expectation. This transformation of
equations accomplishes two things. First, each of the resulting equations has a
constant term that is normalized to unity. Second, the resulting econometric
equations are expressed in terms of marginal rates of substitution for
consumption services rather than marginal utilities. This latter feature
guarantees that our econometric equations can be expressed in terms of ratios of
consumption services. This feature is particularly convenient for the special
case in which a is zero (Cobb-Douglas) as we will see subsequently.
   The model was estimated using the procedures described in section three and
the data described in section four. The results are presented in Table 5.1 as
the base run. The estimated standard errors of a and a are sufficiently large
relative to the respective point estimates to indicate that each of the hypotheses
H1, H2, and H4 may be empirically plausible. Also, the estimated standard
error of 01 is quite large relative to its point estimate. The estimate of the
                                        36

parameter   governing depreciation in nondurables (ó) is positive and large
relative to its standard error implying that nondurable consumption goods
generate consumption services in time periods subsequent to their acquisition.
The point estimate of the parameter governing depreciation in durables (62) is
the same as was obtained when preferences were assumed to be quadratic (see
Table 4. 1). The estimate of the discount factor (IS) exceeds one reflecting the
low ex post returns to holding Treasury Bills during our sample period.
Finally, the T statistic is somewhat lower than the corresponding statistic for
the base quadratic run.7 There is still, however, some evidence against the over-
identifying restrictions.
                                           37

                                     TABLE 5.1


                                       ai
Parameters*             Base          H1         H2           H3         H4
                        1.003         1.003      1.003        1.003      1.003
                        (.001)        (.001)      (.001)      (.001)     (.001)
a                        .62           .54         .54         .41       0
                         (.28)        (.26)       (.28)       (.21)
a                       -.90          0           1            .41       0
                         (.96)                    (.24)       (.28)
e 1 xlO                 2.11          8.70       9.96         9.63       8.73
                       (5.78)          (.06)      (.01)        (.29)         (.05)
61xlO                   2.44           2.30      2.07         2.56       3.11
                         (.77)         (.81)     (1.15)        (.69)      (.36)
62xlO                   9.78          9.75        9.77        9.72       9.75
                         (.02)         (.04)      (.06)       (.07)       (.04)
p 1 x103                2.74           2.76       2.77         2.76       2.72
                         (.04)         (.03)          (.04)     (.04)      (.03)
p 2 x103                4.31           4.34       4.37         4.35       4.27
                         (.08)         (.07)       (.07)       (.06)        (.07)
                       15.77          16.16      21.36        17.39      20.29
                        (.973)         (.960)     (.994)       (.974)     (.984)
RT**
                                        .39       5.59         1.62       4.52
                                       (.468)      (.982)       (.800)     (.896)

*asyptotic standard errors in parentheses.
**co?idence levels in parentheses.
                                         38

   Table5. 1 also reports our results from testing hypotheses H1 through H4.
According to the reported RT statistics, there is very little evidence against
hypothesis H1 and only weak evidence against hypotheses H3 and H4. Of the four
hypotheses, H2 appears to be the least plausible empirically.
  It is of interest to compare the results of the hypothesis tests reported in
Tables 5.1 to those in 4.1. Overall, there is somewhat less evidence against
the over-identifying restrictions when cr is estimated (although constrained to be
less than one) than when preferences are assumed to be quadratic (u=2). Also,
there is more evidence against the perfect substitutability hypothesis (H2) and
less evidence against the strict separability hypothesis (H3) -
   All of the empirical results discussed so far correspond to the first of the
two models of growth discussed in sections one and two. We now examine the
empirical plausibility of these two models. In Table 5.2 we report results
from estimating regressions of log[e1*(t)j, logfe2*(t)], and log{q2*(t)] onto a
constant, a time trend, and one lag of the respective variable. Under the first
model of growth, the coefficients on the lag of the variables should have absolute
values that are less than one. The estimates of the asymptotic standard errors
that are reported in the parentheses were calculated under the presumption that
the First model of growth is the appropriate model. Under the second model of
growth, the coefficient on the time trend should be zero and the coefficient on
the lag of the variable should be one. Dickey and Fuller (198 i) deduced the
asymptotic distribution of the likelihood ratio test when the disturbance terms
in the regression are normal independent random variables and the second model
of economic growth is the appropriate model. Let .ZT denote the likelihood ratio
test statistic suggested by Dickey and Fuller (1981). Phillips and Peron (1985)
showed how to modify the test statistic to accomodate more general distribu-
tional assumptions while preserving the same asymptotic distribution that was
tabulated by Dickey and Fuller (1981).         In particular, Phillips and Peron
allowed for more general forms of serial dependence and conditional heteroske-
dasticity in the disturbance term.      Let ZT* denote the modification of the
likelihood ratio statistic suggested by Phillips and Peron.8
                                               39

                                       TABLE 5.2
                                 TESTS FOR UNIT ROOTS

Right-hand-side variable Nondurables and Services Durables Relative Prices

Constant                                 0.15              0.13         0.004
                                         (0.04)            (0.03)       (0.004)

Time Trend x 10                          1.26              4.32         -0.36
                                        (0.35)             (1.08)       (0.26)


Lag                                      0.96              0.91         0.98
                                        (0.01)            (0.02)       (0.02)


ZT                                      2.65               5.50         2.00

                                        2.60              6.15          2.72

*asymptotic standard errors in parentheses


   Dickey and Fuller (1981) reported critical values for their test statistic of
about 5.4 for confidence level .9 and 6.3 for confidence level .95. Hence the
time series on durable goods is the only one for which there is much evidence
against the second model of growth. Even for this series, the evidence is not
overwhelming. Dickey and Fuller also indicated that the likelihood ratio test
does   not have very much power against many alternatives that are special cases
of our      first model   of growth. Consequently, the results in Table 5.2 indicate
that   it   is very   difficult to discriminate between the two models of growth
suggested in section one using the data set we considered. For this reason, we
also report results for the second model of growth. A cost of using this model
is that our statistical methods are applicable only under hypothesis      (a0).
                                             40
   To estimate the parameters under H1 and the second model of growth, we
chose the matrix z(t) to be
                                e * (t) /e * (t- 1)
                          0
                     Ii         e2*(t)/e2*(t1)
(5.3)       Z(t) =        1
                     La
                                q2*(t)e2*(t)/ej*(t)
                                y (t)
                                 I

Thus, we imposed ten unconditional moment restrictions to estimate the five
parameters , a, 01 c, and 62. Our estimation results are reported in Table
5.3 under the column heading Single Asset. The estimation equations for the
asset return and the relative price are identical with those used to obtain the
results in Table 5.1 under the column H1. Not suprisingly, the point estimates
reported in these two columns are very similar. There is some difference in the
estimated standard errors because of differences in the estimation equations for
the growth parameters and in the choice of the matrix z (t). For instance, the
estimate of o in Table 5.3 is again about .5 although the estimated standard
error is larger than in Table 5.1. The estimate of        in Table 5.3 is again
positive but is estimated with less precision than In Table 5.1. The estimates
of   and 62 are very close to those reported in Table 5.1, but the corresponding
estimated standard errors are smaller.
   Table 5.3 also reports results from estimating the model when two asset
pricing equations were considered simultaneously. Let y1 (t+1) and y2(t+1)
denote the ex post returns on one-month Treasury Bills and a value-weighted
index of stocks on the New York Stock Exchange. The matrix z (t) was chosen to
be

                                     ej*(t)/ej*(t_1)
                     100             y(t)
(5.4)      z(t) =    0 1 0 0
                     001             y2(t)
                                      I
                                                41

                                    TABLE 5.3

                                         cT<i
                                         a0
Preferences*                       Single Asset       Multiple Assets
                                         .999             1.005
                                        (.004)             (.003)
                                        -.51               -.36
                                        (.61)              (.55)
91x10                                   8.63               8.62
                                        (.02)              (.03)
ó1xiO                                   3.06               3.80
                                     (1.59)                (.55)
62x10                                   9.70               9.71
                                         (.05)              (.030)
p1x103                                  2.95               2.99
                                         (.22)              (.19)
p2x103                                  5.55                4.67
                                        1.19               (1.23)
                                     8.35                  19.14
                                        (.862)              (.992)
*standard errors in parentheses.
**pbability values of test statistic.


Thus we imposed twelve unconditional moment restrictions. The results are
reported under the column Multiple Assets.
                                         42

   The   point estimates in this case are very similar to those obtained using only
one asset return.     As in Hansen and Singleton (1982), however, there is
substantially more evidence against the model when two asset returns are used.
This is not surprising because we found very little evidence against the
hypothesis that preferences are logarithmically separable.
                                         43

CONCLUSIONS
    In this paper we presented a set of empirical results pertaining to inter- and
intraternporal substitutability of consumption goods. The results in section four
indicate that when preferences are constrained to be quadratic, there is very
little evidence against the hypothesis that the services from durable goods and
nondurable goods are perfect substitutes. This finding supports the practice of
aggregating these services into a single service. On the other hand, this finding
is inconsistent with the existence of constant real interest rates because prices
of durable goods relative to nondurable goods are not constant over time. In
addition, these results call into question the practice of testing quadratic models
of aggregate consumption using data on nondurables and services only.
   The finding of perfect substitutability between service flows of these
different consumption goods is admittedly extreme and possibly sensitive to the
specification of preferences. For this reason, we reported results using S
branch preference specifications. The results in section five show that for S
branch prefence specifications, there is more evidence against perfect
substitutability between service flows, but less evidence against strict
separability across durable and nondurable consumption goods. Among other
things, these findings suggest that the empirical shortcomings of the
intertemporal asset pricing model cannot be attributed to the neglect of durable
goods.
  For both specifications of preferences, we found that goods classified as
nondurable goods generate positive consumption services in subsequent time
periods. Since this finding may be sensitive to aggregation-over--time biases, it
would be of interest to examine this hypothesis using a model in which
consumers make decisions more frequently than once a month and the
consumption data are viewed as monthly averages over finer intervals of time.
   The models we considered in this paper are important benchmarks for
models with endogenous depreciation, private information, and/or lumpiness in
the acquisition of durable goods. Deducing testable implications from models
with these alternative features will be a challenging but possibly fruitful task.
We hope that by documenting the empirical shortcomings of the benchmark
models, we have made this task a little easier.
                                        44

NOTES

1For our analysis, it is convenient to view economies with capital accumulation
as being in a suitably defined stochastic steady state. Alternatively, one could
use a model for which suitably transformed values of consumption and capital
goods converge to a stochastic steady state starting from arbitrary initial
conditions. Often, the rate or convergence to the stochastic steady state is
sufficiently fast so that the initial conditions do not effect the asymptotic
distribution of the econometric estimators.

      Follows from the analysis in Hansen (1987) where it is shown that there
are multiple ways to represent quadratic preferences when there are more
services than goods. In particular, it is shown that the preferences can always
be represented equivalently with the same number of services as goods but with
a different Corrnan-Lancaster technology.

3The use of seasonally adjusted data is potentially problematic since our
theoretical model provides no rationale for such adjustments. Miron (1986) has
studied the impact of seasonal adjustment of consumption in models similar to
those considered here.

4me results reported in all tables except 5.2, used a value of =   to estimate
                                                                   15
2. Also, we continued using previous round parameter estimates p to obtain e
eeew estimates of 2 until the probability value of statistic did not change in
the third decimal place.

5The examination of the timing convention is not a substitute for investigating
the effects of aggregation-over-time-biases that might occur. For instance,
aggregation-over-time-biases can occur if consumers make consumption decisions
continuously and an econornetrician's time series data is the total consumption
over an interval of time.       Such biases can easily distort estimates of
intertemporal substitution parameters such as c5. In this paper we maintain the
assumption that consumption decisions are made monthly.
                                         45

6Bernanke (1985) studied   the behavior of consumption of nondurabies and
services and durables by assuming that the growth rate in both series were the
same as the growth rate in GNP. His assumption is clearly incompatible with
the results in Table 4.5.

7The minimized values of the criterion functions reported in Tables 4.1 and 5. 1
are not directly comparable because the form of the estimation equations is
different and because the restrictions on preferences across these two tables are
not nested. In principle, one could estimate a preference specification for
consumption services that nests both of the preference specifications used in
Tables 4.1 arid 5.1. Such a nesting is given in section one. Most likely, the
resulting criterion function used in such an estimation would not be very well
behaved. The results in both Tables 4.1 and 5.1 confirm that unless additional
restrictions are imposed, it is difficult to estimate all of the preference
parameters.     Non-nested testing procedures such as those suggested by Cox
(1961) require that more structure be imposed on the estimation problem than
we have imposed here.

     implement the ?hlllips-?eron test, one must estimate a limit like that given
on the right-hand side of (3.14). We found some sensitivity of the estimated
standard errors and the     statistic to the choice of 9, although this sensitivity
was never sufficient to reverse conclusions. The results reported in Table 5.2
take I to be 20.
                                         46

APPENDIX A

   In this appendix we present specifications of preferences and services
technologies that are consistent with our modeling of growth in prices and
quantities.
   Consider first the service technology. Let k*j (t) denote the vector of unsca led
household capital stocks of person j, and c (t) denote the vector of unsca led new
consumption goods of person j. The unscaled counterpart to (1.4) is

(A. 1)       k*J(t) = *k*J(t_1) + e*(t)c*J(t)

where *     = exp(p5)L and e*(t) = exp(p5t)eA(t11. We use (1.5) to map the
household capital stock into consumption services. The matrix Function e*(t)
governs the technological progress in this mapping. Equation (A.1) is designed
so that

(A.2)        r(t) =   Fg*(t) = exp(p5t)f(t)

where {f*(t) : t1} and {g*(t) :      are the economy-wide unscaled average
processes on consumption services and household capital. Hence an implication
of this technology in conjunction with our assumption about the growth in
equilibrium acquisitions of new consumption goods is that the equilibrium
growth rate in consumption services is  for all services.
   Next, we consider specifications of preferences.        When equilibrium
consumption grows over time and c is greater than one, it is necessary for the
preference shocks to grow over time to avoid the implication that consumers
become satiated. Similarly, when o is less than one, it is necessary for
preference shocks to grow in order for the impact of the subsistence levels not
to diminish over time. Thus, to allow for growth in services we transform the
preference shock processes for each individual. Let uJ*(t) u (t)exp(tu5), so
that the growth rate in the preference shocks is the same as the growth rate in
the equilibrium consumption service vector. Also, define        exp(-p5cñ8. Then
the preferences over unscaled consumption services are given by (1.1) and (1.2)
with sJ*(t), uJ*(t), and * replacing s3(t), u(t), and respectively.
                                        47

    It is easy to verify that this specification of preferences and service
technology rationalizes our treatment of growth in prices and new consumption
goods. Notice that there is a restriction linking the growth rates in equilibrium
aggregate consumption and technological progress in the Corman-Lancaster
technology. This restriction is not deduced from more primitive assumptions
but is simply posited. On the other hand, this restriction has empirical content
and can be tested.
    The growth rate       and the discount factor * are left unidentified in our
analysis because direct observations are not available for consumption services.
These parameters must satisfy particular inequality restrictions, however. For
instance,    is less than one, and

(A.3) j.> log()/o        for ci'> 0

(A.4)   ji5   <log()/a   for ci   <0
REFERENCES

Bernanke, B.S., uAdjustrnent Costs, Durables, and Aggregate Consumption,"
   Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol 15 (1985) 4 1-68.
Boyce, R., "Estimation of Dynamic Gorman Polar Form Utility Functions,"
  Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 4:1 (1975), 103-116.
Brown., M.J., and 0. Helen, "The S-Branch Utility Tree: A Generalization of
  the Linear Expenditure System," Econometrica, 40 (1972) 737-747.
Cox, D.R., "Tests of Separate Families of Hypotheses," Proceedings of the
  Fourth Berkeley Symposium in Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
  University of California Press (1961) 105-123.
Darby, M.R., "Post War US Consumption, Consumer Expenditures, and
  Savings," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 65
  (1975) 217-222.
Dickey, D.A. and W.A. Fuller, "Distribution of the Estimators for
   Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root,"        Econornetrica, 49,
   (1981) 1057-1072.
Eichenbaum, M.S, L.P. Hansen, and S.F. Richard, "The Dynamic
   Equilibrium Pricing of Durable Consumption Goods,"   manuscript (1984).
Flavin, M.A., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
   About Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, 89 (1981) 974-
   1009
Gallant, A.R., and D.W. Jorgenson, "Statistical Inference for a System of
   Simultaneous, Nonlinear, Implicit Equations in the Context of
   Instrumental Variable Estimation," Journal of Econometrics 11 (1979)
   275-302.
Gorman, W.M., "Community Preference Fields," Econometrica (1953) 63-
  80.
Gorman, W.M., "A Possible Procedure for Analyzing Quality Differentials in
  the Egg Market," Review of Economic Studies 47 (1980) 843-856.


                                     1
Granger, C.W.J., "Some Properties of Time Series Data and Their Use in
   Econometric Model Specification," Journal of Econometrics, (1981) 121 -
   130.
Grossman, S.J., and R.J. Shiller, "The Determinants of the Variability of
  Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review 71 (1981) 222-227.
Hall, R.E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
  Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy 86
  (1978) 971-987.
Hansen, L.P., "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
  Estimators," Econometrica 50 (1982) 1029-1054.
_________—, "Lecture Notes on Time Series Econometrics," manuscript
   (1986).
___________     "Calculating   Asset Prices in Three Example Economies,"
   (forthcoming in Ed. T.F. Bewley, Advances in Econometrics, Fifth World
   Congress, 1987).
___________ and S.F. Richard, "The Role of Conditioning Information in
   Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing
   Models," (forthcoming in Econometrica, 1987).
__________     andK.J. Singleton, "Generalized Instrumental Variables
   Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Models," Econometrica 50 (1982)
   1269-1286.
_________________________________    "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion,
   and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of Political
   Economy 91:1 (1983) 249-265.
Houthakker, H.S. and L.D. Taylor, Consumer Demand in the United States
  1929-1970, 2nd Edition, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
  (1970).
Ibbotson,   R.G., and R.A. Sinquefeld, Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation:
   Historical Returns, 1926-1978,    2nd.   ed. Charlottesville, VA: Financial

   Analysts   Res. Found. (1979).

                                       2
Kydland, F.E., and E.F. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate
   Fluctuations," Econometrica 50 (November 1982) 1345-1370.
Lancaster, K., "A New Approach to Consumer Theory," Journal of Political.
   Economy 74 (1966) 132-157.
Mankiw, N.G., "Hall's Consumption Hypothesis and Durable Goods," Journal
   of Monetary Economics 10 (1982) 417-425.
Miron, Jeffrey A., "Seasonal Fluctuations and the Life Cycle-Permanent
   Income Model of Consumption," J.P.E., 94:6 (1986) 1258-79.
Muellbauer, J., "Testing Neoclassical Models of the Demand for Consumer
  Durables," Theory and Measurement of Consumer Behavior, A. Deatori
  (ed.), New York: Cambridge University Press (198 1).
Musgrave, J.C., "Durable Goods Owned by Consumers in the United States,
  1925-1977," Survey of Current Business (March 1979).
Newey, W., and K.D. West, "A Simple, Positive Definite, Heteroskedasticity
  and Autocorre lation Covariance Matrix," (forthcoming in Econometrica
  1987).
Novales., A., "A Stochastic, Monetary Equilibrium Model of the Interest
   Rate," manuscript, SUNY at Stony Brook (1985).
Peck, S.C., "The Individual's Choice of Goods, Assets and Durables," Second
   World Congress of the Econometric Society paper (1970).
Phillips, P.C.B. and P. Perron, "Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series
   Regression," mimeo (1986).
Pollak, RA., "Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions," Journal of
   Political Economy, 78, (1970) pp. 745-763.
Sargent, T.J., "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity, and
   Consumption," Journal of Political Economy 86:4 (1978) 673-700.
Sims, C.A., "International Evidence on Monetary Factors in Macroeconomic
   Fluctuations," manuscript (1.980).
Telser, L.G., and R.J. Graves, Functional Analysis in Mathematical
   Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1972).

                                     3
