NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WELFARE COST OF PERCEIVED POLICY UNCERTAINTY:
EVIDENCE FROM SOCIAL SECURITY
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Andrew A. Samwick
Working Paper 21818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21818
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
We thank Alan Gustman, Jonathan Skinner, Steve Venti, and Niels Vermeer for helpful comments
and Poom Nukulkij and Wan Yan of Knowledge Networks for their work on our survey. We also
thank seminar audiences at the Western Economic Association International, NBER Summer Institute,
University of Wisconsin, CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, Tinbergen Institute,
Groningen University, Erasmus University, Tilburg University, University of Oxford, IZA Bonn, LSE/IFS
joint seminar, the Paris School of Economics, the University of Maastricht, the University of Connecticut,
the 13th International Pensions Workshop, Texas A&M University, University of Bergen, Loyola
Marymount University, the University of Utah, and Middlebury College for helpful comments. We
are grateful to Mathew Greenwald for providing us with tabulations of data from his research, to Steve
Goss for guidance on the present discounted value of accrued future Social Security benefits, and to
Ben Chuchla for exceptional research assistance. This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security
Administration through grant #5 RRC08098400-03-00 to the National Bureau of Economic Research
as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely
those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Andrew A. Samwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Welfare Cost of Perceived Policy Uncertainty: Evidence from Social Security
Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Andrew A. Samwick
NBER Working Paper No. 21818
December 2015
JEL No. D89,H55
ABSTRACT
Policy uncertainty can reduce individual welfare when individuals have limited opportunities to mitigate
or insure against consumption fluctuations induced by the policy uncertainty. For this reason, policy
uncertainty surrounding future Social Security benefits may have important welfare costs. We field
an original survey to measure the degree of policy uncertainty in Social Security and to estimate the
impact of this uncertainty on individual welfare. On average, our survey respondents expect to receive
only about 60 percent of the benefits they are supposed to get under current law. We document the
wide variation around the expectation for most respondents and the heterogeneity in the perceived
distributions of future benefits across respondents. This uncertainty has real costs. Our central estimates
show that on average individuals would be willing to forego around 6 percent of the benefits they are
supposed to get under current law to remove the policy uncertainty associated with their future benefits.
This translates to a risk premium from policy uncertainty equal to 10 percent of expected benefits.
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
6106 Rockefeller Center, Room 305
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Erzo.FP.Luttmer@Dartmouth.Edu
Andrew A. Samwick
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
andrew.samwick@dartmouth.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21818

1. Introduction

Relative to the extensive literature that values risk in insurance and financial markets,
economists have paid surprisingly little attention to the welfare consequences of policy
uncertainty. The welfare effects of policy uncertainty are likely to be especially pronounced
when the policy has a potentially large impact on consumption and the risk associated with the
policy is not diversifiable or insurable. For example, uncertainty about future taxes is costly to
individuals because it hampers their ability to consumption smooth over the lifecycle and
because their investments in human capital will not be privately optimal for the actual realization
of the future tax rate.1 Uncertainty about generosity of expenditure programs for the elderly,
such as Social Security and Medicare, also reduces individuals’ ability to consumption smooth.
Given that Social Security is mandatory, non-diversifiable, and accounts for more than a third of
total income among the elderly, we suspect that policy uncertainty regarding its generosity is
likely to be one of the major sources of welfare cost of policy uncertainty more generally. This
paper’s objective, therefore, is to estimate the welfare cost to individuals of policy uncertainty
regarding Social Security benefits.2 In other words, we estimate the risk premium for policy
uncertainty in Social Security wealth.
The traditional method of valuing uncertainty by comparing an asset’s market value to its
expected value is generally not feasible in the case of policy uncertainty. The effect of policy
uncertainty is hardly ever fully captured by a publicly traded asset, and even if it were, other
sources of uncertainty might also affect the asset’s value.3 To overcome this challenge, the
empirical literature on policy uncertainty proceeds in two steps. The first step is to measure the
1

As noted by Weiss (1976) and Stiglitz (1982) in the case of income taxes, policy uncertainty can induce behavioral
changes that may counteract existing distortions. Such behavior changes thus yield a positive effect on welfare and
this positive effect could potentially more than offset the negative welfare effect of the consumption risk induced by
the policy uncertainty. Alm (1988) and Kim, Snow, and Warren (1995) provide further theoretical results regarding
the welfare effects of tax policy uncertainty in a second-best world.
2
Our empirical approach does not allow us to ascertain whether some perceived policy uncertainty is optimal from
an intergenerational risk-sharing perspective (see, e.g., Gordon and Varian (1988)). To the extent some component
of the perceived policy uncertainty is optimal for intergenerational risk sharing, our estimates of the welfare cost to
current individuals of policy uncertainty are an overestimate of the total welfare effect of policy uncertainty.
Similarly, we are not able to evaluate any welfare effects of policy uncertainty that stem from the uncertainty
reducing existing distortions.
3
Geanakoplos and Zeldes (2010) estimate the market value of accrued Social Security benefits by adjusting the
actuarial value of accrued Social Security benefits for the uncertainty in Social Security benefits that stems from
wage indexing. Hence, their paper uses an asset price model to estimate the market risk premium for the main nonpolicy related source of uncertainty in Social Security benefits whereas we use survey techniques to estimate the
individual risk premium for policy uncertainty.

1

degree of policy uncertainty. This can be done retrospectively by measuring uncertainty as the
residuals in a vector-autoregression model, as Skinner (1988) does, or by estimating the
variability in past policy changes, which is the approach taken by McHale (2001), Nataraj and
Shoven (2003), Shoven and Slavov (2006), Borgmann and Heidler (2007), Dušek (2007), and
Blake (2008). Because past variability may not necessarily provide a good estimate of
uncertainty about future policy (e.g., if the process is non-ergodic or there is a so-called pesoproblem), other studies, including Van der Wiel (2008), Guiso, Jappelli, and Padula (2013), and
Giavazzi and McMahon (2012) have measured perceived policy uncertainty using survey
questions about future policy. Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015) take yet another approach and
create an index of policy uncertainty based on the frequency that the word triplet “uncertain”,
“economic,” and “policy” (or variants/synonyms of these words) appears in newspaper articles.
Not all of these papers proceed to the second step, but those that do either relate the
policy uncertainty estimated in the first step to observed behavior or use the estimated policy
uncertainty to calibrate a model that yields a welfare estimate. Papers that relate estimated
policy uncertainty to observed individual-level behavior include Giavazzi and McMahon (2012),
who analyze its effects on household saving; Guiso, Jappelli, and Padula (2013), who study the
effects on enrollment in private pensions and health insurance; and Van der Wiel (2008), who
examines the effects on private pension participation. Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015) relate
their indices of policy uncertainty to industry and macro outcomes including stock-price
volatility, investment, employment, and output.
These papers, however, do not estimate the welfare cost of the policy uncertainty. In
contrast, Skinner (1988) and Dušek (2007) evaluate the estimated uncertainty using a model to
calculate the welfare cost of the uncertainty. Skinner estimates that the welfare cost of uncertain
taxes is 0.4% of national income, and Dušek finds that the risk premium for the uncertainty
around the indexing of Social Security benefits in the Czech Republic is 1.3% when the
coefficient of relative risk aversion is assumed to equal 3. Alternatively, it is possible to
calculate the welfare cost of policy uncertainty using a calibrated (rather than estimated) measure
of policy uncertainty, which is the approach taken by Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira (2012).
They focus on a slightly different question, namely the welfare gain from resolving uncertainty
about future Social Security benefits earlier holding constant the variance in future Social
Security benefits, and find that early resolution can lead to welfare gains that are equivalent to

2

0.5% of lifetime consumption. Caliendo, Gorry, and Slavov (2015) also use a calibrated measure
of policy uncertainty but allow both uncertainty in the timing of the resolution of uncertainty and
uncertainty in the structure of the Social Security reform. Their model shows that the welfare
cost of Social Security policy uncertainty is just a few basis points of lifetime consumption for
individuals who make optimal savings decisions, but that it can exceed 1 percent of lifetime
consumption for those who do not save.
In this paper, we take an alternative and, to the best of our knowledge, novel approach to
valuing the cost of policy uncertainty: we elicit both the expected policy and the certainty
equivalent of uncertain future policy and use the difference between these two measures as the
welfare cost to the individual of policy uncertainty. Our approach is thus similar to the assetpricing approach of valuing uncertainty except that we elicit the certainty equivalent by asking
individuals how they value a hypothetical asset that has no policy uncertainty rather than using a
market price to observe this certainty equivalent. The chief concern about our approach is that
some individuals may have trouble giving a meaningful valuation of a hypothetical asset.
Because we believe this is an important concern, we include various forms of randomized
variation in the way we elicit expectations and certainty equivalents, and the responses to this
randomized variation allow us to evaluate the quality of the responses. The benefit of our
approach is that our estimate of the cost of uncertainty does not rely on model specification,
parameter assumptions, or estimates of the correlation between policy uncertainty and other
sources of uncertainty that affect consumption. This means that our estimate does not rely on
any assumptions on, or estimates of, the types of behaviors people may undertake to mitigate the
policy risk. Moreover, our estimates capture any direct effects (such as disutility from stress or
worrying) related to the policy uncertainty that might not be captured by a standard expected
utility model.
We estimate the cost of policy uncertainty for Social Security benefits because this is one
of the largest sources of policy uncertainty for individuals. To address the solvency of Social
Security, some combination of benefit cuts and tax increases will likely occur at some point in
the future.4 The need for reform to restore the program to long-term financial stability has been
an active topic of policy discussion since at least the report of the 1994-1996 Advisory Council
4

In their most recent report, Social Security’s Board of Trustees (2015) projected that the program’s trust funds
would be exhausted in 2035, at which point annual costs are projected to exceed annual income by 28 percent or 3.2
percentage points of taxable payroll.

3

(Advisory Council, 1997). Since then, each of the last three presidents has made the reform of
Social Security an important part of his policy agenda.5 With the status of reform still in doubt,
individuals can expect some form of policy change but may be uncertain of its timing, size, and
composition. To illustrate the role of this policy uncertainty, consider two scenarios in a stylized
example. In the first, individuals know for sure that their Social Security benefit will be cut by
20 percent. In the second, they have a 20 percent chance that their benefits will be cut
completely and an 80 percent chance that their benefits will not be cut at all. While the expected
benefits (and thus the expected cost to the government) are the same in both scenarios,
individuals only face policy uncertainty in the second scenario. Because of the uncertainty in the
second scenario, risk averse individuals value their benefits less than what they cost in
expectation. In particular, they would likely be willing to trade the second scenario for a sure
benefit cut, even if that sure benefit cut is somewhat greater than 20 percent. The difference
between the expected benefit cut and the largest sure benefit cut people would be willing to
accept is an estimate of the cost to individuals of policy uncertainty surrounding Social Security
benefits.
We implement our methodology by fielding an original, internet-based survey of 3,000
individuals between the ages 25 and 59 who are broadly representative of the U.S. population in
that age range. We focus on this age range because this is the prime age range in which
individuals need to prepare for retirement and because older individuals will likely be
grandfathered into the existing rules if there is a major Social Security reform. An important
innovation relative to the literature that examines perceptions of future Social Security benefits is
that we ask about future benefits relative to the benefits scheduled under current law.6 This
allows us to filter out any uncertainty (or misperceptions) regarding the current benefit rules as
well as uncertainty about benefits that is related to uncertain inputs (such as own future earnings
or aggregate future wage growth) to the benefit formula. The key part of the survey consists of
two sets of questions about these benefits. In the first, respondents are asked to describe the
5

The Social Security Administration keeps an archive of presidential statements on Social Security at
http://www.ssa.gov/history/presstmts.html. President Bush spent much of 2005 advocating for reform, and the need
for reform figured prominently in President Obama’s call for a bipartisan fiscal commission in 2010 and
negotiations over the debt ceiling increase in the summer of 2011.
6
There is an extensive literature examining perceptions of expected Social Security benefits. An early example
focusing on the relationship between Social Security expectations and private saving is Bernheim and Levin (1989).
More recent examples include Gustman and Steinmeier (2005), Dominitz and Manski (2006), Delavande and
Rohwedder (2008), and Liebman and Luttmer (2012).

4

likelihood of receiving benefits in specific ranges relative to “the benefits they are supposed to
get under current law.” They fill in a histogram of this distribution by putting balls into bins on
their computer screens. This histogram allows us to calculate their expected benefits. In the
second part, respondents are asked to make a sequence of choices as to whether they would
prefer a guaranteed contract at a hypothetical percentage of the benefits they are supposed to get
under current law to the distribution of benefits they think they will get. This sequence of
questions allows us to bracket their certainty equivalent benefit level. Subtracting the certainty
equivalent from the expected benefits yields the respondent’s risk premium against policy
uncertainty.
Our main results indicate that individuals perceive the risk to which policy uncertainty
exposes them and that the welfare cost of that risk is statistically and economically significant.
Across respondents, the average expected benefits are 59.4 percent of the benefits the
respondents are supposed to get under current law and the average standard deviation is 22.5
percent. The average certainty equivalent is 53.7 percent, yielding an average risk premium of
5.8 percent. At 7.0 percent, the median risk premium is close to the average risk premium.
These risk premia are expressed as percent of benefits under current law, but would become 9.7
percent and 11.8 percent, respectively, if expressed as a percent of expected benefits.
Regression results show that the risk premium increases with age and decreases with
income. Expected benefits as a fraction of benefits under current law rise with age and the
standard deviation of benefits decreases with age. This implies that the increase in the risk
premium with age is driven by the fact that it is costlier for older people to bear policy risk in
Social Security, for example, because they have fewer means to mitigate this uncertainty by
changing their labor supply or savings rate.
Because we recognize that some of the questions may be challenging for a broadly
representative subject pool, we build into the survey randomizations that can alert us to
respondents giving non-meaningful answers. One of the key randomizations that we insert is the
starting value to the series of questions that brackets the value of the certainty equivalent. This
starting value should not affect the final valuation of the certainty equivalent for a respondent
who can report a stable underlying valuation of the certainty equivalent. We find that the
starting value has a moderate, but statistically significant, effect on the reported certainty
equivalent. The randomization of the starting value enables us to correct the estimated certainty

5

equivalent for the effect of the starting value since the underlying distribution of certainty
equivalents is invariant to the starting value. We obtain an average risk premium of 5.1 percent
based on this corrected value of the certainty equivalent. We also examine how reported risk
premia vary with indicators of response quality based on other questions asked in the survey
(e.g., respondents should not give a lower probability of a policy change by a certain date if the
date is further in the future). If we further adjust the risk premia for these indicators of response
quality, we obtain an average risk premium of 6.7 percent.
As an additional check, we calculate the risk premium using the methodology that the
existing literature has taken, namely applying a model and an assumed coefficient of risk
aversion to our estimates of the degree of policy uncertainty as given by the reported histogram
of future benefits. The resulting “simulated” risk premium has a median of 4.0 percent and an
average of 9.4 percent if we assume a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3. The simulated
risk premium is based on an admittedly very simple model and sensitive to various assumptions
including the value of the coefficient of relative risk aversion and the absence of a correlation
between policy uncertainty in Social Security and other sources of uncertainty affecting
consumption. We nevertheless find it reassuring that the resulting estimate is broadly similar to
our main estimate of the risk premium of policy uncertainty in Social Security benefits.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe our
sampling frame and survey instrument and provide summary statistics for the demographic and
other control variables used in our analysis. In section 3, we discuss the particular design
features of the survey that enable us to elicit information on the distribution of future benefits
and its certainty equivalent. We present our main results and sensitivity tests in Section 4.
Section 5 provides evidence on the validity of survey responses to questions about benefit
distributions. Section 6 considers possible adjustments that could be made to the distribution of
risk premia. Section 7 concludes.

2. Data

Our survey is conducted as a module of the KnowledgePanel, created by the survey firm
Knowledge Networks. The KnowledgePanel is an address-based sample drawn from the U.S.

6

Postal Service’s Delivery Sequence File.7 When households without Internet access are
recruited, they are provided with a laptop computer and free Internet service so they may
participate in the panel. The KnowledgePanel consists of about 50,000 participants over the age
of 18 and includes persons living in cell phone only households. Knowledge Networks collects
basic demographic characteristics for all its panelists, and its panelists are roughly representative
of the adult U.S. population according to these characteristics. Active members of the panel are
invited to take specific surveys, with subsamples drawn using probability weighted sampling
methods. The burden of panel membership is kept low by having members selected for no more
than one survey per week.
We contracted with Knowledge Networks to obtain survey responses from approximately
3,000 KnowledgePanel participants who were between the ages of 25 and 59 in June 2011. Our
sample contains the results for 3,053 completed interviews conducted between June 10 and July
1, 2011. The median duration of the interview was 20 minutes, and we paid respondents a $5
cash-equivalent incentive to enhance survey completion. Table 1 contains summary statistics for
the demographic and other control variables that we use in our empirical analysis.8 Online
Appendix Table A1 compares summary statistics for these and other demographic variables to
the Current Population Survey from March 2010. While for many demographic characteristics
we can reject the hypothesis that the mean is the same in the CPS and our sample, the differences
are limited in terms of economic magnitude. We therefore consider our sample as broadly
representative of the U.S. population between the ages of 25 and 59.
In our regressions, we control for these demographic characteristics, along with MSA
residency, homeownership, and employment status, as shown in Table 1. In some specifications,
we also include a set of additional control variables that are relevant to perceptions of policy
uncertainty in general and the Social Security program in particular.9 We ask about risk

7

As discussed in Knowledge Networks (2010), randomly sampled addresses are invited to join the KnowledgePanel
through a series of mailings (English and Spanish materials) and by telephone follow-up to non-responders when a
telephone number can be matched to the sampled address. Invited households can join the panel by one of several
means: completing and mailing back an acceptance form in a postage-paid envelope; calling a toll-free hotline
staffed by bilingual recruitment agents; or going to a dedicated Knowledge Networks recruitment Web site and
completing the recruitment information online.
8
We defer the discussion of the first four rows, which summarize the distribution of perceived Social Security
benefits, until Section 4 below.
9
We ask these questions at the end of the survey. The full survey instrument is included as Online Appendix B. As
these control variables are not the focus of our analysis, we do not eliminate observations for which they are
missing. Instead, we create a dummy variable for whether the response is missing, recode the missing values to zero,

7

preferences, life expectancy, the importance of Social Security in retirement, optimism, trust in
the political system, and financial literacy. Summary statistics are presented in the last six rows
of Table 1.
We measure risk preference through a sequence of questions in which respondents can
choose a job that offers a certain lifetime income or a job that offers varying degrees of risk, such
as a 50-50 chance of doubling lifetime income and a 50-50 chance of reducing it by some
percentage. The sequence varies the reduction to bracket the respondent’s point of indifference,
from which we can infer risk aversion. In a constant relative risk aversion scenario, the brackets
are coefficients of less than 0.5, 0.5 – 1, 1 – 2, 2 – 4, 4 – 8, and greater than 8. The median
response is consistent with risk aversion of 4 – 8.
Two factors are very important to the role of Social Security in retirement. The first is
how long the beneficiary will live. We ask respondents for a subjective probability of surviving
to age 75. The mean probability is 67.9 percent and the median is 71 percent. The second is
how important Social Security will be as a share of retirement income. We ask this question
directly, with possible responses, coded 1 – 4, in the form of ranges of less than 25 percent of
spending, 25 – 50 percent, 50 – 75 percent, and greater than 75 percent. There is considerable
variation around a mean of 2.8 and a median of 3 (50 – 75 percent).
To measure optimism, we ask six questions about how the respondent perceives the
outcomes of uncertain events (e.g., “In uncertain times, I usually expect the best.”). The
respondent can pick from five choices – strongly disagree, somewhat disagree, neither agree or
disagree, somewhat agree, strongly agree – which are given numerical values of 1 – 5, with
higher values indicating more optimism. We average the numerical responses across the six
questions and standardize the variable to have zero mean and unit standard deviation.
Trust in the political system is measured as the response to the statement, “Most elected
officials are trustworthy.” As with the optimism question, the five choices range from strongly
disagree to strongly agree, with numerical values ranging from 1 – 5. The average response is
2.2 and the median response is 2.0, indicating that most respondents lack trust in the political
system.

and then include both the recoded variable and the dummy for whether the response was originally missing in our
regressions.

8

Finally, we measure financial literacy as the number of correct answers given by the
respondent to four simple questions about a lottery, money illusion, compound interest, and
mutual funds. The average score is 2.4, with a median of 3.

3. Methodology

The main part of our survey is designed to gather information from the respondents
sufficient to calculate the costs of policy uncertainty. As this is not an everyday topic of
conversation for most people, the survey itself needs to guide them through the steps of the
process. Moreover, we include randomizations in the survey that allow us to gauge whether
respondents are able to give meaningful answers. This section discusses and illustrates three
important design features of the survey.

3.1 Choice of Baseline Benefits
The first feature, which to the best of our knowledge has not been implemented before, is
to use the respondent’s own perception of current law benefits as the baseline. Throughout the
survey, respondents are asked to compare expected or hypothetical benefits to “the benefits you
are supposed to get under current law.” We do not seek to measure whether the respondent has
an accurate projection of what those current law benefits would be or whether the respondent is
uncertain about benefits under current law because those benefits depend on variables that
themselves are uncertain, such as future own earnings or future aggregate earnings. By keeping
whatever uncertainty or misconceptions respondents may have about benefits under current law
in the baseline, the survey responses will pertain only to the policy uncertainty regarding how
current law benefits will be changed by policy makers.

3.2 Constructing the Perceived Distribution of Social Security Benefits
The second feature is to use the visual aspect of the online survey to facilitate the answer
to the general question of how uncertain the respondent believes future Social Security benefits
to be. This feature was developed in Delavande and Rohwedder (2008) and subsequently used in
Liebman and Luttmer (2015). We measure uncertainty in the form of a histogram of where the
respondents believe their benefits will be. This allows us to estimate the cumulative distribution

9

function (CDF) of benefits for each respondent as a percent of what he or she is supposed to get
under current law. The survey first asks the respondent to allocate 20 balls across four bins
reflecting different benefit amounts, where each ball is explained to represent a 1 in 20 chance of
that benefit amount occurring. One category is “no benefits whatsoever.” The other three
categories are lower, the same, and higher benefits relative to the benefits that the respondent is
supposed to get under current law. An example of what the survey screen might look like when
the respondent has allocated the 20 balls to the 4 bins is:

Respondents who put any of these balls in the “lower” or “higher” bins are then asked to
further specify which 20-percentage-point bins between 1 and 99% or 101 and 200% should
contain these balls. An example of the next screen this respondent will see is:

10

Finally, any bin into which 11 or more balls are placed is further broken down into five
smaller bins, and respondents are asked to allocate the balls from the larger bin into the smaller
bins. An example of the screen that the respondent would have seen in that case is:

By this three-step process, we obtain the CDF of expected future benefits for each
respondent. In order to have greater confidence that respondents will know how to use this tool
to express their preferences, we first give an illustration using the weather in Boston.

11

Recognizing that the shape of the distribution that we show them to illustrate the method might
influence the way they fill in the distribution of perceived benefits, we choose two different
illustrations and assign them to respondents at random. For example, the wide distribution is:

And the narrow distribution is:

If we had shown no illustration, we could not be sure that respondents would understand
the tool well enough to answer the subsequent question. If we had only shown one illustration,
then we would have had no way to gauge the size of any bias that our particular choice of

12

illustration may have had on the subsequent question. By choosing two illustrations, we can
estimate the impact of the characteristics of the illustration – wide or narrow – on the responses
to the subsequent question.

3.3 Obtaining the Certainty Equivalent Benefit
The natural metrics to quantify just how much the uncertainty in the perceived
distribution of Social Security benefits matters to respondents are how much they would pay to
insure themselves against it or at what discount they would be willing to sell their claim to future
Social Security benefits. Even in a more straightforward context, respondents could be expected
to have trouble coming up with a sensible answer if we asked for it directly. This concern led us
to develop a third important feature of our survey, which is the sequence of binary choices that
the survey presents to the respondent that allow us to bracket the respondent’s certainty
equivalent to the perceived distribution of benefits described in Section 3.2. The survey
calculates the expected value (denoted below by the variable X) of the benefit distribution each
respondent constructed by putting balls into bins and presents the respondent with the following
choice:

The way you put balls into various bins shows that you expect to receive [X]% of the
Social Security benefits you are supposed to get under current law. It also shows that you
could receive more or less than this [X]%. Let’s call this distribution of possible
benefits, as described by you using the bins and balls, your “uncertain benefits.” So, your
uncertain benefits are whatever level of benefits you get when you claim benefits.
Imagine a contract that instead guarantees you a certain percentage of the Social Security
benefits you are supposed to get under current law. This is like having all 20 balls on this
certain percentage. This contract is unbreakable and cannot be changed by anybody,
even the United States government.
Would you rather have:
(1) Guaranteed benefits equal to [Y]% of the Social Security benefits you are supposed to
get under current law
(2) Uncertain benefits around [X]% of the Social Security benefits you are supposed to
get under current law

13

Respondents are prompted with a starting value of Y1 equal to 30 or 70, chosen randomly,
so that we can assess the impact of the starting value on the ultimate results. (Whether the
guaranteed benefits are the first or second choice is also randomized, for the same reason.) A
respondent who chooses the guaranteed (uncertain) benefits at a given Y1 is then offered a lower
(higher) value of Y2 and asked the same question. The questioning continues, with the
differences between Yn and Yn+1 narrowing, until the respondent has answered that he would take
the uncertain benefits if offered the lower of Yn and Ym, and the guaranteed benefits if offered the
higher of them, where the interval between them is 5.10
One problem in generating the certainty equivalent using the question above is that 7.5%
of respondents provide distributions that show no uncertainty. For these respondents, we ask a
slightly different version of the question:

Imagine that you were offered a contract that guaranteed you a certain percent of the
Social Security benefits you are supposed to get under current law. This contract is
unbreakable and cannot be changed by anybody, even the United States government.
Would you rather have:
(1) Benefits as determined by an unbreakable contract that offers you [Y]% of the Social
Security benefits you are supposed to get under current law
(2) Benefits as determined by Social Security when you claim benefits
The sequencing of the offers of Y% is the same as in the original question. This question simply
makes no mention of a distribution that shows no uncertainty.
The answers to these questions provide us with upper and lower bounds on a certainty
equivalent to the distribution of possible Social Security benefits. Subtracting this certainty
equivalent from the distribution’s expected value yields the risk premium that the respondent
would pay to insure against the policy uncertainty in Social Security. In order to make more
precise estimates of this risk premium, we ask a follow-up question of respondents whose range
for the certainty equivalent is close to the expected value of their distribution of benefits.
Specifically, a respondent whose upper bound for the certainty equivalent is within 5 percentage

10

The full sequence of offers that the respondents receive is shown in Question 4.3 of the survey instrument in
Online Appendix B.

14

points of the expected value will be asked the question again, with a value of Y close to X that
will ensure that we can ascertain whether or not the risk premium exceeds two percent.

4. Results

4.1 General Expectations about Social Security
The survey begins by soliciting respondents’ views on the financial condition of the
Social Security program in order to get a qualitative understanding of their views about policy
risk as well as the nature of the risk that they perceive. Table 2 aggregates the responses to these
general questions. About 91 percent of respondents are aware that Social Security faces a
projected financial shortfall. When asked how confident they are that Social Security will be
able to provide them with the benefits they are supposed to get under current law, only 3.3
percent were very confident, with another 22.3 percent somewhat confident. Thus, only a
quarter expressed any confidence in the program’s finances, while 45 percent are not too
confident and 29 percent are not at all confident.
The wording of our question about confidence in Social Security matches that of
Greenwald et al. (2010), who conducted a nationally representative, random-digit telephone
survey. Online Appendix Table A2 provides comparisons of the responses to this question in our
sample and the subsample of their respondents age 25 – 59.11 In their sample, 10.5 percent were
very confident and 34.0 percent were somewhat confident. Together, about 45 percent express
confidence in Social Security in the Greenwald et al. sample, compared to 25 percent in the
Knowledge Networks panel. Of the remaining 55 percent, 36.3 percent are not too confident and
19.2 percent are not at all confident. Thus, our sample respondents show less confidence than
those in the Greenwald et al. sample. In both samples, confidence tends to rise with age and is
similar across men and women.
The survey then asks respondents how they expect the projected shortfall will be closed.
As shown in Table 2, more than half, about 58 percent, expect the shortfall to be addressed by a
combination of tax increases and benefit reductions. Nearly a quarter believe the shortfall will
be addressed mostly or entirely through tax increases, while 18 percent believe the shortfall will
11

We are indebted to Mathew Greenwald for providing these tabulations. The tabulations of the Knowledge
Networks panel in Table A2 pertain to the respondents who answered both the ball/bins questions and the certainty
equivalent questions, as described in Section 3 above.

15

be addressed mostly or entirely through benefit cuts. We focus on benefit cuts in the next several
tables and report the results of analogous questions about tax increases in Table A3 in the Online
Appendix.
When asked about the chance that the general level of benefits (as distinct from the
benefits they expect to get individually) will decline over the next decade, the mean and median
probabilities shown are 61 percent. The same question asked about a decline by the time the
respondent reaches age 65 yields mean and median probabilities of 66.6 and 71 percent,
respectively. This pessimism regarding future benefits is also reflected in expected benefit
levels. Compared to the benefits they are supposed to get under current law, only 3 percent of
respondents expect to get greater benefits, with 24 percent expecting the same benefits and 73
percent expecting lower benefits. When respondents are asked for a point estimate of benefits
they expect to get relative to what they are supposed to get under current law, the mean and
median responses for the point estimate of their benefits are 65.9 and 70 percent, respectively.

4.2 The Perceived Distribution of Future Benefits
The responses to the general questions presented in Table 2 show that respondents by and
large expect to not receive all of the benefits they are supposed to get under current law. By
themselves, they do not indicate whether individuals face uncertainty about the benefits they will
get. Respondents could have a firm belief that they will receive, say, 70 percent of their currentlaw benefits, no more and no less.
Figure 1 graphs the aggregate CDF of perceived future Social Security benefits for all
respondents to the survey. Looking at the probability mass at 0 and 100 percent, in aggregate,
respondents perceive about a one in six chance of receiving no benefits whatsoever and about a
one in four chance of receiving exactly the benefits they are supposed to get under current law.
The perceived probability of outcomes strictly above current-law benefits is less than four
percent. The remaining 54 percent of the probability mass lies strictly between 0 and 100, with
an overall median at 69.5 percent.
The aggregate CDF shown in Figure 1 incorporates both the variation in possible
outcomes within individual respondents’ CDFs and the variation across respondents’ CDFs.
Figures 2 and 3 demonstrate that both sources of variation are important. Figure 2 shows the
CDF of the mean perceived benefit across respondents. There is very little probability mass at

16

zero, at 100 percent, or above 100 percent. Almost all of the respondents have mean perceived
benefits between 0 and 100 percent of the benefits they are supposed to get under current law.
The graph shows wide variation across respondents, with summary statistics provided in the first
row of Table 1. The 25th and 75th percentiles are 37.1 and 83.4 percent, respectively.
We can use two other questions that we asked about the expectations of future benefits to
assess the validity of the subjective probability distribution using our ball/bin question. In the
first, we compute the correlation of the mean of the subjective distribution with the
straightforward multiple-choice question about confidence in Social Security that we presented
in Panel A of Table 2. This correlation is 0.54, indicating that those with more confidence
tended to construct distributions with higher expected benefits. In the second, we compute the
correlation of the mean of the subjective distribution with the point estimate of future benefits as
a fraction of benefits under current law that we presented in Panel F of Table 2. This correlation
is 0.69, and like the first, is highly statistically significant.
We use the expectation of the subjective probability distribution of future Social Security
benefits, rather the point estimate, as our baseline measure of expected future benefits, for two
reasons. First, we are not sure whether the point estimate offered by respondents is an
expectation, a median, or a mode, whereas by construction the expectation of subjective benefits
is an expectation. Second, the expectation of subjective benefits better predicts confidence in
Social Security (as measured by the multiple-choice question) than the point estimate is able to
predict confidence in Social Security. This suggests that the subjective expectation has less
measurement error than the point estimate.
Figure 3 shows the CDF of the standard deviations of respondent CDFs. Only 7.5
percent have a standard deviation of zero. The second row of Table 1 provides summary
statistics, indicating mean and median values of about 23 percent, with a quarter of the standard
deviations at 33 percent or higher. These figures and statistics show that respondents perceive
uncertainty in the possible benefits they will receive from Social Security and that the perceived
distribution of possible benefits varies across respondents.

4.3 The Certainty Equivalent Social Security Benefit
It could be that respondents perceive an uncertain distribution of future benefits but that
due to risk-neutrality or indifference, the uncertainty has little impact on their welfare. As a first

17

measure of the importance of uncertain benefits, the survey asks, “How much does it matter to
you that you do not know exactly how much you will get in Social Security benefits?” Panel G
of Table 2 reports the results. Only 20.5 percent respond that the uncertainty matters little or
does not matter, compared to 32 percent who respond that it matters somewhat and 47.5 percent
who respond that it matters very much.
Figure 4 shows the distributions of the upper and lower bounds for the certainty
equivalents across respondents. In the rest of the paper, we compute the certainty equivalent as
the midpoint of the interval between them. Summary statistics for the certainty equivalents are
shown in the third row of Table 1, denominated as a percentage of the benefits the respondents
are supposed to get under current law. The mean certainty equivalent is 53.7 percent and the
median is 57.5 percent.

4.4 Risk Premia for Policy Uncertainty
With the responses for the expected benefit from the elicited benefit distribution and for
the certainty equivalent from the sequence of choices between guaranteed and uncertain benefits,
we can subtract the average of the upper and lower bounds shown in Figure 4 from the expected
value of benefits to obtain our key results: the risk premia that respondents would pay in the
form of lower benefits to avoid the policy uncertainty surrounding Social Security.
Summary statistics for the distribution of risk premia are shown in the fourth row of
Table 1. The mean risk premium is 5.8 percent and the median risk premium is 7.0 percent.
About 25 percent of respondents have a risk premium of zero or less – there is no requirement
imposed on their responses that the certainty equivalent obtained through the sequence of
choices of guaranteed versus uncertain benefits yields a certainty equivalent below the expected
value. The full distribution of risk premia is shown in Figure 5. About 11 percent of respondents
have risk premia less than negative 20 percent. At the other end of the distribution, 25 percent of
respondents have risk premia of 16.5 percent or more, with 4 percent having risk premia in
excess of 50 percent. Given the challenging nature of our questions, we are not surprised to find
that the tails of the distribution correspond to risk premia that may seem unreasonably high or
low. The estimated risk premia rise moderately if we truncate or ignore observations in the tails.
For example, if we ignore all observations below the 10th percentile or above the 90th percentile,
the mean risk premium becomes 6.9%. Similarly, winsorizing at the 10th and 90th percentiles

18

yields a mean risk premium of 6.3%. Truncating at the 25th and 75th percentiles increases the
mean to 7.3%, while winsorizing at these percentiles yields a mean risk premium of 7.7%.12
Our main estimate of the risk premium is based on our novel method of eliciting a
certainty equivalent and comparing that to the expected value. The benefits of this method are
that the estimate does not rely on modeling or parameter assumptions, that it captures any
responses that mitigate the impact of the uncertainty, and that it does not require estimates of the
correlation between policy uncertainty and other sources of uncertainty affecting future
consumption. Yet, our estimate is based on a question in which respondents are asked to value a
hypothetical contract, and some respondents may have found it challenging to answer this
question. We therefore compare our main estimate with an estimate of the risk premium that
uses the methodology that prior papers have used; namely, to use a model to simulate the risk
premium of the policy uncertainty. For each respondent, we calculate the risk premium that
would be implied by the self-reported distribution of possible Social Security benefits, assuming
constant relative risk aversion preferences with coefficients of relative risk aversion equal to 1, 3,
and 5. These simulated risk premia also incorporate the information from the variable that
captures how important the respondent expects Social Security to be in financing retirement
spending.13
By construction, the distributions of simulated risk premia cannot have negative values
and will show a zero premium for any respondent who did not indicate variation in the selfreported distribution of future Social Security benefits. Figure 6 shows the CDFs for the risk
premia calculated in this manner, along with the CDF from Figure 5 based on self-reported
certainty equivalents. The graph shows that for the 75 percent of respondents who reported
positive risk premia, the CDF of those risk premia is intermediate between the hypothetical
CDFs that would obtain if all respondents had coefficients of relative risk aversion between 3
12

Recall from Section 3.2 that respondents who have missing benefit expectations or distributions that have no
uncertainty are asked an alternative version of the certainty equivalence questions. The latter group tends to have
lower risk premia, as would be expected based on the lack of perceived uncertainty. However, relative to Figure 5,
which includes all respondents, the difference in the CDF when these respondents are excluded is minimal. We
therefore use the full sample of respondents in the analyses below.
13
Specifically, suppose that the respondent’s Social Security benefits will be 100. Recall that the four responses to
the survey question for the importance of Social Security are less than 25 percent, 25 – 50 percent, 50 – 75 percent,
and more than 75 percent. If Social Security financed 25 percent of spending, that would require other income of
300. For 50 and 75 percent, the other income would have to be 100 and 33, respectively. Thus, we can assign other
income of 200, 67, and 17 for the 25 – 50, 50 – 75, and 75 – 100 intervals, respectively. For the interval that is 0 –
25, we choose a value of 500 (consistent with Social Security funding 17 percent).

19

and 5. This indicates that our main estimate of the risk premium is consistent with the risk
premium that would be obtained using a basic model and a reasonable assumption of the
coefficient of relative risk aversion.14

4.5 Correlates of the Perceived Distribution of Benefits
We next consider the empirical relationships between the characteristics of the perceived
distribution of Social Security benefits and the demographic and other control variables included
in the survey. The most important of these is the age of the respondent. Figure 7a shows the
expected benefits with a 95% confidence interval for 5-year age groups in our sample. The
overall pattern is that the expected benefits, as a share of what respondents believe they are
supposed to get under current law, are an increasing function of age. This pattern is evident at
ages above 40 and even more so above 50. The point estimates for the average expected benefits
rise from about 50 percent for the youngest age groups to about 80 percent for the oldest age
group. Figure 7b shows the analogous graph of average risk premia by 5-year age group. There
is a clear difference between those over 50 and those under 50. The former have risk premia
around 11 percent while the latter have risk premia around 4 percent.
We consider age and other factors in regressions in Table 3. Estimates are shown using
expected benefits, the standard deviation of benefits, and the risk premium as dependent
variables. Each regression includes both the demographic variables from the Knowledge
Networks panel and the other control variables about preferences and beliefs that we ask in our
survey.15 Focusing on the regression for expected benefits, an additional year of age leads to a
0.94 percentage point increase in expected benefits and a decrease in the standard deviation of
0.21 percentage points. These estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent level. They
are consistent with political rhetoric on Social Security reform – the older people get, the less
likely they are to get a benefit cut, and the less variable they will expect that cut to be.
Table 3 also shows that some demographic and other control variables have significant
effects on the expected benefits and the standard deviation of benefits. The effect of being
retired on expected benefits is large and significant – equivalent to the effect of 10 years of age.
14

For a 50-50 chance of gaining or losing 25 percent of one’s wealth, the risk premia are 3.2, 9.0, and 13.5 percent
for coefficients of relative risk aversion of 1, 3, and 5, respectively.
15
Estimates that exclude the other control variables about preferences are similar and shown in Online Appendix
Table A4.

20

This is consistent with Benítez-Silva et al. (2007), who find that early retirement can be partly
explained by individuals retiring early in order to reduce exposure to policy risk. The point
estimates for the effect on the standard deviation are negative but significant only at the 10
percent level. A 10 percent increase in income leads to a 0.31 percentage point decline in
expected benefits and a 0.09 percentage point reduction in the standard deviation of benefits.
This result is also consistent with political rhetoric surrounding Social Security reform, in which
potential benefit cuts relative to current law are conjectured to be “progressive.”16 Race and
education also matter – being Black or Hispanic or having less than a high school diploma all
predict higher standard deviations. Black and Hispanic also predict higher expected benefits.
Being female or having kids predicts lower expected benefits, equivalent to being about 3 or 6
years younger, respectively. Among the other control variables, living in the Northeast, greater
longevity, greater importance of Social Security to retirement spending, greater trust in the
political system, greater optimism and higher financial literacy all predict higher expected
benefits.
The third column of Table 3 presents the regression in which the dependent variable is
the risk premium calculated based on the certainty equivalent. The coefficient estimates
generally follow those in the expected benefits regression in terms of sign and significance. For
example, the effect of age is positive and significant while that of income is negative and
significant. An additional decade of age increases the risk premium by 3 percentage points. A
10 percent increase income leads to a 0.18 percentage point reduction in the risk premium. This
is exactly what theory would predict: a given amount of uncertainty is more costly to people near
retirement as they have fewer opportunities to mitigate the benefit uncertainty by adjusting future
labor supply or savings. Those with higher incomes tend to rely less on Social Security in
retirement and would thus have lower risk premia regarding policy uncertainty. Other significant
effects on the risk premia include the positive effects of being retired (equal to 30 years of age),
being Black or Hispanic, being more risk averse, having a higher chance of living to age 75, and
having more trust in the political system.

5. Cross-validation of Responses

16

See, for example, Mermin (2005).

21

Recognizing that our survey asks questions that may be challenging for some respondents
to answer, we incorporated a number of design features to enable us to determine how valid the
answers to the key questions are. In Table 4, we present regressions that examine the effects of
these design features. In Panel A, we construct a dummy variable for whether the respondent
took the option of the guaranteed benefits (rather than the uncertain benefits) in the first round of
questioning to determine the certainty equivalent. Recall that the first offer of guaranteed
benefits was randomized at either 30 or 70 percent of the benefits the respondent is supposed to
get under current law. We also randomized whether the guaranteed benefits were listed as the
first or second option. If respondents are making reasonable choices, then we would expect that
the guaranteed benefits are more likely to be chosen when they are higher and that the results
should be insensitive to whether the guaranteed benefits are the first or second choice. The
regressions in Panel A show this to be the case. Focusing on the second regression, which
includes the demographic and other controls listed in Table 1, the respondent is 34 percentage
points more likely to accept the guaranteed benefits when they are at 70 percent rather than 30
percent, an effect which is both large and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Whether
the guaranteed benefits are shown as the first or second option does not statistically significantly
affect the probability that the respondent chooses them.
In Panel B of Table 4, we regress the respondent’s certainty equivalent on three key
variables that should predict it as well as three variables that should not predict it. The three key
variables that should predict the certainty equivalent are: the respondent’s expected benefits, the
respondent’s perceived standard deviation of benefits, and the measure of the respondent’s risk
aversion derived from separate questions about hypothetical gambles described in Section 2.
Recall that the expected benefits and standard deviation are derived solely from the distribution
of benefits presented by the respondent before questions are asked about the certainty equivalent.
All three coefficients have the predicted signs and are statistically significant at the 1 percent
level. The regression in column 2 shows that a 1 percentage point increase in expected benefits
is associated with a 0.47 percentage point increase in the certainty equivalent, while a 1
percentage point increase in the standard deviation is associated with a reduction in the certainty
equivalent by 0.38 percentage points. An increase of 1 unit in the measure of risk aversion (e.g.,
from a coefficient between 1 – 2 to one between 2 – 4) predicts a reduction of the certainty
equivalent by 1.76 percentage points.

22

The next three regressors in Panel B should not affect the certainty equivalent if the
respondent is able to report a stable underlying value: a dummy for the starting value being 70
percent, a dummy for the order in which the guaranteed benefits option is presented, and a
dummy for whether the respondent sees the wide (rather than narrow) “weather” example. As in
Panel A, the order in which the guaranteed benefits are presented has no statistically significant
effect on the result. However, the starting value affects the certainty equivalent in a statistically
significant way. The regressions show that if the respondent is first presented with guaranteed
benefits of 70 percent rather than 30 percent, then the certainty equivalent that obtains from the
sequence of questions is about 7 percentage points higher. This effect is statistically significant
at the 1 percent level but should be zero – a fully rational respondent would give the same
certainty equivalent regardless of the starting point. We explore possible explanations for this
bias, along with one suggested correction, in Section 6 below.
The regressions in Panel B also show that illustrating how to put balls into bins with a
wide distribution has a statistically insignificant effect on the certainty equivalent. In Panel C of
Table 4, we consider the impact of the weather example on the standard deviation of the
distribution of benefits reported by the respondent. The regressions indicate that respondents
who are shown the wider distribution of temperatures subsequently report distributions with
more uncertainty. A respondent shown the wider distribution has on average a standard
deviation 2.88 percentage points greater than one shown the narrower distribution. Regressions
not shown indicate that there is a negative but insignificant effect of being shown the wider
distribution on the mean of the distribution of expected benefits. Because the estimate of the risk
premium based on our methodology relies on the mean but not the reported dispersion of this
distribution, our estimate is not affected by the sensitivity of the standard deviation to the
weather example. In unreported regressions that are analogous to those in Panel C, but that
instead use our main estimate of the risk premium as the dependent variable, we find no effect of
the weather example on the risk premium – the point estimates are less than 0.1 in absolute value
and statistically insignificant. This would not be the case if our measure of the risk premium
were based on simulations from the reported benefit distribution rather than the certainty
equivalent. Given the need to illustrate the balls and bins framework, the sensitivity of simulated
risk premia to the dispersion in that illustration argues for our methodology based on directly
eliciting the certainty equivalent to measure the risk premia.

23

6. Possible Adjustments to Risk Premia

In this section, we consider two possible adjustments to our estimated risk premia. The
first pertains to the starting value, based on the results in Panel B of Table 4 indicating that the
starting value in the sequence of questions that determine the respondent’s certainty equivalent
has an effect on the resulting value. The second considers the possibility that some respondents
are not able to fully understand the questions and therefore give unreliable answers.

6.1 Starting Value Adjustment to the Certainty Equivalent
The first type of adjustment is based on a simple linear model in which the reported value
(Ri) of the certainty equivalent for respondent i is a weighted average of the respondent’s true
underlying value (Vi) and the starting value (S):

!! ! ! ! ! !! ! !!!
The parameter, β, can be interpreted as a bias that affects all respondents uniformly when they
see a starting value for the certainty equivalent questions that is away from their true underlying
value. Rearranging terms, we can write the true value as a function of the reported value and the
starting value:

!! ! !! !

!
! ! !!
!!! !

The second term on the right-hand side is the adjustment required to remove any starting-value
bias. The higher is the starting value, the more negative is the adjustment. Given the linear
model, and the fact that we randomly varied the starting values across respondents, we can
estimate β by running a regression of the reported values of the certainty equivalent on the
starting value, all the covariates from Table 1, and a set of variables related to response quality
described below. Our estimate (to be more fully described below) of β is 0.17, suggesting that

24

0.17/0.83 or about 20 percent of the difference between the starting value and the reported value
of the certainty equivalent reflects starting-value bias.

6.2 Response Quality Adjustment
To address the possibility that some respondents are not able to understand the questions
fully and therefore give unreliable answers, we construct several indicator variables of response
quality using data from the survey, estimate their relationship to the reported risk premia, and use
this estimated relationship to adjust the reported risk premia of respondents who have one or
more indicators showing low response quality. Specifically, we regress the risk premium on the
response quality dummies controlling for the starting value and our standard set of demographic
and other control variables. The coefficient on the response quality dummy is an estimate of the
effect of giving a high-quality response on the reported risk premium. We create the risk
premium adjusted for response quality by adding to the reported risk premium the coefficient of
each response quality dummy that took on a value of zero for the respondent in question (i.e., for
which the respondent gave a low-quality response). This adjustment yields the distribution of
risk premia that would be obtained if everyone were able to give high-quality responses under
the assumption that any differences in true underlying risk premia between high- and low-quality
respondents are captured by our demographic and other control variables rather than by the
quality response indicators.
Our measures of response quality are dummy variables for whether the survey
respondents provided answers to questions that are correct, consistent, or otherwise in
accordance with what we would expect from someone who fully understood the questions. The
full list of measures, along with sample means, is shown in Online Appendix Table A5. For
example, the first measure is whether the respondent reported a positive probability of not living
to age 75. A respondent who instead gave 100% as the likelihood of being alive at age 75 may
not fully understand the concept of a probability. Other measures for response quality focus on
whether reported probabilities for an event (e.g., a change in Social Security policy) did not
decrease as the time interval increased; on correct answers to the four questions testing financial
literacy; on whether the point estimate for expected benefits given directly was close to the
expectation of the distribution of benefits collected through the balls/bins method; and whether
the survey duration was neither too short nor too long.

25

6.3 Adjusted Risk Premia
Table 5 shows the impact of the two adjustments to the mean and median risk premium,
along with expected benefits, the certainty equivalent, and the standard deviation of benefits.
The first row shows the unadjusted estimates. The second row shows the adjustments for the
starting value, following the procedure described above and the coefficient on the starting value
from the regressions in Online Appendix Table A6, which also include the demographic and
other control variables from Table 3 and the response quality measures. Note that because the
expected benefits and the standard deviation of benefits are elicited without using a starting
value, no adjustment is made for those two outcomes. The starting value adjustment for the
certainty equivalent is 0.7 percentage points at the mean. Standard errors (based on 10,000
bootstrap replications) indicate that the adjustment is statistically significant. The mean
adjustment turns out to be positive because, on balance, the starting value of 30 percent is farther
below the mean reported value 53.7 percent than the starting value of 70 percent is above the
mean value. This 0.7 percentage point adjustment (≈ 20% of 53.7 – (30+70)/2) reduces the mean
risk premium by the same amount, yielding a mean risk premium of 5.1 percent, shown in the
third row of the table. The adjustment to the median risk premium is -1.0 percentage point,
resulting in an adjusted median risk premium of 6.0 percent.
The fourth row of the table shows the adjustments to all four outcome measures based on
response quality. The adjustments are negative for the standard deviation of benefits and positive
for both expected benefits and the certainty equivalent of the distribution of benefits.
Respondents who give higher quality answers tend to have less uncertainty about the distribution
of future benefits, distributions that center closer to the reductions that would be consistent with
official projections of the benefit cuts implied by current funding shortfalls, and higher certainty
equivalents given those higher expected benefits. All of these adjustments, at both the mean and
the median, are statistically significantly different from zero.
Importantly, the upward adjustments to the expected benefits are larger than those to the
certainty equivalent, generating net upward adjustments to the mean and median risk premium of
1.6 and 1.4 percentage points, respectively. Though not statistically significant, the point
estimates for these adjustments more than offset the negative adjustment due to the starting
value. Thus, the mean and median adjusted risk premiums in the last row of the table are higher

26

than the unadjusted estimates in the first row, suggesting that while starting value bias and
response quality do affect the reported benefit distributions and certainty equivalents, the net
impact on the risk premium is negative and the unadjusted estimates are a lower bound for the
risk premium. Using the adjusted estimates, respondents on average expect about two thirds of
the benefits they are supposed to get under current law and view the distribution of future
benefits as equivalent to guaranteed benefits of about 60 percent of what they are supposed to get
under current law, yielding a risk premium of about 7 percent.

7. Conclusion

While it has been long recognized that policy uncertainty can have welfare consequences,
the empirical literature trying to estimate the size of such welfare losses is relatively sparse. This
paper contributes to this literature by providing the first empirical estimate of the size of the
welfare loss to individuals of policy uncertainty in U.S. Social Security benefits. Relative to the
literature on policy uncertainty, we take a novel approach to estimating this welfare loss – we
elicit from a nationally representative sample of survey respondents both the expected value and
the certainty equivalent of future Social Security benefits as a fraction of the benefits they are
scheduled to receive under current law. Our approach mimics the traditional approach of
measuring risk premia in the finance literature, except that, by necessity, we measure the
certainty equivalent using survey methods rather than from market data. We are keenly aware of
the challenges of getting survey respondents to give meaningful answers to hard questions, and
we introduce randomizations in our survey instrument that allow us to detect potential biases,
and in some cases, correct for them.
We apply our methodology to policy uncertainty surrounding Social Security benefits
because this is one of the largest sources of unavoidable and uninsurable economic policy
uncertainty to U.S. residents. The projected financial shortfalls in the Social Security program
have been the subject of active policy discussion for over 15 years. During that period, no clear
policy direction has emerged for how the projected shortfalls will be closed, and, as a result,
households are exposed to considerable policy uncertainty. We find that on average respondents
would be willing to forego around 6 percent of the benefits they are supposed to get under
current law to remove the policy uncertainty associated with their future benefits. Because

27

respondents only expect to receive 60 percent of the benefits they are suppose to get under
current law, this risk premium is equivalent to about 10 percent of expected benefits. The
informal estimate of the accrued obligation, under current law, for individuals 25-59 by the
Office of the Chief Actuary at the Social Security Administration is about $12 trillion.17 So, in
dollar terms, the welfare cost is 6 percent of $12 trillion, which equals about $700 billion. In
other words, the government could cut future Social Security benefits by a total of about $700
billion in present value terms without making individuals worse off on average if it (somehow)
could remove all policy uncertainty surrounding future benefits.
A promising avenue for further research, in economics as well as political science, is the
study of mechanisms by which policy uncertainty could be reduced. From the perspective of the
current generation, which we adopted in this paper, all policy uncertainty is costly, but from an
intergenerational risk-sharing perspective some degree of policy uncertainty may be optimal.
Yet the current degree of policy uncertainty almost surely includes more than just the uncertainty
that could potentially be justified by intergenerational risk sharing because it also includes
uncertainty that is due to the uncertain behavior of political actors. So, one avenue is to try to
eliminate the political component of the policy risk by specifying time-invariant rules that
specify benefit levels as functions of macroeconomic parameters. Sweden and Germany have
adopted such systems, and their operation and performance are analyzed by Auerbach and Lee
(2011). Another avenue for reducing policy risk, but one that has not been implemented
anywhere, is to create government securities that pay out a benefit stream that has the same timeprofile as Social Security benefits as proposed by Geanakoplos and Zeldes (2009) – in other
words, people would be granted ownership of some kind of wage- and/or inflation indexed
deferred annuity in return for contributions to the Social Security system. This will not
completely eliminate policy risk – for example, the government could renege on annuity
payments just like it could default on its Treasury bills, but this would be politically much more
difficult than changing benefit rules. Transforming Social Security into a system with personal
accounts may be an alternative way of reducing policy risk but could expose individuals to other
risks depending on the types of assets that individual could hold in such accounts.18 Indeed,
Smetters and Theseira (2011) find that fundamental reforms away from traditional pay-as-you-go
17

Steve C. Goss, Personal Communication, April 5, 2012.
Diamond (1997) assesses the insulation against political risk that Chile’s privatized mandatory pension system
achieves.
18

28

Social Security systems to systems with funded accounts can be partly explained as a response to
political uncertainty, either coming from a lack of intergenerational trust or from a lack of trust
in the government to save.

29

References
Advisory Council on Social Security (1994 – 1996). 1997. Report of the 1994 – 1996 Advisory
Council on Social Security. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, January 7.
http://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/adcouncil/
Alm, James. 1988. “Uncertain Tax Policies, Individual Behavior, and Welfare,” American
Economic Review, 78(1), pp. 237–245.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Ronald Lee. 2011. “Welfare and Generational Equity in Sustainable
Unfunded Pension Systems,” Journal of Public Economics, 95(1-2), pp. 16–27.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2015. “Measuring Economic Policy
Uncertainty,” unpublished manuscript, Stanford.
Benítez-Silva, Hugo, Debra S. Dwyer, Frank Heiland, and Warren C. Sanderson. 2007.
“Retirement and Social Security Reform Expectations: A Solution to the New Early Retirement
Puzzle,” unpublished manuscript, SUNY-Stony Brook.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Lawrence Levin. 1989. “Social Security and Personal Saving: An
Analysis of Expectations,” American Economic Review, 79(2), pp. 97–102.
Blake, David. 2008. “What is a Promise from the Government Worth? Quantifying Political Risk
in State and Personal Pension Schemes in the United Kingdom, Economica, 75(298), pp. 342–
361.
Borgmann, Christoph, and Matthias Heidler. 2007. “Volatility of Social Security Wealth:
Political Risks of Benefit-Rule Changes in Germany,” FinanzArchiv: Public Finance Analysis,
63(1), pp. 83–106.
Board of Trustees, for the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability
Insurance Trust Funds. 2015. Annual Report. http://www.ssa.gov/oact/tr/2015/tr2015.pdf.
Caliendo, Frank N., Aspen Gorry, and Sita Slavov. 2015. “The Cost of Uncertainty about the
Timing of Social Security Reform,” unpublished manuscript, Utah State University.
Delavande, Adeline, and Susann Rohwedder. 2008. “Eliciting Subjective Expectations in
Internet Surveys,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 72(5), 866–891.
Diamond, Peter. 1997. “Insulation of Pensions from Political Risk,” in Salvador Valdés-Prieto
(ed.), The Economics of Pensions: Principles, Policies and International Experience.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 33–57.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski. 2006. “Measuring Pension-benefit Expectation
Probabilistically,” Labour, 20(2), pp. 201–236.

30

Dušek, Libor. 2007. “Political Risk of Social Security: The Case of the Indexation of Benefits
in the Czech Republic,” CERGE-EI working paper 318, Prague.
Geanakoplos, John, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2009. “Reforming Social Security with Progressive
Personal Accounts,” in Jeffrey R. Brown, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and David A. Wise (eds.), Social
Security Policy in a Changing Environment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 73–128.
Geanakoplos, John, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2010. “Market Valuation of Accrued Social
Security Benefits,” in Deborah Lucas (ed.), Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 213–233.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Michael McMahon. 2012. “Policy Uncertainty and Household
Savings,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(2).
Gomes, Francisco J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Luis M. Viceira. 2012. “The Excess Burden of
Government Indecision,” in Jeffrey R. Brown (ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 26,
University of Chicago Press.
Gordon, Roger H., and Hal R. Varian. 1988. “Intergenerational Risk Sharing,” Journal of Public
Economics, 37(2), pp. 185–202.
Greenwald, Mathew, Arie Kapteyn, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Lisa Schneider. 2010. “What Do
People Know About Social Security?” Pension Research Council Working Paper, September.
Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, and Mario Padula. 2013. “Pension Wealth Uncertainty,” Journal of
Risk and Insurance, 80(4), pp. 1057–1085.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2005. “Imperfect Knowledge of Social Security
and Pensions,” Industrial Relations, 44(2), pp. 373–97.
Kim, Iltae, Arthur Snow, and Ronald S. Warren Jr. 1995. “Tax-Rate Uncertainty, Factor
Supplies, and Welfare,” Economic Inquiry, 33(1), pp. 159–169.
Knowledge Networks. 2010. “KnowledgePanel® Design Summary,” Manuscript, May.
http://www.knowledgenetworks.com/knpanel/docs/KnowledgePanel(R)-Design-SummaryDescription.pdf
Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2012. “The Perception of Social Security Incentives
for Labor Supply and Retirement: The Median Voter Knows More Than You’d Think.” in
Jeffrey R. Brown (ed.) Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 26, University of Chicago Press. 1–
42.
Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2015. “Would People Behave Differently If They
Better Understood Social Security? Evidence From a Field Experiment,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), pp. 275–229.

31

McHale, John. 2001. “The Risk of Social Security Benefit-Rule Changes: Some International
Evidence,” in John Y. Campbell and Martin S. Feldstein (eds.) Risk Aspects of Investment-Based
Social Security Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 247–290.
Mermin, Gordon B.T. 2005. “Reforming Social Security through Price and Progressive Price
Indexing,” Older Americans’ Economic Security Brief No. 6, The Urban Institute, December.
http://www.urban.org/publications/900903.html
Nataraj, Sita and John B. Shoven. 2003. “Comparing the Risks of Social Security with and
without Individual Accounts,” American Economic Review, pp. 348-53.
Shoven, John B., and Sita N. Slavov. 2006. “Political Risk versus Market Risk in Social
Security,” NBER Working Paper 12135.
Skinner, Jonathan. 1988. “The Welfare Cost of Uncertain Tax Policy,” Journal of Public
Economics, 37(2), 129–145.
Smetters, Kent, and Walter E. Theseira. 2011. “A Matter of Trust: Understanding Worldwide
Public Pension Conversions,” NBER Working Paper 17015.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1982. “Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity: The Case for Random
Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 18(1), pp. 1–33.
Weiss, Laurence. 1976. “The Desirability of Cheating Incentives and Randomness in the
Optimal Income,” Journal of Political Economy, 84(6), pp. 1343–1352.
Van der Wiel, Karen. 2008. “Preparing for Policy Changes: Social Security Expectations and
Pension Scheme Participation,” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Paper No.
3623. http://ftp.iza.org/dp3623.pdf

32

20<3#"'=>'?1"#5<"'!"#$"01",':@2'+8'23&3#"'4+$05.'4"$3#0&6'-"%"7&)'
$!!"#
,!"#

!"#$"%&'(")*+%,"%&)'-".+/'

+!"#
*!"#
)!"#
(!"#
'!"#
-./0#1#(,2'#
-.34/0#1#),2(#

&!"#
%!"#
$!"#
!"#
!#

%!#
'!#
)!#
+!#
$!!#
$%!#
$'!#
$)!#
$+!#
!"#$"01",'23&3#"'4+$05.'4"$3#0&6'-"%"7&)'5)'!"#$"%&'+8'-"%"7&)'9%,"#':3##"%&';5/'

%!!#

20:3#"';<'8=2'+6'!"#$"01",'>"5%'23&3#"'?+$05.'?"$3#0&@'-"%"4&)'
$!!"#
,!"#

!"#$"%&'(")*+%,"%&)'-".+/'

+!"#
*!"#
)!"#
(!"#
'!"#

-.12#3#(,4'#
-./012#3#)%4)#

&!"#
%!"#
$!"#
!"#
!#

%!#

'!#
)!#
+!#
$!!#
$%!#
$'!#
$)!#
!"#$"01",'23&3#"'-"%"4&)'5)'!"#$"%&'+6'-"%"4&)'7%,"#'83##"%&'95/'

$+!#

%!!#

33

70;8#"'<='>47'+6'!"#$"01",'2&3%,3#,'4"1035+%'+6'78&8#"'22'-"%":&)'
$!!"#
,!"#

!"#$"%&'(")*+%,"%&)'-".+/'

+!"#
*!"#
)!"#
(!"#
'!"#

-.12#3#%%4(#
-./012#3#%&4!#

&!"#
%!"#
$!"#
!"#
!#

$!#

%!#
&!#
'!#
(!#
)!#
!"#$"01",'2&3%,3#,'4"1035+%'+6'78&8#"'2+$03.'2"$8#0&9'-"%":&)'

*!#

+!#

<2=6#"'>?'0@<)'+8'0"#&12%&3'456271."%&'+8'<6&6#"'A+$21.'A"$6#2&3'-"%"9&)'
$!!"#

8/:4#;<95.294=>#?#(&@*#
8/59:4#;<95.294=>#?#(*@(#

,!"#

!"#$"%&'(")*+%,"%&)'-".+/'

+!"#
*!"#
)!"#
(!"#
'!"#
&!"#
%!"#
-../0#12345#

627/0#12345#

$!"#
!"#
!#

$!#

%!#
&!#
'!#
(!#
)!#
*!#
+!#
0"#&12%&3'456271."%&'1)'!"#$"%&'+8'-"%"9&)':%,"#'06##"%&';1/'

,!#

$!!#

34

:0;3#"'<='>0)&#0?3@+%'+5'(0)1'!#"2032''
$!!"#
,!"#

!"#$"%&'(")*+%,"%&)'-".+/'

+!"#
*!"#
)!"#
(!"#
'!"#

./23#4#(5+#

./0123#4#*5!#

&!"#
%!"#
$!"#
!"#
-%!#

-$!#

!#
$!#
%!#
&!#
(0)1'!#"2032'4)'!"#$"%&'+5'-"%"6&)'7%,"#'83##"%&'94/'

'!#

(!#

:0;3#"'<='>0)&#0?3@+%'+5'(0)1'!#"204'-4)",'+%'A023.4&",'(0)1'BC"#)0+%'D8((BE'
$!!"#
-./012345#23#6778#9#$#

,!"#

-./012345#23#6778#9#&#

-./012345#23#6778#9#(#

!"#$"%&'(")*+%,"%&)'-".+/'

+!"#
7.:
7.:;#<=4/.0/#>/2.?#/42:0=4#@2:45#A?#
B4=32.?3C#4D0.E214?3#2?5#4FG4B345#@4?4H3:#I#

*!"#
)!"#
(!"#
'!"#
&!"#
%!"#
$!"#
!"#
!#

(#

$!#

$(#
%!#
%(#
&!#
&(#
'!#
(0)1'!#"2032'4)'!"#$"%&'+5'-"%"6&)'7%,"#'83##"%&'94/'

'(#

(!#

35

!"#$%&$'()$*$+&,(-,(.$/%$*&(01()$*$+&,(2*'$/(34//$*&(5-6(

:;84/$(<-=(!"#$%&$'()$*$+&,(>?(78$(9/04#(@A$-*(-*'(BCD(30*+'$*%$(E*&$/F-GH(
*!"

)!"

(!"

'!"

&!"

%!"

$!"

#!"

!"

$'+$,"

%!+%&"

%'+%,"

&!+&&"
78$(9/04#((

&'+&,"

'!+'&"

''+',"

!"#$"%&"'()%*+(!#",%-,(.*(!"#$"/0(12(3"/"40*(5/'"#(6-##"/0(7.8(

9%:-#"(;<=(!"#$"%&"'()%*+(!#",%-,(<>(?:"(@#1-A(BC"./(./'(DEF(61/4'"/$"(G/0"#&.HI(
(%#

("#

($#

'#

&#

%#

"#

$#
")!"*#
!"#

+$!+%#

+)!+*#

%$!%%#

%)!%*#

)$!)%#

))!)*#

,-.#/0123#

36

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable

Mean

(1)
Standard
Deviation

(2)
25th
Percentile

(3)
Median

(4)
75th
Percentile

(5)
Number of
Observations

Key Outcome Variables
(all in Percent of Benefits Under Current Law)
Expected Benefits
Standard Deviation of Expected Benefits
Midpoint of Certainty Equivalent
Midpoint of Risk Premium

59.4
22.5
53.7
5.8

30.1
13.7
27.8
28.0

37.1
11.4
32.5
0.0

62.6
23.0
57.5
7.0

83.4
33.3
76.5
16.5

2,960
2,960
2,939
2,939

Demographic Control Variables
Age

42.5

10.0

34.0

43.0

51.0

3,053

Ethnicity
White
Black
Hispanic
Other

0.702
0.103
0.154
0.041

3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053

Education
High School Dropout
High School Education
Some College
Bachelor's or Above

0.088
0.286
0.229
0.397

3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053

ln(Household Size)
ln(Household Income)

1.00
10.97

Marital Status
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Separated
Never Married
Living with partner

0.643
0.013
0.076
0.018
0.157
0.092

3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053

Female
Homeowner

0.464
0.726

3,053
3,053

Region
Northeast
Midwest
South
West

0.174
0.237
0.354
0.235

3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053

Lives in MSA
Kids in Household

0.843
0.467

3,053
3,053

Employment Status
Currently Working
Retired
Disabled
Unemployed
Not Working

0.788
0.019
0.021
0.086
0.085

3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053
3,053

Other Control Variables
Risk Aversion Index (Using Lifetime Income
Gambles, 1-6 scale)
Subjective Probability of Surviving To Age 75
(percent)
Importance of Social Security Funds during
Retirement (1-4 scale)
Trust in Elected Federal Officials (1-5 scale)
Optimism Indicator (standarized variable)
Financial Literacy (0-4 scale)

0.52
0.89

0.69
10.53

1.10
11.12

1.39
11.63

3,053
3,053

4.6

1.4

4.0

5.0

6.0

2,997

67.9

22.5

51.0

71.0

85.0

2,935

2.8

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

2,982

2.2
0.0
2.4

1.0
1.0
1.2

1.0
-0.6
2.0

2.0
0.0
3.0

3.0
0.7
3.0

3,018
2,955
3,053

Notes: Key outcome variables are measured in the June 2011 Social Security Policy Risk Survey, designed by the authors and fielded by Knowledge Networks. The
baseline demographics are the values in the standard demographic profile variables at the time of the baseline survey (June 2010). The standard demographic
profile is collected by Knowledge Networks. The sample is restricted to individuals between the ages of 25 and 59 as of May 2011. See the text and Appendix B for
a discussion of and definitions of the key outcome variables. The risk-aversion variable is an index that runs from 1 to 6 and is based on five questions about
hypothetical choices between a riskless and a risky job (Q6.1-Q6.5). The index corresponds respectively to the following six CRRA ranges: [<0.5], [0.5-1],[1-2],[24],[4-8],[>8]. Importance of Social Security Funds during Retirement is measured on a 4-point scale from "not so important" to "extremely important" (Q6.10).
Trust in Elected Federal Officials is a on a five-point scale, with higher values indicating more trust (Q6.11). The Optimism Indicator is the standardized average of
the non-missing responses to the six items (reverse coded when appropriate) of Q6.12. The financial literacy index is the number of correct responses to the four
questions on financial literacy (Q6.13-Q6.13).

37

Table 2: Expectations about Social Security
(1)

(2)

Mean

Median

(3)
Number of
Observations

Panel A: Respondent Confidence in Social Security
Very Confident
Somewhat Confident
Not too Confident
Not at all Confident

0.033
0.223
0.453
0.291

(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.008)

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

3,045
3,045
3,045
3,045

Panel B: Does Social Security Face a Financial Shortfall?
Yes
No

0.914
0.086

(0.005)
(0.005)

..
..

..
..

3,036
3,036

Panel C: How Will the Government Address the Shortfall?
Mostly or Entirely through Benefit Cuts
Balanced Mix of Benefit Cuts and Tax Increases
Mostly or Entirely through Tax Increases

0.183
0.576
0.241

(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.008)

..
..
..

..
..
..

3,028
3,028
3,028

Panel D: Chance of a Decline in General Level of Benefits
Within 10 Years
By Age 65

61.0
66.6

(0.5)
(0.5)

61.0
71.0

(0.8)
(0.5)

2,937
2,840

Panel E: Do you Expect More, the Same, or Less Benefits
than you are Supposed to Get Under Current Law?
More
The Same
Less

0.028
0.241
0.731

(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.008)

..
..
..

..
..
..

3,026
3,026
3,026

65.9

(0.6)

70.0

(0.5)

2,956

0.475
0.320
0.148
0.057

(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.004)

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

3,038
3,038
3,038
3,038

Panel F: Point Estimate of Future Benefits as % of
Current Benefits (measured using a slider)
Panel G: Importance of Benefit Amount Uncertainty
Matters Very Much
Matters Somewhat
Matters Little
Does Not Matter at All

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data from the June 2011 Social Security Policy Risk Survey, designed by the authors and fielded by Knowledge
Networks. The sample is restricted to individuals between the ages of 25 and 59 as of May 2011. See Appendix B for exact question definitions: Q1.2 for Panel
A, Q2.1 for Panel B, Q2.2 for Panel C, Q2.11 for Panel D, Q3.1 for Panel E, Q3.2 for Panel F, Q4.1 for Panel G.

38

Table 3: Correlates of Expected Benefits, Standard Deviation of Benefits, and the Risk Premium
(1)

(2)

(3)

Dep. Variable:
Expected Benefits

Dep. Variable:
Standard Deviation
of Benefits

Dep. Variable:
Risk Premium

Basic Demographics
Age
Black
Hispanic
Other
Highschool Dropout
Some College
Bachelor's Degree or Higher
Ln Household Size
Ln Household Income
Widowed
Divorced
Separated
Never Married
Lives With Partner
Female
Owns House
Lives in Northeast
Lives in Midwest
Lives in West
Lives in MSA
Kids in Household
Retired
Disabled
Unemployed
Not Working

0.94***
5.1***
3.9**
-0.8
0.7
-0.3
0.6
0.8
-3.1***
6.9*
-0.5
-0.3
2.9
0.6
-3.0***
-1.1
4.0***
2.4*
0.0
2.3
-5.4***
9.3**
-2.5
-2.0
-0.5

(0.06)
(1.9)
(1.6)
(2.8)
(2.2)
(1.5)
(1.5)
(1.6)
(0.8)
(4.0)
(2.0)
(3.7)
(1.7)
(1.9)
(1.1)
(1.3)
(1.5)
(1.3)
(1.4)
(1.4)
(1.5)
(3.8)
(3.8)
(2.0)
(2.0)

-0.21***
3.1***
1.8**
1.9
3.7***
-0.7
0.1
0.6
-0.9**
-0.8
0.0
-0.1
-1.0
0.7
0.3
-1.2*
0.1
0.1
1.2*
-0.1
0.1
-3.6*
-1.5
-1.4
1.9**

(0.03)
(1.0)
(0.8)
(1.2)
(1.1)
(0.7)
(0.7)
(0.8)
(0.4)
(2.9)
(1.1)
(1.8)
(0.9)
(0.9)
(0.5)
(0.7)
(0.7)
(0.7)
(0.7)
(0.7)
(0.8)
(1.9)
(2.2)
(1.0)
(0.9)

0.29***
9.5***
4.8***
-4.1
3.4
-1.6
-0.5
0.3
-1.8**
5.3
-0.5
6.2*
1.9
1.4
2.0*
-1.9
-1.1
-1.0
-2.3
0.2
-1.1
10.6***
-4.9
-0.7
2.0

(0.06)
(2.1)
(1.7)
(2.6)
(2.4)
(1.5)
(1.5)
(1.6)
(0.9)
(4.0)
(2.1)
(3.3)
(1.7)
(2.1)
(1.1)
(1.4)
(1.5)
(1.3)
(1.4)
(1.5)
(1.5)
(3.4)
(4.1)
(2.2)
(2.0)

Other Control Variables
Risk Aversion Index
Subjective Probability of Surviving To Age 75
Importance of SS to Retirement Spending
Trust in Elected Federal Officials
Optimism Index
Financial Literacy

0.0
0.13***
2.3***
6.0***
1.7***
1.5***

(0.4)
(0.03)
(0.6)
(0.5)
(0.6)
(0.5)

-0.2
-0.03**
-0.4
0.0
-0.4
0.0

(0.2)
(0.01)
(0.3)
(0.3)
(0.3)
(0.3)

1.6***
0.05**
0.9
2.3***
0.6
0.7

(0.5)
(0.03)
(0.6)
(0.5)
(0.5)
(0.6)

R2
N

0.202
2,960

0.069
2,960

0.075
2,939

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Missing values of explanatory variables are
dummied out. Expected Benefits and Standard Deviation of Expected Benefits are based on the bin/ball question that elicites the subjective distribution of future
Social Security benefits (Q3.3-Q3.6). The risk premium is the percent of benefits under current law that respondents are willing to sacrifice in order to receive
their expected benefits with certainty. All dependent variables are expressed as a percentage of benefits under current law. See the note to Table 1 for more
details on the explanatory variables. Data from the June 2011 Social Security Political Risk Survey, designed by the authors and fielded by Knowledge Networks.
The sample is restricted to individuals between the ages of 25 and 59 as of May 2011.

39

(2)

0.34*** (0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
Yes
0.189
2,939

0.47*** (0.02)
-0.38*** (0.04)
-1.76*** (0.37)
7.44*** (0.82)
1.18
(0.82)
0.56
(0.83)
Yes
0.375
2,939

Dependent Variable: Std Dev. of Perceived Social Security Benefits
2.73*** (0.50)
2.88*** (0.49)
No
Yes
0.010
0.080
2,960
2,960

0.49*** (0.02)
-0.42*** (0.04)
-1.99*** (0.34)
7.68*** (0.82)
0.94
(0.83)
0.81
(0.83)
No
0.352
2,939

Dependent Variable: Certainty Equivalent of Social Security Benefits

0.34*** (0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
No
0.113
2,939

40

Dependent Variable: Dummy for Respondent Choosing Guaranteed Benefits

(1)

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Demographic and other controls is the set of controls used in Table 3. The
Certainty Equivalent is the percent of benefits under current law that the respondent is just willing to accept in place of benefits under current law if the certainty equivalent is guaranteed in
an unbreakable contract. Expected Social Security Benefits and Perceived Standard Deviation of Social Security Benefits are based on the respondent's subjective probability distribution of
future Social Security Benefits as elicited by the Bin/Ball question (Q3.3-Q3.6). The Risk Aversion Index is defined in the note to Table 1. The weather example is an example of a probability
distribution using the Bin/Ball format that was presented to the respondent prior to Q3.3. The variable Respondent Sees High SD Weather Example is a dummy that equals 1 if the variance
of the distribution in the example was high. Data from the June 2011 Social Security Political Risk Survey, designed by the authors and fielded by Knowledge Networks. The sample is
restricted to individuals between the ages of 25 and 59 as of May 2011.

Panel C: Effect of Weather Example On Perceived Uncertainty
Respondent Sees High SD Weather Example
Demographic and Other Controls
R2
N

Panel B: Effects of Randomizations, Perceived Uncertainty, and
Risk-Aversion on Certainty Equivalent
Expected Social Security Benefits
Perceived Standard Deviation of own Social Security Benefits
Risk Aversion Index
Starting Value is 70%
Guaranteed Benefits is Second Option
Respondent Sees High SD Weather Example
Demographic and Other Controls
R2
N

Panel A: Effect of Starting Value on First Choice
Starting Value is 70%
Guaranteed Benefits is Second Option
Demographic and Other Controls
R2
N

Table 4: Are Responses on Certainty Equivalence Meaningful?

-0.7
(0.1)
5.1
(0.5)
1.6
(1.2)
6.7
(1.2)

(2) Starting Value Adjustment

(3) Estimate Adjusted for Starting Value

(4) Response Quality Adjustment

(5) Estimate Adjusted for Starting Value
and Response Quality
2939

7.4
(1.1)

1.4
(1.1)

6.0
(0.4)

-1.0
(0.4)

7.0
(0.4)

65.1
(1.2)

5.6
(1.1)

59.5
(0.5)

0
--

59.5
(0.5)

Mean

2939

68.4
(1.4)

5.7
(1.1)

62.7
(0.9)

0
--

62.7
(0.9)

Median

58.4
(1.2)

4.0
(1.1)

54.4
(0.6)

0.7
(0.1)

53.7
(0.5)

Mean

2939

62.0
(1.3)

4.6
(1.4)

57.4
(1.6)

-0.1
(1.6)

57.5
(0.1)

Median

19.2
(0.6)

-3.3
(0.6)

22.6
(0.3)

0
--

22.6
(0.3)

Mean

2939

19.5
(0.7)

-3.5
(0.6)

23.0
(0.4)

0
--

23.0
(0.4)

Median

(4)
Standard Deviation
Certainty Equivalent
of Benefits

(3)

0OMJOF"QQFOEJDFTDBOCFGPVOEBUIUUQVTFSTOCFSPSH_MVUUNFSQPMSJTL@BQYQEG

Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses (based on 10,000 replications). The sample is limited to observations for which both the expected benefits
and the certainty equivalent are nonmissing. See text for a description of the methodology of the starting value adjustment. The starting value adjustment is not
done for expected benefits and standard deviation of benefits because these two variables were elicited without using a starting value. See text for a description
of the response quality adjustment. The variable definitions and means of the variables that are proxies for response quality are listed in Appendix Table A5. The
coefficients of the regression of the outcome variables on these measures of response quality are shown in Table A6.

Number of observations

5.8
(0.5)

(1) Unadjusted Estimate

Median

Expected Benefits

Risk Premium
Mean

(2)

(1)

Table 5: Adjustments for Starting Value and Response Quality

41

