                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PRODUCTIVITY AND ORGANIZATION IN PORTUGUESE FIRMS

                                        Lorenzo Caliendo
                                         Giordano Mion
                                     Luca David Opromolla
                                     Esteban Rossi-Hansberg

                                       Working Paper 21811
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21811


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2015, Revised April 2018




We thank Serguey Braguinsky, Jan De Loecker, Jakub Kastl, Steve Redding, Ananth Seshadri,
and seminar participants at various institutions and conferences for useful comments and
discussions. This article is part of the Strategic Project (UID/ECO/00436/2013). The analyses,
opinions, and findings represent the views of the authors and they are not necessarily those of
Banco de Portugal or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21811.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Lorenzo Caliendo, Giordano Mion, Luca David Opromolla, and Esteban Rossi-
Hansberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Productivity and Organization in Portuguese Firms
Lorenzo Caliendo, Giordano Mion, Luca David Opromolla, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
NBER Working Paper No. 21811
December 2015, Revised April 2018
JEL No. D22,D24,F16,J24,J31,L23

                                          ABSTRACT

The productivity of firms is, at least partly, determined by a firm’s actions and decisions. One of
these decisions involves the organization of production in terms of the number of layers of
management the firm decides to employ. Using detailed employer-employee matched data and
firm production quantity and input data for Portuguese firms, we study the endogenous response
of revenue-based and quantity-based productivity to a change in layers: a firm reorganization. We
show that as a result of an exogenous demand or productivity shock that makes the firm
reorganize and add a management layer, quantity- based productivity increases by about 8%,
while revenue-based productivity drops by around 7%. Such a reorganization makes the firm
more productive, but also increases the quantity produced to an extent that lowers the price
charged by the firm and, as a result, its revenue-based productivity.

Lorenzo Caliendo                                 Luca David Opromolla
Yale University                                  Banco de Portugal
School of Management                             Departamento de Estudos Económicos
135 Prospect Street                              Rua Francisco Ribeiro, 2
New Haven, CT 06520                              1150-165 Lisboa, Portugal
and NBER                                         and CEPR, CESifo and UECE
lorenzo.caliendo@yale.edu                        luca.opromolla@nyu.edu

Giordano Mion                                    Esteban Rossi-Hansberg
Room 220, Jubilee Building                       Princeton University
University of Sussex                             Department of Economics
BN1 9SL, Falmer, Brighton                        289 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
United Kingdom                                   Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and CEPR, CEP, and CESifo                        and NBER
g.mion@lse.ac.uk                                 erossi@princeton.edu
1    Introduction
A …rm’s productivity depends on the way it organizes production. The decisions of its owners and managers
on how to combine di¤erent inputs and factors of production with particular technologies given demand for
their product determine the production e¢ ciency of a …rm. Clearly, these decision makers face many con-
straints and random disturbances. Random innovations or disruptions, regulatory uncertainties, changes in
tastes and fads, among many other idiosyncratic shocks, are undoubtedly partly responsible for ‡uctuations
in …rm productivity. However, these random –and perhaps exogenous– productivity or demand ‡uctua-
tions, result in …rm responses that change the way production is organized, thereby a¤ecting its measured
productivity. For example, a sudden increase in demand due to a product becoming fashionable can lead
a …rm to expand and add either a plant, a more complex management structure, a new division, or a new
building. These investments are lumpy and, as such, will change the …rm’s production e¢ ciency and prices
discontinuously as well.
    In this paper we study the changes in productivity observed in Portuguese …rms when they reorganize
their management structure by adding or dropping layers of management. Consider a …rm that wants to
expand as a result of a positive demand shock and decides to add a layer of management (say add another
division with a CEO that manages the whole …rm). The new organization is suitable for a larger …rm and
lowers the average cost of the …rm thereby increasing its quantity-based productivity. Moreover, the switch
to an organizational structure …tted for a larger …rm also reduces the marginal cost of the …rm leading to
higher quantities and lower prices. That is, at the moment of the switch, the …rm is using a technology that
is still a bit big for the size of its market, which reduces revenue-based productivity. The reason for this
is that the organizational decision is lumpy. So a change in organization that adds organizational capacity
in the form of a new management layer, leads to increases in quantity-based productivity, but reductions
in revenue-based productivity through reductions in prices (due to reduction in the marginal cost, and,
perhaps also due to reductions in mark-ups). In that sense, the endogenous response of …rm productivity
to exogenous shocks can be complex and di¤er depending on the measure of productivity used.
    Using a recently developed measure of changes in organization we show that these patterns are very
much present in the Portuguese data. To illustrate the parallel case when a …rm receives a negative shock,
consider the example of a Portuguese …rm producing “Knitted and crocheted pullovers, cardigans, and
similar articles”. This …rm downsized heavily between 2002 and 2005 as a result of China’s entry into the
WTO and the resulting reduction in quotas and increased import competition. We observe that the quantity
sold by the …rm declines by 50%, but its prices increases by 30%. The …rm reduced its layers of management
by …ring several managers and employees performing secondary tasks, and focusing on its main experties
by maintaining its "sewers and embroiderers". Overall its labor forced declines by 27 employees. Using the
measures of productivity we explain in detail below, the result is a reduction in quantity based productivity
of 53% combined with an increase in revenue-based productivity of 9.2%. The experience and behavior of
this …rm is by no means unique. Using many examples and a host of empirical measures, we show that



                                                     2
reorganization and productivity are systematically linked in the way we describe.
       Although the logic above applies to many types of organizational changes and other lumpy investments,
we explain it in more detail using a knowledge-based hierarchy model that can guide us in our empirical
implementation. Furthermore, this model provides an easy way to empirically identify the changes in
organization using occupational classi…cations. The theory of knowledge-based hierarchies was developed
in Rosen (1982), Garicano (2000) and, in an equilibrium context with heterogeneous …rms, in Garicano
and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) and Caliendo and Rossi-Hansberg (2012, from now on CRH). In particular,
we use the model in CRH since it provides an application of this theory to an economy with …rms that
face heterogeneous productivity and demands for their products. In the context of CRH, we provide novel
theoretical results that characterize the pattern of quantity-based and revenue-based productivity when
…rms reorganize as a result of exogenous demand or productivity shocks.
       The basic technology is one that requires time and knowledge. Workers use their time to produce
and generate ‘problems’or production possibilities. Output requires solving this problems. Workers have
knowledge that they use to try to solve these problems. If they know how to solve them, they do, and
output is realized. Otherwise they can redirect the problem to a manager one layer above. Such a manager
tries to solve the problem and, if it cannot, can redirect the problem to an even higher-level manager. The
organizational problem of the …rm is to determine, how much does each employee know, how many of them
to employ, and how many layers of management to use in production.
       Using matched employer-employee data for the French manufacturing sector, Caliendo, Monte and Rossi-
Hansberg (2015), from now on CMRH, show how to use occupation data to identify the layers of management
in a …rm.1 They show that the theory of knowledge-based hierarchies can rationalize the layer-level changes
in the number of employees and wages as …rms grow either with or without changing layers. For example,
as implied by the theory, a reorganization that adds a layer of management leads to increases in the number
of hours employed in each layer but to a reduction in the average wage in each preexisting layer. In
contrast, when …rms grow without reorganizing they add hours of work to each layer and they increase the
wages of each worker. This evidence shows that when …rms expand and contract they actively manage their
organization by hiring workers with di¤erent characteristics. The Portuguese data exhibits the same patterns
that CMRH found for France. Importantly, the detailed input, revenue and quantity data for Portugal allows
us to go a step further and measure the productivity implications of changes in organization.
       Measuring productivity well is notoriously complicated and the industrial organization literature has
proposed a variety of techniques to do so (see Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995), Olley and Pakes (1996),
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), Wooldridge (2009), and De Loecker and Warzinsky (2012), among others).
The …rst issue is whether we want to measure quantity-based or revenue-based productivity. The distinction
is crucial since the …rst measures how e¤ective is a …rm in transforming inputs and factors into output, while
the other also measure any price variation, perhaps related to markups, that result from market power. The
   1
    Following CMRH several studies have shown that occupational categories identify layers of management in other datasets.
For example, Tåg (2013) for the Swedish data and Friedrich (2015) for the Danish data.



                                                            3
ability of …rms to determine prices due to some level of market power is a reality that is hard to abstract
from. Particularly when considering changes in scale that make …rms move along their demand curve and
change their desired prices. We …nd that using a host of di¤erent measures of revenue productivity (from
value-added per worker to Olley and Pakes, 1996, Wooldridge, 2009, and De Loecker and Warzinsky 2012),
adding layers is related to decreases in revenue-based productivity. As explained above, our theory suggests
that this should be the case since …rms reduce prices when they expand. However, since …rms also received
a variety of idiosyncratic demand, markup, and productivity shocks every period it is hard to just directly
look at prices to measure this e¤ect.
       To measure the e¤ect of organizational change on quantity-based productivity we need a methodology
that can account for demand, markup, and productivity shocks over time and across …rms.2 We use the
methodology proposed by Forlani et al., (2015), which from now on we refer to as MULAMA. This method
uses the same cost minimization assumptions as previous methodologies, like De Loecker and Warzinsky
(2012), but makes some relatively strong assumptions on the way demand di¤ers across …rms in order to
allow for correlated demand and productivity disturbances. Furthermore, it is amenable to introducing the
organizational structure we described above. Note also that since we focus on changes in quantity-based
productivity as a result of a …rm reorganization we can sidestep the di¢ culties in comparing quantity-based
productivity across horizontally di¤erentiated products. Using this methodology, and quantity data available
in the Portuguese data, we …nd that adding (dropping) layers is associated with increases (decreases) in
quantity-based productivity. The …nding survives a variety of robustness checks and alternative formulations
of the productivity process. For example, we can allow for changes in organization to have a permanent or
only a contemporaneous impact on quantity-based productivity as well as for various …xed e¤ects. This is our
main …nding: we link a careful measure of productive e¢ ciency (quantity-based productivity as measured by
MULAMA) with an increase in the management capacity of a …rm (as measured by the number of layers)3 .
       Up to this point we have not addressed the issue of causality. The results above only state that adding
layers coincides with declines in revenue-based productivity and increases in quantity-based productivity.
To the extent that organization, like capital infrastructure, cannot adjust much in the short run in the
wake of current period shocks the above results can be interpreted as causal. We relax this assumption by
using a set of instruments represented by demand and cost shocks predicting organizational changes but
uncorrelated with current productivity shocks. In this respect, the MULAMA model allows us to quantify
the past productivity, demand, and markups shocks that motivate …rms to expand or contract production
scale, but that are uncorrelated with current shocks. In addition to these set of instruments suggested by our
theory, we make use of a more traditional set of instruments based on real exchange rates and a …rm’s export
and import patterns. We show that our results on both revenue-based and quantity-based productivity do
   2
     See Marschak and Andrews (1944) and Klette and Griliches (1996) for a discussion of the output price bias when calculating
productivity.
   3
     In a related result, Garcia and Voigtländer (2014) …nd among new Chilean exporters a reduction in revenue-based pro-
ductivity and an increase in quantity-based productivity. The mechanism and …ndings in our paper can be used directly to
rationalize their …ndings since exporting amounts to a …rm revenue shock.



                                                              4
seem to be causal. In our preferred speci…cation, with instrumental variables, we also show that the e¤ect
of changes in the number of layers on productivity remains signi…cant even when we introduce quantity
directly into the productivity process as a proxy for shocks a¤ecting productivity beyond the organization
channel.
       Finally, we go one step further, and use the quota removals in sub-industries of the “Textile and Ap-
parel”sector, that resulted from China’s entry into the WTO, as an instrument for a …rm’s reorganization.
Focusing on this sector allows us to explore the implications of a clearly exogenous negative demand shock
on reorganization and productivity. Overall, we …nd that the behavior of …rms as a result of the reduction
in quotas is very much in line with the rest of our …ndings. This is con…rmed with a couple of detailed
examples of individual …rms in this industry where we describe in more detail the way these …rms changed
their labor force composition and therefore their organization and productivity.
       In sum, in this paper we show that the organizational structure of …rms, as measured by their hierarchical
occupational composition, has direct implications on the productivity of …rms. As they add organizational
layers, their quantity-based productivity increases, although the corresponding expansion decreases their
revenue productivity as they reduce prices.4 This endogenous component of productivity determines, in
part, the observed heterogeneity in both revenue and quantity-based productivity across …rms. Failure to
reorganize in order to grow can, therefore, result in an inability to exploit available productivity improve-
ments. This would imply that …rms remain ine¢ ciently small, as has been documented in some developing
countries (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014).
       The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide a short recap of the knowledge-
hierarchy theory that we use to guide our empirical exploration and describe its implications for productivity.
We …nish this section with several examples of Portuguese …rms that went through a process of reorgani-
zation. Section 3 discusses the Portuguese manufacturing data set we use in the paper and presents the
basic characteristics of Portuguese production hierarchies. In particular, we show that …rms with di¤erent
numbers of layers are in fact di¤erent and that changes in the number of layers are associated with the
expected changes in the number of workers and wages at each layer. Section 4 presents our main results
on revenue-based productivity, as well as the methodology we use to measure quantity-based productivity
and our main empirical results on this measure. It also presents a variety of robustness results as well
as our results for revenue-based and quantity-based productivity using instrumental variables. Section 5
concludes. The appendix includes more details on our data set, a description of all Tables and Figures, as
well as additional derivations and robustness tests of the results in the main text.
   4
    Our results also relate to the cost pass-through literature given that a reorganization a¤ects cost and, in turn, prices. As
a result, in the paper we also calculate the cost-pass through for all …rms (what we refer to as the unconditional measure) and
for …rms that change organization (conditional). We …nd that the unconditional cost pass-through estimates are similar to the
ones in the literature, but that the estimates conditional on …rms reorganizing are somewhat larger, as expected.




                                                               5
2        A Sketch of a Theory of Organization and its Empirical Implications
The theory of knowledge-based hierarchies, initially proposed by Garicano (2000), has been developed using
a variety of alternative assumptions (see Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg, 2015, for a review). Here we discuss
the version of the technology with homogenous agents and heterogeneous demand developed in CRH.
        So consider …rm i in period t that faces a Cobb-Douglas technology

                                                                                          M     H
                                   Qit (Oit ; Mit ; Kit ) = ait OitO Mit M Kit                                           (1)

with quantity-based productivity ait ; returns to scale given by                      and where Oit denotes the labor input,
Mit material inputs and Kit capital. The parameter                   O       0 represents the expenditure share on the labor
input,      M     0 on materials and        M        O   on physical capital. The labor input is produced using the
output of a variety of di¤erent workers with particular levels of knowledge. The organizational problem is
embedded in this input. That is, we interpret the output of the knowledge hierarchy as generating the labor
input of the …rm. Hence, in the rest of this section we focus on the organizational problem of labor and
abstract from capital and materials. We return to the other factors in our estimation of productivity below.
        Production of the labor input requires time and knowledge. Agents employed as workers specialize
in production, use their unit of time working in the production ‡oor and use their knowledge to deal
with any problems they face in production. Each unit of time generates a problem, that, if solved yields
one unit of output. Agents employed as managers specialize in problem solving, use h units of time to
familiarize themselves with each problem brought by a subordinate, and solve the problems using their
available knowledge. Problems are drawn from a distribution F (z) with F 00 (z) < 0: Workers in a …rm
know how to solve problems in an interval of knowledge [0; zL0 ]; where the superindex 0 denotes the layer
(0 for workers) and the subindex the total number of management layers in the …rm, L. Problems outside
this interval, are passed on to managers of layer 1. Hence, if there are n0L workers in the   h …rm, n
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                       iL =
hn0L 1 F zL0 , managers of layer one are needed. In general, managers in layer ` learn ZL` 1 ; ZL` and
                                                        P
there are n`L = hn0L (1 F (ZL` 1 )) of them, where ZL` = `l=0 zLl : Problems that are not solved by anyone in
the …rm are discarded. Agents with knowledge zL` obtain a wage w zL` where w0 zL` > 0 and w00 zL`                         0.
Market wages simply compensate agents for their cost of acquiring knowledge.
        The organizational problem of the …rm is to choose the number of workers in each layer, their knowledge
and therefore their wages, and the number of layers. Hence, consider a …rm that produces a quantity O of
the labor input. CL (O; w) is the minimum cost of producing a labor input O with an organization with L
layers5 at a prevailing wage schedule w ( ), namely,
                                                                             XL
                                       CL (O; w) =        min                       n`L w zL`                            (2)
                                                     fn`L ;zL
                                                            ` gL         0    `=0
                                                               l=0

    5
    Throughout we refer to the number of layers of the …rm by the number of management layers. So …rms with only workers
have zero layers, …rms with workers and managers have 1 layer, etc.



                                                               6
subject to

                                         O       F (ZLL )n0L ;                                                              (3)
                                        n`L = hn0L [1       F (ZL` 1 )] for L     ` > 0;                                    (4)
                                        nL
                                         L = 1:                                                                             (5)

    The …rst constraint just states that total production of the labor input should be larger or equal than
O; the second is the time constraint explained above, and the third states that all …rms need to be headed
by one CEO. The last constraint is important since it implies that small …rms cannot have a small fraction
of the complex organization of a large …rm. We discuss bellow the implications of partially relaxing this
constraint. The variable cost function is given by

                                               C (O; w) = min fCL (O; w)g :
                                                             L 0


CRH show that the average cost function (AC (O; w) = C (O; w) =O) that results from this problem exhibits
the properties depicted in Figure 1 (which we reproduce from CMRH). Namely, it is U-shaped given the
number of layers, with the average cost associated to the minimum e¢ cient scale that declines as the …rm
adds layers. Each point in the average cost curve in the …gure correspond to a particular organizational
design. Note that the average cost curve faced by the …rm is the lower-envelope of the average cost curves for a
given number of layers. The crossings of these curves determine a set of output thresholds (or correspondingly
demand thresholds6 ) at which the …rms decides to reorganize by changing the number of layers. The overall
average cost, including materials and capital, of a …rm that is an input price taker will have exactly the
same shape (given our speci…cation of the production function in equation (1) under                     = 1).
    Consider the three dots in the …gure, which correspond to …rms that face di¤erent levels of demand
as parametrized by .7 Suppose that after solving the corresponding pro…t maximization using the cost
function above, a …rm that faces a demand level of                   decides to produce Q ( ) (or q ( ) in logs). The top
panel on the right-hand-side of Figure 1 tells us that it will have one layer with 5 workers and one layer
with one manager above them. The …gure also indicates the wages of each of them (the height of each bar),
which is increasing in their knowledge. Now consider a …rm that as a result of a demand shock expands to
     0
Q        without reorganizing, that is, keeping the same number of layers. The …rm expands the number of
workers and it increases their knowledge and wages. The reason is that the one manager needs to hire more
knowledgeable workers, who ask less often, in order to increase her span of control. In contrast, consider
                                  00
a …rm that expands to Q                : This …rm reorganizes by adding a layer. It also hires more workers at all
   6
     Note that since output increases (decreases) discontinuously when the …rm adds (drops) layers, the average cost curve is
discontinuous as a function of the level of demand :
   7
     In our examples here we focus on changes in the level of demand. Later on we will further consider changes in the exogenous
component of productivity and changes in markups. Indeed, whatever pushes the …rm to change its desired output can a¤ect
a …rm’s organizational structure.



                                                                 7
preexisting layers. However, it hires less knowledgeable workers, at lower wages, in all preexisting layers.
The reason is that by adding a new layer the …rm can avoid paying multiple times for knowledge that is
rarely used by the bottom ranks in the hierarchy. In the next section we show that all these predictions are
con…rmed by the data.

                                       Figure 1: Average Cost and Organization

                     Average cost function AC(Q)
                                                                                      Hierarchy at 6
                                                   n LL   61

                                                   n LL   =1
                                                                w11 (6)

                                                                w01 (6)
                                                                            0   2       4       6           8         10
                                                                                      Hierarchy at 6'
                                                                w11 (6')                       w11 (6') > w 11 (6)
           C(Q)/Q




                                                                                               w01 (6') > w 01 (6)
                                                                w01 (6')

                                                                            0   2       4       6           8         10
                                                                                      Hierarchy at 6''
                                                                w22 (6'')                      w12 (6'') < w 11 (6)

                                                                w12 (6'')                      w02 (6'') < w 01 (6)

                                                                w02 (6'')
                                                                            0   2       4       6           8         10
                    Q(6) Q(6')       Q(6'')                                         Number of employees



       We can also use Figure 1 to show how the organizational structure changes as we relax the integer
constraint of the top manager, in (5). First, note that at the minimum e¢ cient scale (MES), which is given
by the minimum of the average cost, having one manager at the top is optimal for the …rm. So the constraint
in (5) is not binding. Hence, relaxing the constraint can a¤ect the shape of the average cost function on
segments to the right and to the left of the MES. The reason why average costs rise for quantities other
than MES is that …rms are restricted to have one manager at the top. Otherwise, the …rm could expand
the optimal organizational structure at the MES by just replicating the hierarchy proportionally as it adds
or reduces managers at the top.
       For instance, suppose we allow organizations to have more than one manager at the top, namely nL
                                                                                                      L                       1:
Figure 1 presents dashed lines that depict the shape of the average cost for this case. As we can see, the
average cost is ‡at for segments to the right of the MES up to the point in which the …rm decides to add a
new layer. At the moment of the switch, the average cost starts falling until it reaches the MES and then it
becomes ‡at again. All the predictions that we discussed before still hold for this case. The only di¤erence
is the way in which …rms expand after they reach their MES up to the point in which they reorganize. We
allow for this extra degree of ‡exibility when we use the structure of the model and take it to the data.8
   8
   Alternatively, one could also relax the integer constraint by letting nLL     ; where 1 > > 0. Following the discussion in the
main body, in this case, the average cost also has ‡at segments to the left of the MES up to the point in which it reaches nL
                                                                                                                            L = :




                                                               8
2.1    Productivity Implications
In the following section we show that …rms that grow or shrink substantially do so by adding or dropping
management layers. These reorganizations also have consequences on the measured productivity of …rms.
In the model above quantity-based productivity of a …rm in producing the labor input can be measured
as the inverse of the average cost at constant factor prices; namely, Q ( ) =C (Q ( ) ; C ( ; 1) ; 1; 1) where
C (Q ( ) ; C ( ; w) ; Pm ; r) denotes the overall cost function of the …rm and Pm and r the price of materials
and capital. Note that Q ( ) denotes quantity produced and not revenue. Revenue-based productivity is
instead given by P ( ) Q ( ) =C (Q ( ) ; C ( ; 1) ; 1; 1) where P ( ) denotes the …rm’s output price.
    Quantity-based productivity increases with an increase in                when the …rm adds layers. The reason is
simply that any voluntary increase in layers is accompanied by an increase in the quantity produced, which
results in a lower average costs for the …rm when using the new organizational structure. The …rm is only
willing to add an extra layer of management, and hire more managers that do not generate production
possibilities at a higher cost, if it can use the new organization to produce more at a lower average and
marginal cost. Of course, under standard assumptions that lead to a downward sloping demand, the increase
in quantity will also decrease the price that consumers are willing to pay for the good. Note that, since the
…rm is choosing the level of       at which it switches layers, we know that pro…ts will be continuous in . This
implies that the increase in revenue has to be identical to the increase in variable costs. Given that, in the
presence of …xed production costs, total revenue has to be larger that variable costs in order for pro…ts to
be non-negative, the proportional increase in revenue will be smaller than the proportional increase in costs.
The result is a decline in revenue-based productivity.
    The logic above uses the following assumptions which are necessary for the proof of Proposition 1 below.
    Assumption 1: Firms face …xed production costs and their chosen price is an increasing function of
their marginal cost.

Proposition 1 Given Assumption 1, a) Quantity-based productivity increases with a marginal increase in
  when the …rm adds layers; b) Revenue-based productivity decreases with a marginal increase in                          when
the …rm adds layers.

Proof. Without loss of generality we …x factor prices and focus on the problem of one …rm. Denote
the pro…ts of a …rm with demand draw                  producing with L layers by            ( ; L) = P ( ; L) Q ( ; L)
C (Q ( ; L) ; CL ( ; 1) ; 1; 1)   F; where we denote by P ( ; L) ; and Q ( ; L) the price and the quantity
produced, respectively, given          and L; and by F the …xed production costs. To ease notation we let
C (Q ( ; L) ; CL )     C (Q ( ; L) ; CL ( ; 1) ; 1; 1) : Denote by     the level of demand at which the …rm is indif-
ferent between producing with L and L + 1 layers; namely,                  ;L =         ;L + 1       0:
At this point the average cost jumps to the level of the MES of the new optimal (and lower) number of layers. Depending
on the value of this will imply that the …rm might decide to drop more than one layer. If is low enough, the average cost
curve will be a step function with no smoothing declining segments. The lower is ; the easier it is for the …rm to produce less
quantity with more layers, and in the limit, as ! 0; …rms converge to L = 1: This case is counterfactual since we observe
that in most cases …rms expand by adding one layer at the time (see Section 4).


                                                              9
      We prove part a) of the proposition by contradiction. Consider …rst how quantity-based productivity
changes when a …rm at            experiences demand         + "; for " > 0 in…nitesimally small, and optimally decides
to add a    layer.9   Toward a contradiction, suppose that quantity-based productivity is lower when the …rm
adds a layer, i.e.
                                               Q      ;L + 1               Q ;L
                                                                                     :
                                       C Q         ; L + 1 ; CL+1       C Q ; L ; CL

In the remainder of the proof we show that there exists an alternative feasible choice of quantity, Q0                 ;L + 1 ,
that attains higher pro…ts than Q              ; L + 1 , therefore contradicting the optimality of Q            ; L + 1 . First,
note that— as shown in Proposition 2 of CRH— since the minimum average cost for a given number of layers
decreases with the number of layers, i.e.

                                                   C (Q; CL )                      C (Q; CL+1 )
                                    QL     min                   QL+1        min                ;
                                               Q      Q                      Q         Q

and the level of output that achieves this minimum increases with the number of layers, there exists a
quantity Q0       ;L + 1 > Q        ; L such that

                             Q      ;L + 1                 Q ;L                         Q0      ;L + 1
                                                                                                            :               (6)
                       C Q       ; L + 1 ; CL+1         C Q ; L ; CL               C   Q0    ; L + 1 ; CL+1

      Note that Q0       ;L + 1 > Q         ; L + 1 always since Q            ; L + 1 is in the decreasing segment of the
average cost curve, i.e. Q            ;L + 1        QL+1 . To see this, note that if the …rm had chosen a quantity
level associated with the same average cost but on the increasing segment of the average cost curve, i.e.
Q00     ;L + 1        QL+1 such that

                                         Q00      ;L + 1             Q ;L + 1
                                                                =                    ;
                                   C(Q00       ; L + 1 ; CL+1 )   C Q ; L + 1 ; CL+1

the …rm would have set lower prices and obtained lower pro…ts. Therefore, Q0                        ;L + 1 > Q      ;L + 1 .
      Since the marginal cost is increasing in quantity— as shown in Proposition 1 of CRH— if prices are
increasing in the marginal cost then P (Q0             ;L + 1 )       P (Q    ; L + 1 ). Combined with inequality (6), the
latter implies that

                             P (Q0 ; L + 1 )Q0 ; L + 1                P (Q ; L + 1 )Q ; L + 1
                                                                                              :
                                C Q0 ; L + 1 ; CL+1                      C Q ; L + 1 ; CL+1
Since the cost function— as shown in Proposition 1 of CRH— is strictly increasing in quantity, a fortiori

                              P (Q0      ; L + 1 )Q0     ;L + 1       C Q0         ; L + 1 ; CL+1
  9
      To ease notation we drop from the proof, from now on, ".




                                                                 10
                             P (Q    ; L + 1 )Q   ;L + 1      C Q     ; L + 1 ; CL+1 ;

i.e. the pro…ts associated with Q0     ; L + 1 are higher than those associated with Q      ; L + 1 . This is a
contradiction. Hence, quantity-based productivity is strictly higher after adding layers at . So we have
proven part a), namely, that quantity-based productivity increases with a marginal increase in       when the
…rm adds layers.
     We prove part b) of the proposition directly. Consider how revenue-based productivity changes when
the …rm with demand level       adds a layer. Since      ;L =        ;L + 1 ;

         P     ;L + 1 Q    ;L + 1    P    ;L Q     ;L = C Q         ; L + 1 ; CL+1   C Q    ; L ; CL :

Since        ;L + 1   0 and F > 0, P     ;L + 1 Q       ;L + 1 > C Q      ; L + 1 ; CL+1 which implies that

         P     ;L + 1 Q ;L + 1        P ;L Q       ;L        C Q    ; L + 1 ; CL+1 C Q ; L ; CL
                                                         <                                      ;
                    P ;L + 1 Q       ;L + 1                            C Q ; L + 1 ; CL+1

or
                                P ;L Q ;L      P ;L + 1 Q ;L + 1
                                             >                     :
                                C Q ; L ; CL    C Q ; L + 1 ; CL+1
Hence, we have proven part b), namely, that revenue-based productivity decreases with a marginal increase
in    when the …rm adds layers.

     This e¤ect in both types of productivity is illustrated in Figure 2 where we consider the e¤ect of a shock
in    that leads to a reorganization that adds one layer of management.
     In sum, …rms that add layers as a result of a marginal revenue shock increase their quantity discontinu-
ously. The new organization is more productive at the new scale, resulting in an increase in quantity-based
productivity, but the quantity expansion decreases price and revenue-based productivity. When …rms face
negative shocks that make them drop layers we expect the opposite e¤ects.

2.1.1    Some Portraits of Actual Reorganizations

The mechanism described above is naturally an abstraction of reality. To illustrate the way in which …rms
actually reorganize in the data, we present a series of examples of …rms that go through this process of
reorganization. We choose a variety of examples that includes …rms in many industries, some that grow
and some that decline. We start with the example of a single-product …rm producing aluminium cookware
(anonymous given con…dentiality requirements). It increased its workforce over time and, in particular,
by 27 percent between 1996 and 1998. In the same period exports increased by 170%, and went from
representing 10% of the …rms sales in 1996 to 16% in 1998. Between 1997 and 1998 the …rm reorganized
and added a layer of management.
     Our …rm had a layer of workers and a layer of managers until 1997 and it added a new layer of man-


                                                        11
                 Figure 2: Quantity and Revenue Productivity Changes as a Firm Adds Layers
                    Quantity-based Productivity                                 Revenue-based Productivity




                                                                                                         Jump




                                              Jump




                          Demand shifter                                             Demand shifter



agement in 1998 (so it went from 1 layer to 2 layers of management). Figure 3 plots its quantity-based
and revenue-based productivity around the reorganization (we plot 3 alternative measures of revenue-based
productivity).10 The pattern in the …gure is typical in our data. The year in which the …rm reorganizes its
quantity-based productivity clearly jumps up and its revenue-based productivity declines. In contrast, it is
hard to see any signi…cant pattern in the changes in these measures of productivity for the year before or
the year after adding the extra layer.
       Figure 4 shows the corresponding levels of output, prices and revenue for the same …rm and time period.
The graph shows how, in fact, the increase in quantity-based productivity is accompanied by an increase
in quantity, a fairly large decrease in price, and a small increase in revenue. These changes align exactly
with our story in which the increase in quantity-based productivity generated by the reorganization (that
adds a layer of management) leads to an increase in quantity, a lower marginal cost that leads to a decline
in price, and a correspondingly muted increase in revenue and decline in revenue-based productivity. Note
that quantity in this …rms grows not only at the time of the reorganization but before and after it as well.
This is consistent with a …rm that is progressively moving toward the quantity threshold in which it decides
to reorganize. In these other years, demand and productivity shocks do not trigger a reorganization and so
we do not see the corresponding decline in price.
       One issue with the previous example is that we do not know what caused the growth of this …rm.
Fortunately, our sample covers the period in which China entered the WTO. So we now present two more
examples of …rms producing in the “Textile and Apparel” industry. The reorganization of these …rms was
arguably triggered by an exogenous event, namely, the reductions in quotas that resulted from China’s entry
into the WTO.11
  10
    We describe the precise methodology and data used to measure both types of productivity in detail in Section 4.
  11
    As a consequence of China joining the WTO a number of quotas that were imposed at the EU-level on Chinese imports— as
well as on imports from other non-WTO countries— were removed. Later on, in Section 4.3.1, we describe in greater detail how
we identify the shock and the implications that this shock had for the entire industry.



                                                            12
                Figure 3: An Example of a Firm that Adds Layers: Productivity Measures (logs)




                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                        .2
                                        0
                           Other Productivity Measures




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Revenue Labor Productivity
                                                 −.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                 −.4




                                                                                             Until here: 2 Layers                       From here: 3 Layers
                                        −.6
                                        −.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                             1996                                    1997                                       1998                                        1999
                                                                                                                           Year


                                                                    Quantity−based: Mulama

                                                                    Revenue−based: OLS TFP                  Revenue−based: Wooldridge TFP              Revenue−based: Revenue Labor Prod.




                 Figure 4: An Example of a Firm that Adds Layers: Output, Price, and Revenue
                                            16




                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                             Until here: 2 Layers                       From here: 3 Layers




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                      15.5
                             Revenue or Quantity Sold




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Price
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                            15




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                            14.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                             1996                                    1997                                       1998                                        1999
                                                                                                                           Year


                                                                                              Revenue (log)               Quantity Sold (log)            Price (log)




      The …rst …rm we analyze is one that was hit hard by the (quota) shock and that we already referred to in
the introduction. The …rm produces “Knitted and crocheted pullovers, cardigans, and similar articles”(Nace
1772). Between 2002 and 2005, as a result of the quota reduction, it downsizes rapidly. Table 1 illustrates
the organization of the …rm before and after the shock.12 Labor force goes down from 37 to 10 employees.
 12
      As we describe later, throughout the paper we use the variable qualif (see Table A.1 in Appendix A) to map occupations


                                                                                                                           13
                        Table 1: Textile and Apparel Firm Reorganization, Nace 1772 Example
                                                    Firm with 3 Layers (2004)
                           Occupation                            Layer 0   Layer 1                                         Layer 2   Layer 3
                           Managers                                                                                           1         2
                           Technicians and Assoc. Professionals               1
                           Clerks                                   2
                           Crafts Workers                          15                                                        4
                           Plant and Machine Operators             11
                           Elementary Occupations                   1
                                                    Firm with 2 Layers (2005)
                           Managers
                           Technicians and Assoc. Professionals               1                                              1
                           Clerks                                             1
                           Crafts Workers                           4
                           Plant and Machine Operators              1                                                        1
                           Elementary Occupations                   1
                           N o te s: O c c u p a tio n s c o rre sp o n d to IS C O -8 8 1 -d ig it m a jo r g ro u p s.




The quantity sold by the …rm declines by 50 percent, value added by 84 percent, and prices increase by 30
percent. Imported inputs double. We see that the …rm reorganizes and decreases the number of management
layers from 3 to 2. Accordingly, and as expected, the …rm reduces quantity-based productivity by 53 percent
and revenue-based productivity increases by 9.2 percent.
    The reorganization of the …rm takes a natural form. It …res the 3 managers it used to have (two in
“production and operations” and one in “sales and marketing”).13 In lower layers, the …rm …res its “…bre
preparers”and “textile, leather pattern-makers and cutters”and now focuses on “sewers and embroiderers”
(reduces the total number but hires a new one). Similarly, it …res a variety of machine operators to focus
exclusively on “sewing-machine operators”. It also …res the one designer it used to employ. The result
is the elimination of the top layer, and reductions in employment in the bottom layers. Essentially, the
…rm focuses on its top tasks and substitutes some of the others by producing less and importing more
intermediate goods. Even though the …rm is shrinking tremendously, the workforce that remains now earns
more, as our model predicts, with increases in median wages of 73 percent in layer 2, 33 percent in layer 1
and 3 percent in layer 0.
    Our second example of a …rm a¤ected by the quota is a larger …rm producing “Woven fabrics” (Nace
1720). This …rm also goes through a substantial downsizing from 1999 to 2000. Quantity sold decreases
by 46 percent, value added by 30 percent, but prices rise by 13 percent. In the previous example we saw
to layers. However, for illustration purposes, while describing the reorganization of the …rm we use the occupational variable
pro…ssão (which is built following ISCO-88). This variable allows us to talk about more concrete and detailed occupations like
“Sewers and embroiderers”.
   13
      Note that within each of the broad occupational categories that we present in the table there are several subcategories of
occupations that can map to di¤erent layers. In Appendix A we present in greater detail how we map occupations to layers
based on the tasks performed and skill requirements (qualif). For example, in 2004 the …rm has two clerks, a statistical and
…nance clerk and a stock clerk. The statistical and …nance clerk has a qualif of 60 which corresponds to semi-skilled professionals
(with higher numbers representing lower skilled employees). Based on this qualif we assign it to layer 0. The stock clerk has
a qualif of 71 which corresponds to non-skilled professionals. Based on this qualif we assign it to layer 0 as well. The stock
clerk is “…red” in 2005. The remaining statistical and …nance clerk changes qualif from 60 to 51 which corresponds to skilled
professional. Based on this qualif we assign it to layer 1. That is, this clerk got a promotion to a more demanding job.



                                                                                          14
                          Table 2: Textile and Apparel Firm Reorganization, Nace 1720 Example
                                                     Firm with 3 Layers (1999)
                            Occupation                            Layer 0   Layer 1                                         Layer 2   Layer 3
                            Professionals                                                                                                3
                            Technicians and Assoc. Professionals     1          5                                             2
                            Clerks                                  14         10                                             2
                            Crafts Workers                          17
                            Plant and Machine Operators             71         2                                              1
                            Elementary Occupations                  17
                                                     Firm with 2 Layers (2000)
                            Professionals                                                                                     2
                            Technicians and Assoc. Professionals     1          5                                             2
                            Clerks                                  16         8                                              1
                            Crafts Workers                          15
                            Plant and Machine Operators             49         3                                              1
                            Elementary Occupations                  17
                            N o te s: O c c u p a tio n s c o rre sp o n d to IS C O -8 8 1 -d ig it m a jo r g ro u p s.




that the …rm shrank by focusing on its core activities. In contrast, this …rm reduces its product scope.
It specializes in cotton fabrics (its core product) and drops the production of synthetic fabrics. This is
achieved with a reduction in the number of layers of management from 3 to 2, and a 46 percent smaller
labor force. Correspondingly, the …rm’s quantity-based productivity decreases by 19 percent but its revenue-
based productivity increases by 30 percent. Table 2 presents the organization of the …rm before and after
the reorganization.
      The …rm reduces the number of workers in the lowest layer by …ring the workers that are not involved
in the production process of the core product. The …rm …res its “Fibre-preparing-, spinning- and winding-
machine operators”, “Weaving- and knitting-machine operators”, “Bleaching-, dyeing- and cleaning-machine
operators”, and “Steam-engine and boiler operators”. In addition, the …rm reduces the number of designers
(“Decorators and commercial designers”) from three, to one, to none within three years. Regarding the top
layers of the …rm, we see clear changes in its leading structure. In 1999 the top layer of the hierarchy includes
3 top management business professionals, specialized in accounting. In 2000 the …rm drops the top layer.
Layer 2, the new top layer, now focusses on dealing with less specialized tasks, including two middle man-
agement business professionals, and two administrative secretaries and related associate professionals— to
"implement and support the communication, documentation and internal managerial coordination activi-
ties of an organizational unit to assist the head of unit" (ISCO 3411). As a result of the restructuring, the
median wage in layer 0 goes up, by 7.5 percent, while in layers 1 and 2 they do not change much (reductions
of 1.4 percent in median wages but an increase of 1 percent in the mean wages of layer 0).
      These cases exempli…ed well the way in which the abstract mechanism highlighted by our theory works
in practice. However, one concerned is that the way the restructuring took place could be particular to the
textile and apparel industry and not present in other industries. Therefore, we …nish this section by brie‡y
presenting two other examples: one of a negative shock to a …rm in the footwear industry and one of a
positive shock to a …rm in the cork industry (were Portugal is a main producer).14 In these cases we have
 14
      Footwear and cork are two traditional Portuguese industries. For istance, footwear represents about 6 percent of Portuguese


                                                                                           15
                           Table 3: Footware Firm Reorganization, Nace 19301352 Example
                                                   Firm with 3 Layers (1998)
                          Occupation                            Layer 0   Layer 1                                              Layer 2      Layer 3
                          Managers                                                                                                             1
                          Technicians and Assoc. Professionals               1
                          Clerks                                             1                                                                1
                          Crafts Workers                          56         1                                                      1
                          Elementary Occupations                   9
                                                   Firm with 2 Layers (1999)
                          Managers
                          Technicians and Assoc. Professionals               1
                          Clerks                                             1
                          Crafts Workers                          47                                                                2
                          Elementary Occupations                   7
                          N o te s: O c c u p a tio n s c o rre sp o n d to IS C O -8 8 1 -d ig it m a jo r g ro u p s.




                                    Table 4: Cork Firm Reorganization, Nace 2052 Example
                                                                      Firm with 1 Layer (2004)
                                            Occupation                  Layer 0   Layer 1   Layer 2                            Layer 3
                                            Managers
                                            Clerks                                  1
                                            Crafts Workers                8         1
                                                                     Firm with 2 Layers (2005)
                                            Managers                                                              2
                                            Clerks                                               1
                                            Crafts Workers                     9
                                            N o te s: O c c u p a tio n s c o rre sp o n d to IS C O -8 8 1 -d ig it m a jo r g ro u p s.




not identi…ed the exact source of the shock, but we observe similar, theory-consistent, behavior of …rms as
they expand or contract.
    Consider a …rm producing “Women’s town footwear with leather uppers” (Nace 19301352) that goes
through a downsizing process from 1998 to 1999. The …rm experienced a reduction in value added of 10
percent, reduced its labor force from 71 to 58 workers, and switched from 3 to 2 layers of management.
Accordingly, the …rm’s quantity-based productivity decreases by 17 percent, its revenue-based productivity
increases by 9 percent, quantity sold decreases by 24 percent, and prices rise by 12 percent. Table 3 presents
the organizational structure of the …rm in 1998— the last year the …rm has three layers of management— and
in 1999— when the …rm has 2 layers of management. The …rm reorganizes by simplifying its management
structure. The new organization has neither a manager nor a statistical and …nance clerk. The …rm also
reduces the number of shoe makers (identi…ed in the table as crafts workers). As a result of the restructuring,
the median wage rises in all the pre-existing layers (by 3 percent in layer 2, 23 percent in layer 1, and 8
percent in layer 0).
    Our …nal example studies a small …rm producing “Manufacture of articles of cork, straw and plaiting
materials”(Nace 2052) which goes through a growth spell between 2004 and 2005, experiencing a 3 percent
increase in value added. The …rm started with one layer of management and added another layer. Its
labor force goes from 9 to 12 workers. As expected, the …rm’s quantity-based productivity increases by
exports in the 1993-2009 period, while Portugal is the biggest producer of cork in the world.


                                                                                         16
6 percent, its revenue-based productivity decreases by 29 percent, quantity sold increases by 28 percent,
and prices decreases by 6 percent. Table 4 portraits the organizational structure of the …rm before and
after the reorganization. The structure of the …rm remains simple, with the only addition of a layer of
management that includes two production and operations department managers. The small reinforcement
of layer 0, where the number of craft workers— all of them "wood treaters"— rises from 8 to 9, hides a more
substantial churning, with two wood treater leaving the …rm and three new ones entering. As a result of
the restructuring, the median wage decreases in all the pre-existing layers (by 1.4 percent in layer 1, and 7
percent in layer 0).
         The examples above are illustrative, we believe, of the di¤erent forms that reorganizations take in
practice. Sometimes …rms focus or expand the set of production tasks performed, sometimes they restrict
or increase the set of products produced, and sometimes they simply add or take away managerial structure
to do less of more of the same. In all these cases, however, we …nd that the behavior of these …rms exhibits
the patterns we expect, even though these patterns are quite complicated and multidimensional. Not only
do the …rms reshu- e their labor force as predicted, but the wages they pay, as well as the implications for
both types of productivity, are consistent with our mechanism. Of course, they are some exceptions, so the
rest of the paper is dedicated to present systematic evidence of the ubiquitousness of these patterns as …rms
reorganize.


3         Data Description and Processing
Our data set is built from three data sources: a matched employer-employee panel data set, a …rm-level
balance sheet data set, and a …rm-product-level data set containing information on the production of manu-
factured goods. Our data covers the manufacturing sector of continental Portugal for the years 1995-2005.15
As explained below in detail, the matched employer-employee data virtually covers the universe of …rms,
while both the balance sheet data set and the production data set only cover a sample of …rms. We build
two nested samples. The largest of them sources information from the matched employer-employee data
set for the subset of …rms for which we also have balance sheet data. We refer to this sample as Sample 1.
It contains enough information to calculate measures of revenue-based productivity at the …rm-year-level.
The second sample covers a further subset of …rms for which we also have production data. This data is
necessary to calculate quantity-based productivity at the …rm-product-year-level. We refer to this sample as
Sample 2. All our revenue-based productivity results below hold similarly well for both samples, although
we only present results using Sample 2 for brevity.
         Employer-employee data come from Quadros de Pessoal (henceforth, QP), a data set made available by
the Ministry of Employment of Portugal, drawing on a compulsory annual census of all …rms in Portugal
that employ at least one worker.16 Currently, the data set collects data on about 350,000 …rms and 3 million
    15
     Information for the year 2001 for the matched employer-employee dataset was not collected. Hence, our sample excludes
the year 2001 (see Appendix A).
  16
     Public administration and non-market services are excluded. Quadros de Pessoal has been used by, amongst others,


                                                           17
employees. Reported data cover the …rm itself, each of its plants, and each of its workers. Each …rm and each
worker entering the database are assigned a unique, time-invariant identifying number which we use to follow
…rms and workers over time. Variables available in the data set include the …rm’s location, industry, total
employment, and sales. The worker-level data cover information on all personnel working for the reporting
…rms in a reference week in October of each year. They include information on occupation, earnings, and
hours worked (normal and overtime). The information on earnings includes the base wage (gross pay for
normal hours of work), seniority-indexed components of pay, other regularly paid components, overtime
work, and irregularly paid components. It does not include employers’contributions to social security.17
    The second data set is Central de Balanços (henceforth, CB), a repository of yearly balance sheet data
for non …nancial …rms in Portugal. Prior to 2005 the sample was biased towards large …rms. However, the
value added and sales coverage rate was high. For instance, in 2003 …rms in the CB data set accounted for
88.8 percent of the national accounts total of non-…nancial …rms’ sales. Information available in the data
set includes a …rm sales, material assets, costs of materials, and third-party supplies and services.
    The third data set is the Inquérito Anual à Produção Industrial (henceforth, PC), a data set made
available by Statistics Portugal (INE), containing information on sales and volume sold for each …rm-
product pair for a sample of …rms with at least 20 employees covering at least 90 percent of the value of
aggregate production. From PC we use information on the volume and value of a …rm’s production. The
volume is recorded in units of measurement (number of items, kilograms, liters) that are product-speci…c
while the value is recorded in current euros. From the raw data it is possible to construct di¤erent measures
of the volume and value of a …rm’s production. For the sake of this project we use the volume and value
corresponding to a …rm’s sales of its products. This means that we exclude products produced internally and
to be used in other production processes within the …rm as well as products produced for other …rms, using
inputs provided by these other …rms. The advantage of using this de…nition is that it nicely corresponds
to the cost of materials coming from the balance sheet data. For example, the value of products produced
internally and to be used in other production processes within the …rm is part of the cost of materials while
products produced for other …rms, using inputs provided by these other …rms, is neither part of the cost
of materials nor part of a …rm’s sales from the PC data. We aggregate products at the 2-digits-unit of
measurement pairs and split multi-products …rms into several single-product …rms using products revenue
shares as weights (see Appendix A).18
Blanchard and Portugal (2001) to compare the U.S. and Portuguese labor markets in terms of unemployment duration and
worker ‡ows; by Cabral and Mata (2003) to study the evolution of the …rm size distribution; by Mion and Opromolla (2014)
to show that the export experience acquired by managers in previous …rms leads their current …rm towards higher export
performance, and commands a sizeable wage premium for the manager.
   17
      The Ministry of Employment implements several checks to ensure that a …rm that has already reported to the database is
not assigned a di¤erent identi…cation number. Similarly, each worker also has a unique identi…er, based on a worker’s social
security number. The administrative nature of the data and their public availability at the workplace— as required by the
law— imply a high degree of coverage and reliability. It is well known that employer-reported wage information is subject to
less measurement error than worker-reported data. The public availability requirement facilitates the work of the services of
the Ministry of Employment that monitor the compliance of …rms with the law.
   18
      In our analysis, we also experimented with using the sample of single-product …rms only. Results, available upon request,



                                                              18
3.1    Occupational Structure
To recover the occupational structure at the …rm level we exploit information from the matched employer-
employee data set. Each worker, in each year, has to be assigned to a category following a (compulsory)
classi…cation of workers de…ned by the Portuguese law.19 Classi…cation is based on the tasks performed
and skill requirements, and each category can be considered as a level in a hierarchy de…ned in terms of
increasing responsibility and task complexity. Table A.1 in Appendix A contains more detail about the
exact construction of these categories.
    On the basis of the hierarchical classi…cation and taking into consideration the actual wage distribution,
we partition the available categories into management layers. We assign “Top executives (top management)”
to occupation 3; “Intermediary executives (middle management)”and “Supervisors, team leaders”to occu-
pation 2; “Higher-skilled professionals”and some “Skilled professionals”to occupation 1; and the remaining
employees, including “Skilled professionals”, “Semi-skilled professionals”, “Non-skilled professionals”, and
“Apprenticeship” to occupation 0.
    We then translate the number of di¤erent occupations present in a …rm into layers of management. A
…rm reporting c occupational categories will be said to have L = c             1 layers of management: hence, in our
data we will have …rms spanning from 0 to 3 layers of management (as in CMRH). In terms of layers within
a …rm we do not keep track of the speci…c occupational categories but simply rank them. Hence a …rm with
occupational categories 2 and 0 will have 1 layer of management, and its organization will consist of a layer
0 corresponding to some skilled and non-skilled professionals, and a layer 1 corresponding to intermediary
executives and supervisors.20
    Table 5 presents some basic statistics for Sample 1 for the ten years spanned by our data. The data
exhibits some clear trends over time. In particular, the number of …rms declines and …rms tend to become
larger. In all our regressions we control for time and industry …xed e¤ects.

3.2    Portuguese Production Hierarchies: Basic Facts
In this section we reproduce some of the main results in CMRH for France using our data for Portugal in
Sample 1. We focus here on the main …ndings and, for brevity, we relegate all the tables and …gures with
the exact results to Appendix B.
    Firms with di¤erent numbers of layers are di¤erent. If we group …rms by their number of management
layers, …rms with more layers are larger in terms of value added, hours, and that they pay on average higher
wages (see Table B-1). In fact, the distributions of value added, employment, and the hourly wage by layer
are qualitatively identical and quantitatively very similar.
  19
     Following CMRH we use occupational categories to identify layers of management. In the case of French …rms, CMRH use
the PCS classi…cation. In this study we use the Portuguese classi…cation (Decreto Lei 121/78 of July 2nd 1978) which is not
the ISCO.
  20
     One potential concern with this methodology to measure the number of layers is that many …rms will have layers with
occupations that are not adjacent in the rank. This does not seem to be a large problem. More than 75% of …rms have adjacent
layers.



                                                            19
                                             Table 5: Firm-level data description by year
                                                                                                 Mean
                                  Year        Firms         Value Added                Hours        Wage                # of layers
                                  1996        8,061               1,278               102,766           4.37                  1.25
                                  1997        8,797               1,227                91,849           4.48                  1.20
                                  1998        7,884               1,397                96,463           4.81                  1.28
                                  1999        7,053               1,598               105,003           4.93                  1.31
                                  2000        4,875               2,326               139,351           5.13                  1.62
                                  2002        4,594               2,490               125,392           5.63                  1.62
                                  2003        4,539               2,363               124,271           5.65                  1.70
                                  2004        4,610               2,389               124,580           5.82                  1.74
                                  2005        3,962               2,637               129,868           6.01                  1.76
                                  N o te s: Va lu e a d d e d in 2 0 0 5 e u ro s. Wa g e is ave ra g e h o u rly w a g e in 2 0 0 5 e u ro s.




for …rms with more layers are shifted to the right and exhibit higher variance (see Figures B-1 to B-3).
Thus, these results underscore our claim that the concept of layers we use is economically meaningful.
      Our de…nition of layers of management is supposed to capture the hierarchical structure of the …rm. So it
is important to verify that the implied hierarchies are pyramidal in the sense that lower layers employ more
hours and pay lower hourly wages. The implied hierarchical structure of …rms is hierarchical in the majority
of cases (Table B-2). The implied ranking holds for 76% of the cases when comparing any individual pair of
layers. As for compensation, employees in lower layers command lower wages in the vast majority of cases
(Table B-3). For example, the proportion of …rms that exhibits a hierarchical ranking for any given bilateral
comparison between layers is also greater than 75%. We conclude that, although with some exceptions, our
de…nition of layers does a good job in capturing the hierarchical structure of …rms.
      Our primary goal is to study the endogenous productivity responses of …rm that reorganize. So it is
important to establish how often they do so.21 In a given year about half the total number of …rms keep the
same number of layers, with the number increasing to 70% for …rms with 4 layers (3 layers of management).
Most of the …rms that do not reorganize just exit, with the percentage of exiting …rms declining with the
number of layers. About 12% of …rms in a layer reorganize by adding a layer, and about the same number
downscale and drop one. Overall, as in France, there seem to be many reorganizations in the data. Every
year around 20% of …rms add and drop occupations, and therefore restructure their labor force (the number
is lower for …rms with 3 layers of management since, given that the maximum number of management layers
is 3, they can only drop layers).
      A reorganization is accompanied with many other …rm-level changes. To see this, we divided …rms
depending on whether they add, do not change, or drop layers, and present measured changes in the total
number of hours, number of hours normalized by the number of hours in the top layer, value added, and
average wages. First, we …nd that …rms that either expand or contract substantially do so by reorganizing.
This is the case both in terms of hours and value added. Furthermore, changes in either hours or value added
seem to be symmetric, but with opposite sign, for …rms that add or drop layers. After detrending, …rms
that add (drop) layers tend to pay higher (lower) average wages. However, once we focus on average wages
 21
      Table B-4 presents a transition matrix across layers.


                                                                                     20
in preexisting layers wages decline (increase), as the theory predicts. So, in …rms that add layers, average
wages increase because the agents in the new layer earn more than the average but workers in preexisting
layers earn less as their knowledge is now less useful (as found for France in CMRH).22
         The results above can be further re…ned by looking at layer-level outcomes for …rms that expand without
reorganizing and …rms that expand as a result of a reorganization. The theory predicts that …rms that expand
but keep the same number of layers will increase employment and wages in all layers. In contrast, …rms
that expand and add layers, will increase employment in all layers but will decrease wages (and according
to the theory, knowledge) in all preexisting layers. That is, adding a layer allows the …rm to economize on
the knowledge of all the preexisting layers. Hence, we expect the elasticity of normalized hours (hours at
each layer relative to the top layer) and wages, respectively, to value added for …rms that do not add layers
should be positive. This prediction is con…rmed for all elasticities except for one case where the estimate is
not signi…cant (see Tables B-6 and B-7). We conclude that …rms that grow without reorganizing increase
employment and wages in all layers.
         Adding layers should lead to increases in employment but declines in wages in all preexisting layers.
These implications are veri…ed for all transitions in all layers except for two non-signi…cant results for …rms
that start with zero layers of management (see Table B-8). Similar to the results in CMRH for France, our
estimates for Portugal show that …rms that add layers in fact concentrate workers’knowledge, as proxied
by their wages, on the top layers. This is one of the consequences of a …rm reorganization and supports
empirically the underlying mechanism that, we hypothesize, leads to an increase (decrease) in quantity-based
productivity as a result of a reorganization that adds (drops) layers.


4         Changes in Productivity
We now present our methodology to measure changes in revenue-based and quantity-based productivity
induced by …rm reorganization. The measurement of revenue productivity has received a lot of attention
in the industrial organization literature, and so we expand standard methodologies to account for the role
of layers. Measuring quantity-based productivity is more involved and requires more detailed data. We
address each measurement exercise in turn.
         In both cases, once recovered productivity, we analyze the link between productivity (outcome variable)
and changes in layers (explanatory variable). In doing so we always control for lagged productivity because
it is well known that productivity is highly persistent over time. We use sequences of …rm-years with
either one or zero changes in layers. The underlying idea is to compare the productivity of …rms that
are, for example, increasing the number of layers both among them as well as with …rms that are not
changing the number of layers. In the former case, we obtain identi…cation of the impact on productivity
via comparing …rms increasing the number of layers before and after the change. In the latter case we
also get identi…cation from comparing the productivity of …rms changing layers with those that do not. To
    22
         All these results are presented in Table B-5.


                                                         21
better isolate reorganization events and ease comparability of an otherwise complex structure we break …rms
into sequences that correspond to at most one change in the hierarchical structure. More speci…cally, we
de…ne a sequence of type L          L0 as the series of years in which a …rm has the same consecutively observed
number of management layers L plus the adjacent series of years in which a …rm has the same consecutively
observed number of management layers L0 . For example, a …rm that we observed all years between 1996
and 2000 and that has zero layers in 1996, 1997, and 2000 and one layer in 1998 and 1999 would have two
sequences: A 0-1 sequence (1996 to 1999) as well as a 1-0 sequence (1998 to 2000). Firms that never change
layers in our sample form a constant-layer sequence. We then separately analyze sequences characterized by
an increasing, decreasing or constant number of layers as well as all sequences together. In particular, we
use the productivity corresponding to such sequences as dependent variable and run both basic OLS and
…rm-product-sequence …xed e¤ects regressions.23 When considering …xed e¤ects, we provide below results
based on the within estimator as well as on the dynamic panel data system GMM estimator developed in
Arellano and Bover (1995).24 In Appendix G, we revisit all our results using an alternative grouping of
…rms based on their number of layers the …rst time we see them reorganize in the data.25
    In all OLS speci…cations we use a battery of time-varying industry/product a¢ liation dummies as well
as time dummies. We use time dummies in …xed e¤ects speci…cations. Throughout, standard errors are
clustered at the …rm-level. Bootstrapped standard errors are virtually identical to …rm-clustered ones.

4.1    Revenue-based Productivity
The purpose of this section is to study the relationship between organization and revenue-based productivity.
We start by showing that, for essentially all industries, adding (dropping) layers of management is associated
with decreases (increases) in revenue productivity if we use simply value-added per worker, a measure of
revenue-based productivity that does not depend on our structural assumptions. We then proceed to employ
measures of revenue-based productivity that are much more re…ned.
   23
      To be more speci…c, if a …rm sells two products and its time hierarchy pro…le is characterized by two types of increasing
sequences we break— as indicated in Section 3— the …rm into two single-product …rms and assign to each of these two …rms
a speci…c identi…er. At the same time within each …rm-product identi…er we distinguish sequences depending on their L L0
type by allowing for …rm-product-sequence type …xed e¤ects. In our analysis, we also experimented with using the sample of
single-product …rms only. Results, available upon request, are qualitatively identical and quantitatively very similar.
   24
      More speci…cally, we implement this with the xtabond2 command in Stata.
   25
      The second approach groups …rms according to the number of layers (0, 1, 2 or 3) the …rm has in the year of the …rst
observed reorganization. We then follow …rms over time and relate changes in the hierarchical structure to the evolution of …rm
productivity. Appendix F presents results for each of these groups using either OLS or …rm-product …xed e¤ects. Again, for
the latter case we provide both within and dynamic panel system GMM results. Crucially, both approaches lead to very similar
conclusions and magnitudes. One issue with this second approach is that …rms within each of the four groups might be both
increasing and decreasing the number of layers several times over the observed time span. In contrast, in the …rst approach,
that we present in the main text, we focus on single events and distinguish more explicitly reorganizations leading to an increase
or decrease in the number of layers.




                                                               22
                           4.1.1                                The E¤ect of Organization Across Industries: Some Simple Statistics

                           The arguments and examples presented so far indicate that when a …rm receives a positive (negative) shock
                           that makes it reorganize by adding (dropping) layers, its revenue-based productivity decreases (increases).
                           Note, however, that this is the expected response only for …rms that reorganize by changing the number
                           of management layers. Firms that receive similar shocks but do not change layers, do not expand as much
                           as a result of a positive shock, which implies that the price response is more muted and so revenue-based
                           productivity increases due to the direct e¤ect of the reduction in costs. We now show evidence of these
                           patterns at the sectoral level.
                                               Figure 5 Panel a shows the change in value-added per worker between 1996 and 2005 by industry if we
                           condition on …rms that do not reorganize. Clearly, for …rms that grow in terms of sales value-added per
                           worker increases as well. In contrast, …rms that experience a decrease in total sales see their value-added
                           per worker decline. The …gure shows that all 19 industries exhibit this relationship. This is not surprising,
                           after all revenue productivity and sales are positively related in many theories of the …rm.

                                                                                                                                               Figure 5: Reorganization and Value added per Worker
                                                                                     a) Firms that do not change layers, by industry, 1996-2005                                                                                                                                                     b) Firms that change layers, by industry, 1996-2005
                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .6
Log change in value-added per worker




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Log change in value-added per worker
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .4
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
  -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2                 -.4
                    -.2



                                                s


                                                          s

                                                                 rel


                                                                                r

                                                                                           rk


                                                                                                  r

                                                                                                           ing


                                                                                                                      als


                                                                                                                                   s

                                                                                                                                             llic

                                                                                                                                                      tals


                                                                                                                                                                                                  tal


                                                                                                                                                                                                     .

                                                                                                                                                                                                 ery


                                                                                                                                                                                                  m.


                                                                                                                                                                                                   tr.

                                                                                                                                                                                                 les


                                                                                                                                                                                                  m.


                                                                                                                                                                                                     r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rel


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ork


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ing


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            als


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   llic

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tals


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tal


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ery


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tr.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        les


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                                                                                               ipm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ipm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ipm
                                                                             ea




                                                                                                pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                the




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      pe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the
                                             ge


                                                      tile




                                                                                                                                stic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ge


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      stic
                                                                                      co




                                                                                                                                                                                               ns




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ns
                                                                                                                                                                                             Me




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Me
                                                              pa




                                                                                                                                                                                              uip




                                                                                                                                                                                              uip




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    uip
                                                                                                                                          eta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                eta
                                                                                                                    ic




                                                                                                                                                                                             hic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hic
                                                                                                         sh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sh
                                                                                                                                                                                             hin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hin
                                                                           tw




                                                                                                Pa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tw




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pa
                                                                                                                                                    Me




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Me
                                        era




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 era
                                                                                                                                                                                           &O




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 &O
                                                       x




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x
                                                                                                                                                                                            qu




                                                                                                                                                                                            nI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nI
                                                                                                                 em


                                                                                                                             Pla




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       em


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pla
                                                                                       d
                                                              Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ap
                                                    Te




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Te
                                                                                                      bli




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            bli
                                                                        foo




                                                                                                                                                                                           Eq




                                                                                                                                                                                           Eq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       foo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Eq
                                                                                                                                         n-m




                                                                                                                                                                                          Ve




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n-m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ve
                                                                                    an




                                                                                                                                                                 d




                                                                                                                                                                                          ac




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ac
                                                                                                                                                                                        &E




                                                                                                                                                                                        isio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              isio
                                        ev




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ev
                                                                                                                                                  sic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        sic
                                                                                                                                                             ate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ate
                                                                                                      Pu


                                                                                                                 Ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ch
                                                                                                                            &




                                                                                                                                                                                      ure




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ure
                                                                                                                                                                                      lm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            lm
                                                                                                                                                                                       ns




                                                                                                                                                                                      ort




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ort
                                                                                                                                                                                      tor




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tor
                                       &b




                                                                         &

                                                                                 od




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    od
                                                                                                                                       No




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             No
                                                                                                                                                Ba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                    rec




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rec
                                                                                                                         er




                                                                                                                                                           bric




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               er




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bric
                                                                                                                                                                                    ry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ry
                                                                                                                                                                                   tio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tio
                                                                      er




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               er
                                                                                                                                                                                  ica




                                                                                                                                                                                   sp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ica




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sp
                                                                                                                                                                                 Mo




                                                                                                                                                                                 rnit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rnit
                                                                              Wo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wo
                                                                                                                        bb




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              bb
                                                                                                                                                                               ine




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ine
                                od




                                                                                                                                                                             &P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         od




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &P
                                                                  ath




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ath
                                                                                                                                                                              ica




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ica
                                                                                                                                                                             ran




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ran
                                                                                                                                                        Fa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fa
                                                                                                                                                                             ctr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ctr
                                                                                                                                                                             Fu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fu
                                                                                                                      Ru




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ru
                              Fo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fo
                                                                                                                                                                           ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ch
                                                               Le




                                                                                                                                                                          un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Le




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                un
                                                                                                                                                                        Ele




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ele
                                                                                                                                                                         rT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rT
                                                                                                                                                                          al




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                al
                                                                                                                                                                  Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ma
                                                                                                                                                                    mm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mm
                                                                                                                                                                      dic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dic
                                                                                                                                                                      he




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            he
                                                                                                                                                                  Me




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Me
                                                                                                                                                                   Ot




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ot
                                                                                                                                                                  Co




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Co




                                                                                                     Increase sales                                                    Decrease sales                                                                                                                 Increase layers                                                        Decrease layers



                                               Figure 5 Panel b presents again the change in value-added per worker but now for …rms that increase
                           or decrease the number of layers (transition across layers). As predicted by our theory, but perhaps more
                           surprising in light of the previous literature, in this case we see that …rms that increase layers tend to
                           decrease value-added per worker, and vice-versa for …rms that drop layers. This is the case for all industries
                           except “Communications Equipment”, “Medical and Precision Instruments” and “Other Transportation
                           Equipment” where some of the e¤ects are not signi…cant. The switch in sign depending on whether a …rm
                           reorganizes or not is remarkable, given that increases (decreases) in sales are highly correlated with increases
                           (decreases) in layers.




                                                                                                                                                                                                         23
4.1.2      The E¤ects on Revenue TFP: Structural Estimation

These …rst set of results should help bring con…dence about the response of revenue-based productivity when
…rms reorganize. Yet, there are two problems related to explicitly accounting for the choice of organization
into productivity estimations. The …rst one is endogeneity: the …rm chooses the optimal organizational
structure also based on productivity shocks. The second one is measurement: the number of workers in a …rm
and the total wage bill are observables in standard datasets but the amount of problem-solving managerial
knowledge leveraging production capacity (our labor input O) is typically not observable. Furthermore, two
…rms with identical total wage bill and number of workers will have di¤erent labor inputs O depending on
their organizational structure (number of layers and knowledge within each layer). In what follows we show
how to solve these two problems in the context of revenue productivity estimations.
   The Cobb-Douglas production function for …rm i in period t introduced in equation (1) can be expressed
in logs as
                                    qit = ait +    O oit   +   M mit   +(         M   O )kit                                 (7)

where ait denotes productivity, oit the log of the labor input, mit the log of materials, and kit the log of
capital.
   The labor input Oit is not directly observable, but we can use the fact that

                                                   C (Oit ; w)        C (Oit ; w)
                                           Oit =               Oit =              :                                          (8)
                                                   C (Oit ; w)       AC (Oit ; w)

The numerator of this expression, C (Oit ; w), is the total expenditure on the labor input, i.e., the total wage
bill of the …rm (which is observable in standard data) while the denominator, AC (Oit ; w) = C (Oit ; w) =Oit ;
is the unit cost of the labor input (which is, by contrast, unobservable). Indeed, while average wages
per worker are observable in standard data, C (Oit ; w) =Oit is not because the labor input Oit does not
correspond to the number of workers in a …rm but rather to the amount of problem-solving managerial
knowledge leveraging production capacity. Substituting (8) into the production function and multiplying
by the price leads to an equation for revenue given by

                             rit = ait +    O   ln C (Oit ; w) +     M mit   +(       M    O )kit ;                          (9)

where ait       pit + ait     O   ln AC (Oit ; w) denotes revenue-based productivity. In what follows we assume
   O   ln AC (Oit ; w) = Lit which implies ait = pit + ait + Lit . Note that               O   ln AC (Oit ; w) = Lit is what
is implied by the CRH model if we substitute the constraint (5) in the organizational problem with nL
                                                                                                    L                          ;
for small enough > 0: In such a case we thus only need to keep track of the number of management layers
(Lit ) rather than both the number of layers and the average knowledge within each layer ` (zL` ).
   Turning to the time evolution of productivity we follow the literature and impose productivity follows
an autoregressive process. In particular we assume productivity in t (ait ) depends upon productivity at
time t-1 (ait   1)   with the latter incorporating the e¤ect of organization in t-1 (Lit              1 ).   If the …rm does not

                                                                24
change the number of layers in t we assume ait =                     a ait 1   +    ait .    However, if the …rm changes the number
of layers in t we need to consider the extra term                 Lit      Lit       Lit       1:


                                                   ait =   a ait 1   +         Lit +        ait ;                                      (10)

where      ait   is a productivity shock that is i.i.d. across …rms and time. We follow again the literature and
assume      ait   is uncorrelated with all past values of ait . As far as the correlation between                          ait   and    Lit
is concerned we could in principle make two di¤erent hypothesis. On the one hand, we could assimilate
organization to capital investments and assume the number of layers is predetermined in the short-run, i.e.,
the current organizational structure has been chosen in the past and cannot immediately adjust to current
period shocks. In this case             Lit would not be, very much like capital kit , correlated with             ait .   On the other
hand, one might argue that contemporaneous shocks could be big enough to trigger an organizational change
and in this respect it is important to note that cumulated shocks are those who matter, i.e., the current
shock might be in itself small but just enough to pass the threshold making a reorganization pro…table.
In this scenario          ait   would be uncorrelated with past values of Lit but correlated with                 Lit in (10). Both
arguments have some merits and in what follows we explore both. More speci…cally, we estimate revenue-
based TFP ait under the weaker assumption that                    Lit and          ait   are correlated. We accomplish this by using
the lag of        Lit as well as Lit     2   as instruments for       Lit . This provides estimates that are consistent under
both scenarios. When subsequently regressing our measure of revenue-based productivity on changes in the
organizational structure as described above we provide in this Section results based on the predetermined
hypothesis (       ait   not correlated with      Lit ) while leaving to Section 4.3 the discussion of results based on the
endogeneity assumption.
       As far as …rm choices are concerned we assume, in line with the literature, that capital is predetermined
in t. We further allow …rms to optimally choose materials in order to minimize short-run costs. As for the
labor input, we follow Ackerberg et al. (2015) and assume it is somewhere in between capital and materials
in terms of its capacity to adapt to contemporaneous shocks. The cost of materials is common across …rms
but can vary over time while the unit cost of the labor input AC (Oit ; w) varies across …rms and time.
From …rst-order cost minimization conditions we have that materials’ choice mit is a function of kit and
ait . Indeed, whatever the structure of organization chosen by the …rm (Lit ), it will ultimately pin down
ait which in turn, together with capital kit , determines the optimal materials’expenditure. After inverting
the …rst-order conditions of the …rm, we can express ait as a function of capital and materials, namely,
ait = g(kit ; mit ).
       From now onwards we follow Wooldridge (2009) and consider the value-added form of the revenue
function (9) which is known in the literature to perform better in terms of identi…cation.26 In particular,
  26
   Wooldridge (2009) builds on Olley and Pakes (1996), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), and Ackerberg et al. (2015) and shows
how to obtain consistent estimates of input elasticities with a one-step GMM procedure. The results are qualitatively and
quantitatively very similar if we simply implement the methodology in Olley and Pakes (1996).




                                                                     25
using (10) as well as the inverted input demand equation of the …rm, ait                              1   = g(kit   1 ; mit 1 );   we obtain

                                  0                       0             0                             0
                       vait =     O   ln C (Oit ; w) +    K kit    +    a g(kit 1 ; mit 1 )      +         Lit +    ait :                  (11)

                                                                                 0
where vait is value added and, for example, the coe¢ cient                       O        equals      O   times a scaling factor common
to all other coe¢ cients. As shown in, for example, Bilir and Morales (2016) going from (9) to (11) simply
requires the optimal materials expenditure to be a constant fraction of the revenue (which is true in our
Cobb-Douglas production function framework) and a CES demand (which is the speci…cation used in CRH).
    The error term     ait   in (10) is uncorrelated with kit and mit                1.   Hence, g(kit       1 ; mit 1 )    is also uncorrelated
with   ait   in (11). The wage bill C (Oit ; w) and the change in the number of layers at t;                                   Lit ; are instead
endogenous and we instrument them with the wage bill at t                                 1, the change in the number of layers at
                                                                            0
t   1, and the number of layers in t           2. As for the term           a g(kit 1 ; mit 1 )       we use a second order polynomial
approximation in kit    1    and mit    1.   We …nally estimate (11) by IV and ultimately get an estimate of revenue
TFP as
                                                               0                            0
                                             b
                                             ait = vait       ^ O ln C (Oit ; w)          ^ K kit :

    Equipped with b
                  ait we can now comprehensively estimate the impact of changes in organization on revenue
productivity by following the two approaches outlined at the beginning of Section 5 and using both OLS
and …xed e¤ects. In this respect bait is a measure of revenue productivity that, while accounting for the
standard problem of inputs endogeneity, explicitly incorporates the choice of organization. Yet, one might
wonder to what extent our …ndings rely on the particular revenue productivity measure we propose. The
literature has proposed several ways to estimate revenue productivity and we have actually experimented
with several estimation techniques including standard Olley and Pakes (1996), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)
and De Loecker and Warzynski (2012). We provide in Appendix D and E many of the results obtained with
these alternative techniques. We also provide in Appendix D …ndings obtained with simpler approaches like
OLS and value added per worker and show below results referring to the most basic measure of revenue-
based productivity one could think of: revenue per worker. All of these results point to a coherent picture in
which an increase (decrease) in the number of layers decreases (increases) revenue productivity. However, we
believe the numbers we obtain below with the modi…ed Wooldridge (2009) procedure explicitly incorporating
the choice of organization are to be preferred.
    Table 6 provides our baseline results. The dependent variable is productivity at time t (b
                                                                                             ait ) while the
main control variable is lagged productivity and the key covariate is the change in the number of management
layers in t. Table 6 reports coe¢ cients referring to sequences corresponding to an increasing (column 1),
decreasing (column 2) or constant (column 3) number of layers while column 4 groups all sequences together.
    Table 6 shows that adding a layer (column 1) reduces revenue-based productivity by 6.8%, while dropping
one (column 2) increases it by slightly less than 11%. The overall e¤ect (column 4) of changing a layer is
about 8% and coe¢ cients are highly signi…cant in all cases.
    The OLS estimations in Table 6 closely matches our assumption about the productivity process (10)


                                                                   26
                                          Table 6: Wooldridge Revenue TFP. OLS
                                                            (1)                      (2)                     (3)                  (4)
                               VARIABLES                Increasing                Decreasing               Constant               All

                               Productivity t-1            0.741 a                     0.769 a              0.805 a             0.785 a
                                                              (0 .0 3 0 )              (0 .0 3 2 )          (0 .0 2 1 )         (0 .0 1 7 )

                               Change in layers            -0.068 a                -0.108 a                                     -0.079 a
                                                              (0 .0 1 1 )              (0 .0 1 6 )                              (0 .0 0 8 )

                               Constant                       -0.006                   -0.028               -0.018              -0.010
                                                              (0 .0 1 8 )              (0 .0 3 6 )          (0 .0 2 6 )         (0 .0 1 4 )


                               Observations                   4,057                    2,086                2,934                9,677
                               Adjusted R2                    0.622                    0.520                0.642                0.598
                                           F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                          a
                                                               p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                    Table 7: Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Dynamic panel
                                                                    (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
                            VARIABLES                           Increasing              Decreasing             Constant                 All

                            Productivity t-1                       0.373 a                  0.436 a              0.518 a             0.462 a
                                                                    (0 .0 6 1 )              (0 .0 8 5 )          (0 .0 7 2 )         (0 .0 4 5 )

                            Change in layers                       -0.036 a                 -0.087 a                                 -0.056 a
                                                                    (0 .0 0 9 )              (0 .0 1 2 )                              (0 .0 0 6 )

                            Constant                                0.049                    -0.016               0.012               0.019
                                                                    (0 .0 3 2 )              (0 .0 3 4 )          (0 .0 3 4 )         (0 .0 1 6 )


                            Observations                            4,057                    2,086                2,934               9,677
                            Number of …xed e¤ects                   1,655                    1,268                1,276               4,199
                            AR(2) Test Stat                         1.837                    1.254                1.204               2.331
                            P-value AR(2)                           0.066                    0.210                0.229               0.020
                                           F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                          a
                                                               p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




in that— besides the issue of endogeneity we deal with in Section 4.3— there is no space for unobserved
heterogeneity correlated with lagged TFP and/or the change in layers. We extend our framework to the
presence of time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity, to be dealt with either time di¤erencing (dynamic
panel) or a within transformation (within estimator). More speci…cally, given the simultaneous presence of
a lagged dependent variable and …xed e¤ects, we employ in Table 7 the system GMM estimator proposed
by Arellano and Bover (1995) within the context of dynamic panel data with endogenous regressors. We
also present more standard results obtained by means of the within estimator in Appendix D and E. The
two sets of results are qualitatively identical and quantitatively very similar.
       Table 7 portraits a picture very similar to the one emerging from Table 6.27 While the e¤ect of changing
  27
    As far as test diagnostic is concerned, system GMM estimations in Table 7 are characterized by small and often not
signi…cant AR(2) tests on residuals suggesting the way we model the dynamics captures well the persistency features of the
data.


                                                                                  27
                                  Table 8: Revenue Labor Productivity. OLS
                                                        (1)                  (2)                   (3)              (4)
                            VARIABLES               Increasing            Decreasing             Constant           All

                            Productivity t-1           0.772 a                0.898 a              0.914 a       0.855 a
                                                          (0 .0 2 0 )         (0 .0 1 4 )          (0 .0 1 4 )   (0 .0 1 1 )

                            Change in layers           -0.118 a               -0.181 a                           -0.132 a
                                                          (0 .0 1 5 )         (0 .0 2 4 )                        (0 .0 1 2 )

                            Constant                   2.717 a                1.185 a              0.971 a       1.705 a
                                                          (0 .2 4 0 )         (0 .1 6 5 )          (0 .1 5 7 )   (0 .1 2 6 )


                            Observations                  4,206                2,750                3,090        10,046
                            Adjusted R2                   0.768                0.749                0.854         0.792
                                       F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                      a
                                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




layers is now a bit smaller across the board, it is negative and signi…cant in all speci…cations. At the same
time Table 7 indicates that decreasing the number of layers has a bigger impact on productivity than adding
layers. The overall e¤ect of changing layers is now down to 5-6% as compared to roughly 8% in speci…cations
without …xed e¤ects. This might be due to unobservables being positive correlated with the change in layers
and/or with the lag of productivity so warranting the use of …xed e¤ects. However, this might as well be
driven by standard measurement error, and related attenuation bias, being more pronounced when taking
…rst di¤erences to eliminate …xed e¤ects. For both reasons we do not necessarily consider the numbers in
Table 7 as being more accurate than those in Table 6.
   Last but not least we present in Table 8 the results based on the simplest measure of revenue productivity
one could think of: log revenue per worker. We present here simple OLS regressions and report in Appendix
D and E the corresponding within and system GMM estimates along with those of the other measures
of revenue productivity we consider like De Loecker and Warzynski (2012). Looking at Table 8 the same
consistent patterns emerges. Interestingly enough, impacts are considerably larger in this case with an
average decrease (increase) in revenue productivity of about 13% upon an increase (decrease) in the number
of management layers. This is consistent with a scenario in which …rms who, for example, reorganize by
increasing the number of layers also adjust capital and materials in such a way that TFP changes translate
into ampli…ed changes of the revenue to labor ratio.
   Overall these results paint a very consistent portrait. Revenue-based productivity decreases (increases)
with a reorganization that adds (cuts) layers by between 4 and 8%. The result varies somewhat, depending
on whether one controls or not for the presence of unobserved heterogeneity correlated with organizational
changes. Furthermore, taking care of multiple inputs and adjusting for the endogenous choice of materials
and labor is important as well, and reduces the absolute magnitude of the estimated e¤ect of a reorganization.
Nevertheless, the main result that revenue productivity jumps in the opposite direction as the number of
layers is very robust across speci…cations and exercises. Clearly, revenue productivity can jump down either
because …rms reduce their prices or, perhaps, because quantity-based productivity goes down (a result that

                                                                         28
would contradict our hypothesis). Thus, we now proceed to estimate the e¤ect of a reorganization on
quantity-based productivity.

4.2      Quantity-based Productivity
Measuring quantity-based productivity is harder than measuring revenue-based productivity partly because
we need information about quantities, which is rarely available, and partly because we need to account
more explicitly for di¤erences in demand across …rms. Two …rms producing similar products might be
characterized by the same quantity productivity but face rather di¤erent demands. They will thus end up
charging di¤erent prices and making di¤erent input choices so complicating the estimation of the production
function. Furthermore, the empirical implications derived from the theory that we outlined in Section 2
crucially depend on accounting for heterogeneity and shocks in demand and their potential correlation with
productivity shocks. Indeed, whatever the nature of the shock pushing a …rm to change its optimal quantity,
it will impact …rm organizational structure because the latter is optimally designed to …t a given production
scale.
   This means we require a methodology explicitly allowing for di¤erent types of shocks while at the same
time not restricting a priori the correlation among these shocks. We actually need more than that. We
need to measure all of these shocks if we want to draw a causal relationship going from these shocks, to a
change in the optimal production scale triggering a change of the organizational structure and the latter
ultimately impacting on …rm productivity. To do so we follow Forlani et al. (2015) who allow computing
quantity-based productivity in the presence of potentially correlated productivity, demand and markup
shocks. Forlani et al. (2015) also provide a way to quantify these shocks that will be needed to strengthen
the causal interpretation of our …ndings. As discussed in the previous Section, if organization is allowed to
change in the short run in the wake of contemporaneous shocks we need some instruments to get causal
identi…cation. In this respect, we will use in Section 4.3 information on productivity, demand and markups
shocks computed from this Section, as well as other demand and cost shifters, to draw a more causal link
between reorganization and productivity: both revenue-based and quantity-based.
   In what follows we start with a description of the baseline MULAMA methodology and subsequently
expand on its application by explicitly considering the role of organization in producing the labor input. We
then draw a link between reorganization and …rm quantity-based productivity using several speci…cations
and econometric models under the assumption that organization, like capital infrastructure, cannot adjust
much in the short run. We relax this assumption in Section 4.3. Before moving forward it is important
to highlight that, for the purpose of our analysis, neither the methodology developed in De Loecker et al.
(2016) nor the one described in Foster et al. (2008) …t our requirements exactly. De Loecker et al (2016)
allows recovering quantity productivity while having some demand and markups shocks in the background.
However, demand shocks cannot be quanti…ed in their framework. Foster et al. (2008) allow measuring
quantity-based productivity and demand shocks but impose a zero correlation between the two shocks as
well as a constant markup across …rms.

                                                     29
4.2.1      Baseline MULAMA

Following Forlani et al. (2015) we use a two-stage estimation procedure to obtain quantity-based produc-
tivity. This approach allows us to explicitly take into account the presence of demand shocks and markup
heterogeneity across …rms and quantify them. We do this by both assuming costs minimization, which
provides a useful way of computing markups as in De Loecker and Warzynski (2012), and by imposing
some restrictions on the way demand shocks enter utility. From standard pro…t maximization conditions
the elasticity of revenue with respect to quantity is one over the markup                                                                  it .   We assume the elasticity of
                                                                                                                                                         1
revenue with respect to demand shocks                   it   is also 1=                     it .      Therefore, rit = pit + qit =                            (   it   + qit ). Forlani
                                                                                                                                                         it
et al. (2015) show how this holds as a …rst-order linear approximation in a variety of circumstances and in
particular when a representative consumer pays pit to get qit but the latter enters utility as q~it = qit +                                                                         it .
In this light       it   is a demand shock than can be interpreted as a measure of quality.
    Recall the production function in equation (7) and assume the following standard AR(1) quantity-based
productivity process: ait =           a ait 1   +   ait .    Capital is predetermined in t meaning that kit is uncorrelated
with contemporaneous shocks            ait .   Labor and materials are instead optimally chosen with respect to, among
others, ait and so they are correlated with                      ait .        Furthermore, assume that demand for the product of …rm
i at time t, in logs, is given by
                                                                                      1                         1
                                                    pit =                 1                           it              qit
                                                                                       it                        it

where      it    denotes our demand shifters and                     it   the elasticity of demand. Multiplying both side by qit we
have
                                                                 1                                              1
                                         rit =      1                         (   it   + qit ) =                      (    it    + qit )
                                                                  it                                             it

where the last equality comes from the assumption of monopolistic competition and the markup is given by

                                                                                                 it
                                                                          it      =                        :
                                                                                            it         1

Thus, heterogeneity or shocks in the elasticity of demand will result in variation in markups across …rms
and time. In terms of the time evolution of                       it      we assume that

                                                                 it    =               it 1        +           it ;


where       it   is an idiosyncratic demand shock that can be correlated with the idiosyncratic productivity shock
 ait .   In doing so we allow more broadly                  it    and ait to be correlated with each other. We do not need to
make speci…c assumptions about the time evolution of markups                                                              it .   Indeed, cost minimization implies, for
the ‡exible inputs (which in our model are the labor input and materials), that there is direct link between
the ratio of the elasticity of output to the markup and the share of inputs expenditure in …rm revenue

                                                             O                Oit M C (Oit ; w)
                                                                      =                         ;
                                                             it                    Pit Qit

                                                                                       30
and
                                                               M         Mit PM t
                                                                     =            ;
                                                                it       Pit Qit
where M C (Oit ; w) is the marginal cost of the labor input and PM t denotes the price of materials. Note
that Mit PM t is the total expenditure on materials, and Oit M C (Oit ; w) is the total expenditure on the labor
input when we allow nL
                     L              ; for    > 0 (since the unit and marginal cost coincide at the MES).
       With this structure in hand, we can proceed to measure quantity-based productivity using data on
quantities, revenue, labor, capital, material and inputs expenditure shares. The key insight of our approach
is that, by having being explicit about demand, we can explicitly write down the revenue function in terms of
demand, productivity and markups and use both the revenue and quantity equations to estimate parameters.
This is why there are two steps in our estimation procedure. In doing so we depart from the more standard
approach of focusing on the quantity equation only.
       We start from the revenue equation. Denote

                                                   rit    sOit (oit           kit ) sM it (mit          kit )
                                      LHSit =                                                                   ;
                                                                               sM it

where sxit is the share in expenditure of input x. After some manipulations of the revenue equation we can
obtain an expression for LHSit that we can estimate in the …rst stage. Namely,

                                   LHSit = b1 z1it + b2 z2it + b3 z3it + b4 z4it + b5 z5it + uit ;                                              (12)

                                                                          rit 1
where z1it = kit ; z2it = LHSit         1;   z3it = kit   1;   z4it =    sM it 1 ;   z5it = qit    1;   uit = (      ait   +   it ) = M :   Appendix
C.1 presents a detailed derivation of equation (12). Note that we can simply use OLS to estimate equation
 (12) since uit , the combined contemporaneous demand and productivity shocks, is not correlated with the
 covariates. This equation allows us to identify several reduced-form parameters of the model: ^b1 = M ;
^b2 = ; ^b3 =                                      + a
         a          a   ; ^b4 =
                        M
                                     ; and ^b5 =
                                             a         .             M
       Using ^b1 and ^b2 we can implement a second stage to separately identify                                 where we use the productivity
process and the production function (quantity equation) to obtain

                                                    qit    ^b2 qit   1   = b6 z6it +     ait


where
                             oit       kit sOit    mit kit        ^b2                                                 rit 1^b2
                    z6it =                       +         + kit + LHSit                       1
                                                                                                   ^b2 kit      1               ;
                                   ^b1     sM it      ^b1         ^b1                                               ^b1 sM it 1

with b6 = .28 Note that since kit is predetermined in t we can instrument for z6it with kit . This is what
  28
     Note that, alternatively, we could have used a combination of the estimates in the …rst stage to obtain an estimate of
  , instead of using a second stage. This alternative methodology is in general not as robust and precise, since it involves
multiplications and divisions of estimated coe¢ cients as well as a di¤erence between      and a that is signi…cantly di¤erent
from zero. In any case, identi…cation of in the …rst stage still requires information on quantity because quantity is among the



                                                                         31
we do using the instrumental variables (IV) estimator.
     Then, our estimate of productivity is given by

                                         ^b6 sOit                        ^b6
                             a
                             ^it = qit            (o       kit )             (mit             kit )   ^b6 kit ;
                                         ^b1 sM it it                    ^b1
     our estimate of demand shocks by

                                                          ^b6
                                              ^ it =               rit        qit ;
                                                       ^b1 sM it
     and our estimate of markups by
                                                                ^b6
                                                  ^ it =                  :
                                                            ^b1 sM it
     The basic estimation methodology that we just described is amenable to various generalizations. In
particular we can allow for a translog production function and can allow for a quadratic rather than the
linear dependence of the productivity process on past productivity. We can also allow for labor to be
somewhere in between materials and capital in terms of its responsiveness to contemporaneous shocks.

4.2.2    Changes in Layers in MULAMA

The methodology to estimate quantity productivity introduced above does not incorporate the e¤ect of
changes in organization in the labor input. To do so we parallel what we did in Section 4.1, while further
experimenting in Sections 5.2.3 and 5.2.4 with other approaches, in order to solve the two very same
problems: (i) the potential endogeneity of the organizational structure with respect to contemporaneous
shocks; (ii) the fact that knowledge embedded in the labor input is not directly observable and neither the
number of workers not the total wage bill of the …rm are su¢ cient statistics for it.
     To address these issues we substitute Oit in the production function for C (Oit ; w) =AC (Oit ; w) (as we
did for the case of revenue-based productivity, see Equation 8) and assume the process for quantity-based
productivity to be
                                         a
                                         ~it =   aa
                                                  ~it 1    +             Lit +        ait ;                       (13)

where, as before, we adjust the process for quantity-based productivity to take into account the dependence
on layers and modify the MULAMA procedure to incorporate this endogeneity; see Appendix C.1 for further
details. As we mentioned above, a change in the average cost of the organization AC (Oit ; w) corresponds
to      Lit if we replace constraint (5) by nL
                                             L          > 0; since in this case the average cost function is a step
function where the steps correspond to changes in layers.
     Once quanti…ed a
                    ~it we can comprehensively estimate the impact of changes in organization on quantity
productivity by following the two approaches outlined at the beginning of Section 5 and using both OLS
right-hand side variables.




                                                           32
                                                   Table 9: Quantity TFP. OLS
                                                               (1)                 (2)                   (3)              (4)
                                  VARIABLES                Increasing           Decreasing             Constant           All

                                  Productivity t-1              0.892 a             0.873 a              0.905 a       0.895 a
                                                                (0 .0 1 4 )         (0 .0 1 5 )          (0 .0 1 3 )   (0 .0 0 8 )

                                  Change in layers              0.029 a             0.032 b                            0.026 a
                                                                (0 .0 1 1 )         (0 .0 1 4 )                        (0 .0 0 7 )

                                  Constant                      0.926 a             0.113 a              0.320 b       0.081 b
                                                                (0 .0 4 8 )         (0 .0 3 5 )          (0 .1 3 1 )   (0 .0 3 3 )


                                  Observations                  4,171                2,734                3,055         9,960
                                  Adjusted R2                   0.781                0.748                0.804         0.782
                                             F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                            a
                                                                p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




and …xed e¤ects. We deal with endogeneity in Section 4.3. Table 9 provides OLS estimation results.
All of the 3 estimates of          in Table 9 are positive and signi…cant and point to an impact of about 3%:
reorganizations leading to an increase (decrease) in the number of layers increase (decrease) quantity TFP
by around 3%. Interestingly enough, and parallel to the revenue TFP analysis, downward transitions seem
to be characterized by somewhat larger e¤ects than upward transitions. Though, di¤erences are less stark
here.
      In Table 10 we further allow for the presence of time-invariant unobservables correlated with changes in
organization. In particular, we allow for …rm-product-sequence …xed e¤ects in Table 10. We report below
estimates obtained with the dynamic panel data system GMM estimator29 and show in Appendix F almost
identical results obtained with the within estimator. Estimates in Table 10 are in line with OLS results
in Table 9. Point estimates are somewhat smaller now suggesting an impact of reorganization on quantity
productivity in between 2 and 3% on average. The slight drop in magnitude when using …xed e¤ects is in
line with what we observed for revenue productivity and it might signal some moderate issue of unobserved
heterogeneity or the result of some measurement error magni…ed when …rst-di¤erencing the data.

4.2.3      Level E¤ects

The previous formulations restrict the impact of organizational changes on productivity to be fully con-
temporaneous. In particular, a change in organization, whether measured as a change in the number of
layers or as a change in quantity, a¤ects productivity in t but, conditional on productivity in t, does not
a¤ect productivity in t + 1. However, one could think of an alternative scenario in which an organizational
change takes more than a year to fully impact on productivity. One way of incorporating a slow adjustment
of productivity to organizational changes is to assume that the level of, as opposed to the change in, the
number of layers or quantity should enter the random processes of revenue and quantity productivity. More
 29
      Note that the same observation we made in Footnote 19 applies for the case of Table 10.



                                                                              33
                   Table 10: Quantity TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Dynamic panel data
                                                              (1)                  (2)                  (3)               (4)
                         VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant            All

                         Productivity t-1                    0.622 a               0.712 a               0.641 a       0.678 a
                                                             (0 .0 9 0 )           (0 .0 8 4 )           (0 .0 6 5 )   (0 .0 4 5 )

                         Change in layers                    0.029 a               0.016                               0.018 b
                                                             (0 .0 1 1 )           (0 .0 1 4 )                         (0 .0 0 7 )

                         Constant                             0.019                0.150                 0.409         0.081 ac
                                                             (0 .2 2 2 )           (0 .0 9 2 )           (0 .2 7 4 )   (0 .0 4 7 )


                         Observations                         4,171                2,734                 3,055          9,960
                         Number of …xed e¤ects                1,673                1,280                 1,298          4,251
                         Adjusted R2
                         AR(2) Test Stat                      1.101                0.143                 2.372          2.234
                         P-value AR(2)                        0.271                0.886                 0.018          0.025
                                       F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                      a
                                                          p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




speci…cally, one could assume for quantity productivity:

                                              a
                                              ~it =          aa
                                                              ~it 1        + Lit +               ait ;                               (14)

and for revenue productivity
                                              ait =          a ait 1       + Lit +               ait :                               (15)

We provide in Appendices D (for revenue productivity) and F (for quantity productivity) selected estimation
results obtained using processes 14 and 15 to compute productivity and draw a link with organization.
These results point to qualitatively identical …ndings with respect to what provided above. In terms of
quantitative implications, coe¢ cients corresponding to the layer level variable are in general larger than
those obtained above with the change in layers variable suggesting that, if anything, estimates provided so
far are to be considered as conservative. Such a pattern is consistent with a scenario in which a change
in organization takes some time to fully impact on productivity. By focusing on changes in t rather than
levels, the formulations above allow capturing most but not all of this slow adjustment. Yet, we prefer the
more demanding speci…cations using          Lit and               qit because the level of layers or quantity is more likely to
be correlated with unobservables a¤ecting productivity.

4.2.4   The E¤ect of Organization on Prices

As we have emphasized, the main di¤erence between the impact of a reorganization on revenue-based and
quantity-based productivity is its e¤ect on prices. Given this, one obvious reaction is to try to look directly
at the e¤ect of reorganizations on prices. While it is important to note that we do not actually observe
prices in our data –we have information on quantities sold and related revenues–we can still construct unit



                                                                           34
values (revenue over quantity) in lieu of actual prices and study how they change as …rms reorganize.
       There are several potential problems related to using unit values as a measure of prices to measure
relative changes in revenue and quantity-based productivity . First, any measurement errors in quantity
and/or revenue will add up into this residual measure of prices. Second, prices could change as a consequence
of supply side shifters, like costs, as well as other demand side shifters, like markups and taste shocks. As
a result, price changes might be a noisy measure of the relative changes in a …rms’ quantity-based and
revenue-based productivity.
       In Appendix I we measure the e¤ect of a …rm’s reorganization on our measure of prices. We …nd that the
results using prices are consistent with our main results but are, as expected for this constructed measure,
more noisy.

4.3      Endogeneity of Organization
The results so far have shown, we believe, that a set of detailed and speci…c predictions on revenue-based
and quantity-based productivity changes as a result of a …rm’s reorganization are robustly present in the
data. The fact that when we see …rms adding layers revenue-based productivity declines but quantity-based
productivity increases, and that this is signi…cantly the case even after including a large battery of …xed
e¤ects and using di¤erent measures and speci…cations, lends credibility to the causal interpretation that our
theory provides for these facts.
       Still, in drawing a link between productivity and organization, we have not yet accounted for the endo-
geneity of organization to contemporaneous productivity shocks. To be more precise, we have allowed for
such endogeneity in estimating revenue-based and quantity-based productivity but we have subsequently
treated reorganization as a predetermined variable when regressing productivity on changes in organization.
To the extent that organization, like capital infrastructure, cannot adjust much to current period shocks
the number of layers is a predetermined variable and so results above are to be interpreted as causal. In
what follows we relax this assumption and use a number of demand and cost shifters that can predict a
reorganization but are not correlated with current period productivity shocks.
       In this respect, the MULAMA model allows quantifying past productivity, demand and markups shocks
pushing …rms to expand or contract production scale while being uncorrelated with current shocks. For
example, ait    2,   it 1   and   it 1   are all uncorrelated with   ait .   At the same time, cumulated past productivity,
demand and markups shocks a¤ect optimal production scale and contribute determining the timing of a
reorganization. For example, a series of positive shocks would increase the quantity produced by a …rm
and get the …rm closer to the threshold beyond which a reorganization becomes pro…table. In sum, past
productivity, demand and markups shocks meet the requirements of good instruments for organizational
changes and we use them below to establish a more causal link between organization and both revenue-based
and quantity-based productivity.30
  30
   More speci…cally, we use as instruments demand and markups at time t 1, productivity at time t 2, capital at time t,
number of layers in t 1, revenue in t 1 as well as all of these variables lagged to the …rst available year. All of these variables


                                                                35
    In addition to these instrumental variables we use more traditional (and external to the model) demand
and cost shocks (see Bertrand, 2004, Park et al., 2010, and Revenga, 1992, for examples).31 Concretely, with
information on nominal exchange rates, consumer price indexes, and …rm-level information on exports and
imports across countries, we aggregate real exchange rate changes across destination/origins using lagged
exports/imports country shares as weights and construct …rm-time speci…c real exchange rate shocks.32 An
appreciation of the average real exchange rate across the destination served by a …rm represents a positive
demand shock while an appreciation of the average real exchange rate across the sourcing origins of a …rm
represents a negative cost shock.
    As shown by …rst stage F-statistics below our set of instruments has a good predictive power with
respect to changes in organization. However, we cannot rule out that the demand and cost shocks we use as
instruments a¤ect productivity via channels other than organization. For example, an appreciation of the
exports real exchange rate could push a …rm to quality-upgrade its products and change the skill composition
of its workforce. Within our framework, we already account for the changes in prices and employment costs
stemming from this shock. However, it might be that such a shock directly impacts productivity and that
it does it in a way that is not fully captures by organizational changes. In order to address this problem,
we incorporate organization into productivity using the number of layers while at the same time allowing
productivity to depend on production scale via channels other than organization. More speci…cally, we
assume for revenue productivity

                                         ait =   a ait 1   +   Lit +    q   qit +   ait ;                                  (16)

and for quantity productivity
                                         a
                                         ~it =   aa
                                                  ~it 1    +   Lit +    q   qit +   ait :                                  (17)

We show in Appendix C.1 how to modify the Wooldrige (2009) revenue productivity model as well as
MULAMA to account for (16) and (17). Once recovered estimates of ait and a
                                                                         ~it we subsequently regress
them on both changes in layers and changes in quantity using our set of instruments to account for the
endogeneity of both regressors.33 These speci…cations allow us to test for the causal impact of a change
in layers while allowing for alternative mechanisms— working through quantity changes— to also impact
meet the requirements of good instruments under the assumptions of our model.
   31
      In Appendix A we describe in greater detail how we follow the literature to construct these instruments.
   32
      Of course, not all …rms are subject to exchange rate shocks. But it turns out that for a small open economy like Portugal,
46% of the …rms in our sample either export or import in a way that makes the construction of this additional instrumental
variable possible. Our weights are time-varying so increasing identi…cation power. However, they are more prone to endogeneity
issues. We provide in Appendix E complementary results obtained using initial period …xed weights. Results are qualitatively
identical and quantitatively very similar.
   33
      In all the tables that use instrumental variables we do not present the value of constants since we de-mean all variables.
Since we are using a battery of instrumental variables as well as past productivity, the set of …xed e¤ects we used in some of
the previous regressions are not obviously necessary. They also reduce the precision of our estimates substantially. So for all
results using instrumental variables we do not consider …xed e¤ects, although we keep product group and time dummies in all
regressions.



                                                               36
Table 11: Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Instrumental Variable. Both change in layers and change in quantity as
endogenous variables
                                                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)              (4)
                               VARIABLES                       Increasing            Decreasing           Constant           All

                               Productivity t-1                  0.921 a               0.917 a              0.912 a        0.920 a
                                                                 (0 .0 1 3 )           (0 .0 2 1 )          (0 .0 1 6 )    (0 .0 0 9 )

                               Change in layers                 -0.070 a              -0.082 a                             -0.072 a
                                                                 (0 .0 2 1 )           (0 .0 2 8 )                         (0 .0 1 7 )

                               Change in quantity                0.765 b               0.792 b              -0.230          0.395
                                                                 (0 .3 7 4 )           (0 .3 4 3 )          (0 .2 5 5 )    (0 .2 6 9 )



                               Observations                       4,057                 2,686                2,934          9,677
                               Kleibergen-Paap stat.              12.73                 10.48                11.83          18.34
                               Adjusted R2                        0.725                 0.674                0.848          0.806
                                            F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                           a
                                                               p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table 12: Quantity TFP. Instrumental Variable. Both change in layers and change in quantity as endogenous variables

                                                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)              (4)
                               VARIABLES                       Increasing            Decreasing           Constant           All

                               Productivity t-1                   0.953 a              0.906 a              0.967 a        0.955 a
                                                                  (0 .0 1 4 )          (0 .0 1 9 )           (0 .0 1 7 )   (0 .0 1 2 )

                               Change in layers                   0.054 b              0.053 c                             0.077 a
                                                                  (0 .0 2 1 )          (0 .0 2 9 )                         (0 .0 2 0 )

                               Change in quantity                 0.034                 -0.032               0.139          0.050
                                                                  (0 .0 5 8 )          (0 .1 3 3 )           (0 .1 0 7 )   (0 .0 6 1 )



                               Observations                       4,171                 2,734                3,055          9,960
                               Kleibergen-Paap stat.              45.1                  341.4                39.4           594.0
                               Adjusted R2                        0.855                 0.767                0.902          0.872
                                            F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                           a
                                                               p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




productivity. Coming back to the example of an appreciation of the exports real exchange rate, we thus
allow quality-upgrading and skill composition changes to a¤ect productivity via a change in the quantity
produced.
      Table 11 presents IV results for revenue productivity. First-stage F statistics (Kleibergen-Paap stat.)
are consistently well above 10 across samples and indeed coe¢ cients are quite precisely estimated.34 In this
respect, the results show a negative relationship between changes in layers and revenue-based productivity
even when controlling for changes in quantity and allowing both variables to be endogenous. Magnitudes are
now a bit larger than before and around 7% across speci…cations. A similar but positive e¤ect stems from
 34
      The …rst stage estimates for tables 11 and 12 are presented in Appendix J.



                                                                                37
Table 12 for quantity productivity. Coe¢ cients are positive and signi…cant. Point estimates are around 5%
independently on whether the …rm is adding or dropping layers. Though, we …nd a larger e¤ect of around
8% when we pull all the observations in column 4. Appendix C.1 presents further results using our IV
strategy.35
       Finally, in order to provide a further validation of our results, we estimated quantity-based productivity
using the estimation procedure described in De Loecker et al. (2016). Table H-5, in Appendix H presents
the results. We …nd that when we pull all the observations together, the e¤ect of a change in layers on
quantity-based productivity is 3 percent and signi…cant. A slightly lower value compared to the results
using MULAMA.

4.3.1      A Case Study: Textile and Apparel

As a …nal attempt to identify a causal e¤ect of reorganization, we now use the textile sector as an example
of an industry that experienced an exogenous shock. The shock we study is the changes in quotas applied
to the “Textile and Apparel” industry associated to China’s entry into the WTO. This shock provides a
cleaner, albeit more narrow in scope, identi…cation of the e¤ect of organization on productivity.
       We use the data on reductions in quotas across sub-industries and follow the methodology in Bloom,
Draca, and Van Reenen (2016)36 who calculate that these reduction in quotas created a 240% increase in
Chinese imports in that industry. This large EU-wide shock a¤ected Portuguese …rms in the “Textile and
Apparel”industry di¤erently depending on the set of products they produce. Firms that produced products
that were protected by a quota, experienced a 24% negative demand shock (as measured by the demand
metric we calculate in the main text), an 11% reduction in actual sales, and an 11% reduction in employment
(all signi…cant at the 1% level).
       These …rms also reduced the numbers of layers. We use the …rm-level variation in the reductions in quotas
as an instrument for the change in layers in a …rst stage of a two-stage-least-squares (2SLS) speci…cation.
We compute for each 6-digit Prodcom product category, the proportion of the more detailed 6-digit HS
products that were covered by a quota, weighting each HS6 product by its share of EU15 imports over the
period 1995-1997. Then, for each …rm, we measure the …rm-level exposure to the quota by adding each of
the 6-digit Prodcom products weighted by the initial share of sales of the …rm in that product.37 We label
this variable QuotaCoveragei , and focus on the period 2000-2005. Figure K-1 in Appendix K shows that
the number of layers tend to increase progressively for …rms that were not a¤ected by the quota removals,
  35
     We also investigated whether our results are a¤ected if we restrict the sample to …rms that are never foreign-owned at any
point in time in our dataset. We …nd that our results carry through and point estimates are virtually una¤ected. Similarly, it
would be interesting to see if family-owned or managed …rms behave di¤erently. Unfortunately our dataset does not include
this information.
  36
     The underlying identifying assumption of this strategy is that unobserved demand/technology shocks are uncorrelated with
the strength of quotas to non-WTO countries (like China) in 2000. Since these quotas were built up from the 1950s, and their
phased abolition negotiated in the late 1980s was in preparation for the Uruguay Round, Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen (2016)
conclude that this seems like a plausible assumption.
  37
     As in the rest of the paper, we refer as a …rm to a two-digit Prodcom product within an enterprise.



                                                              38
while it decreases for …rms that were a¤ected by the quota removal. We instrument the change in the
number of management layers with the QuotaCoveragei ; with the lagged number of layers, and with the
stock of capital of the …rm at the initial period of analysis. Given that the quota removal might be more
important if it a¤ects the core product of the …rm, we included as an additional instrument the squared
value of QuotaCoveragei . Overall, we …nd that the instruments have predictive power and in Table K-1 in
Appendix K we present the results of the …rst stage.

                               Table 13: Textile and Apparel, OLS and IV estimates
                                                                                                                     IV estimates
                VARIABLES                            Revenue TFP                 Quantity TFP                Revenue TFP    Quantity TFP

                Change in number of layers                -0.070 a                      0.043                      -0.194 a       0.128 c
                                                          (0 .0 3 1 )                  (0 .0 2 9 )                 (0 .0 5 8 )    (0 .0 7 1 )

                Constant                                    0.047                      -0.037                      -0.072 a       -0.021
                                                           (0 .0 3 9 )                 (0 .0 3 4 )                  (0 .0 2 5 )   (0 .0 2 7 )


                Observations                                 831                          831                        831            831
                Kleibergen-Paap stat.                                                                               63.12          63.12
                                        F irm -p ro d u c t-le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                             a
                                                                 p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




   Table 13 reports IV estimates of the e¤ect of the change in the number of layers on either revenue or
quantity-based productivity. The …rst two columns report the results from a simple OLS speci…cation where
changes in layers are not instrumented and the last two columns presents the IV estimates. We …nd in both
speci…cations that …rms that reduce layers exhibit an increase in revenue-based productivity (signi…cant at
1%) and a reduction in quantity-based productivity (signi…cant at 10% for the IV). The results are consistent
with the main claim of our paper, signi…cant, and quite large. When focusing on the …rms that experienced
the shock, the IV results show that in this industry reducing a layer increases revenue-based productivity
by about 19% and reduces quantity-based productivity by 13%. Without instrumenting we …nd that these
results are dampened, as we would expect in the presence of reverse causality (particularly for revenue
productivity). The results are also larger than for the whole manufacturing sector. This might be the result
of the tighter identi…cation of the shock, or of the particular characteristics of the textile sector. Firms in
the textile sector are larger and more labor intensive than …rms in the rest of manufacturing.
   In sum, throughout our investigation we did not …nd any signi…cant evidence to falsify the hypothesis
proposed by the knowledge-based hierarchy model. All the signi…cant evidence was in line with the main
implications. Hence, we conclude that when …rms receive an exogenous shock that makes them reorganize,
both quantity-based and revenue-based productivity are signi…cantly a¤ected. On average for the whole
manufacturing sector, an extra layer increases (decreases) quantity (revenue) productivity by around 8%
(7%), and a drop in layers decreases (increases) quantity (revenue) productivity by a similar percentage.




                                                                               39
4.3.2   Cost Pass-through Conditional on Reorganization

One way to think about the price responses implied by our results above is through the pass-through of
a change in cost into prices. A simple calculation taking the ratio of the responses of revenue-based and
quantity-based productivity to a change in layers delivers a cost pass-through that is around, but sometimes
clearly above, one (1.30, 1.55 and 0.94 for …rms that add, drop, or all that reorganize according to Tables 11
and 12). These numbers might seems high relative to other studies of cost pass-through that in general …nd
values between 0.6 and 0.9. However, note that this calculation measures the cost pass-through conditional
on a reorganization. This conditional pass-through has never been estimated before and so has no direct
counterpart in the literature. In order to compare the cost pass-through into prices in our data to the
estimations in the literature, we need to instead calculate an unconditional measure. In doing so, we follow
two approaches.
   First, we use Portuguese trade data to study the e¤ect of exchange rate shocks on export behavior of
multi-product …rms, following the recent approach of Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and Vichyanond (2013).
We …nd an import price elasticity to the real exchange rate of 0.85, which is very close to what that study
…nds for Brazil. Berman, Martin, and Mayer (2012) …nd 0.83 with …rm-level French data, while Campa and
Goldberg (2010) …nd 0.64 with country- and industry-level OECD data. Therefore, our …ndings for this
period in Portugal are clearly in line with the literature.
   These results use export prices and not the Prodcom-based prices we use in our main analysis. So, as
an additional exercise, we compute the price response of changes in quantity-based productivity (obtained
using the procedure in our main exercise). We …nd almost identical elasticities with respect to cost changes
(we can do the estimation separately for multiproduct and single product …rms and …nd price elasticities to
quantity-based productivity of 0.86 and 0.81 respectively, exactly in line with the literature).
   Why do we obtain results that seem to suggest large pass-through? The key is that our results are not
measuring average responses of prices to changes in costs or demand. They are measuring changes in prices
(or revenue-based productivity) conditional on changes in layers. That is, a cost or demand shock can be
quite small, but it might trigger a reorganization since the …rm was right at the threshold that determines
the decision to reorganize. The reorganization then changes the …rm size substantially which results in a
large change in prices (as we argue in the main text). As a result, the associated pass-through will seem too
large because the original shock was small relative to the change in prices due to the reorganization (even
the augmented shock, once we take into account the endogenous e¤ect on quantity-based productivity of
the reorganization, will seem small). Given that the literature has only calculated average pass-throughs
without conditioning on shocks that trigger a reorganization, our results are not directly comparable with
the literature and predictably somewhat larger. However, as we discussed above, once we calculate the
unconditional pass-through we obtain exactly the same numbers others have computed.




                                                      40
                                         Table 14: Change in Quantity TFP due to Reorganization
                                                 Firms that increase layers                   Firms that reduce layers
                      Percentiles         Overall change   Due to reorganization      Overall change    Due to reorganization

                         10%                   -0.562              0.064                      -0.633                    -0.134
                         25%                   -0.193              0.070                      -0.304                    -0.077
                         50%                   0.057               0.073                      -0.021                    -0.077
                         75%                    0.342              0.077                       0.266                    -0.071
                         90%                    0.739              0.138                       0.795                    -0.067

                        Mean                   0.065               0.083                      -0.010                    -0.082

                     Observations               817                 817                        466                          466




4.4      Aggregate Productivity E¤ects from Reorganization
The results in the previous Section indicate that reorganizations lead to large changes in quantity-based
productivity for a …rm. If we want to gauge the importance of organization for aggregate productivity
dynamics, we need to understand how important is the e¤ect of reorganizations for the average …rm that
reorganizes. So, for the …rms that reorganize we want to ask how important is the change in productivity
that resulted from the reorganization, compared to changes in productivity due to shocks, or the mean
reversion implied by the process in (17).
      Consider a …rm i that we observe from t                    T to t. Iterating over equation (17) we obtain that
                                                                XT    1                       XT       1
                                           T                               v                                 v
               a
               ~it     a
                       ~it   T   =         a    1 a
                                                  ~it   T   +              a    Lit   v   +                  a    q   qit    v    +   ait v   :
                                                                  v=0                             v=0

Hence, the overall change in productivity for a …rm, given by a
                                                              ~it                                      a
                                                                                                       ~it   T;   can be decomposed into three
components. The …rst term is a mean reversion component that is negative when a
                                                                              ~it                                                     T   is positive since
 a < 1. Namely, productivity tends to revert to its long term mean given a number of layers. The cumulative
                                                                                       PT 1 v
change in productivity due to a reorganization, is given by the second term, namely,     v=0 a Lit v : The
third term is just the accumulated e¤ect of past shocks. Note that, because of mean-reversion, the second
and third component explain more than 100% of the overall change in productiviy. We now explore how
large is the second term, the change in productivity due to a reorganization, relative to the total.
      We calculate these terms for …rms that increase and decrease the number of layers between t                                                 T and t.
Using our results for ,              q   and    a   from the MULAMA speci…cation with both change in layers and quantity
in column 4 of Table 12 we calculate each of these terms for the whole distribution of …rms. Clearly, the
actual change in productivity across …rms is very heterogeneous. Some …rms that add layers experiment a
large decline in productivity, while some experiment a very large increase. Hence, we order …rms by their
overall change in productivity and in Table 14 present the distribution of the overall changes in productivity
and the change in productivity due to changes in layers.38 Columns two and three present the results for
…rms that increase layers, while columns four and …ve present the results for …rms that drop layers.
 38
      The unit of observation is actually a …rm-product and we allow t                T and T to vary across …rm-product pairs.



                                                                           41
    The results are stark. On average, or for the median …rm, the increase in productivity due to reorga-
nization explains more than the total increase in overall mean productivity. This is clearly not the case
for all …rms, some of them receive large positive or negative productivity shocks that account for most of
the changes in productivity, but on average those shocks (and the associated reversion to the mean) con-
tribute to more than the aggregate mean variation. The result is that reorganization can account for an
increase in quantity-based productivity, when …rms reorganize by adding layers, of about 8.3% while the
average increase in productivity for these …rms was 6.5%. Similarly, when …rms reduce the number of layers,
reorganization accounts for a 8.2% decrease in quantity-based productivity while the average decrease in
productivity for these …rms was about 1%. Reorganization accounts for more than 100% of the overall
change in productivity of expanding and downsizing …rms! These results underscore the importance of the
reorganization of …rms as a source of aggregate productivity gains in the economy.


5    Conclusion
Large …rm expansions involve lumpy reorganizations that a¤ect …rm productivity. Firms that reorganize
and add a layer increase hours of work by 25% and value added by slightly more than 3%, while …rms that do
not reorganize decrease hours slightly and value added by only 0.1%. Reorganization therefore accompanies
…rms’expansions. A reorganization that adds layers allows the …rm to operate at a larger scale. We have
shown that such a reorganization leads to increases in quantity-based productivity of about 8%. Even
though the productive e¢ ciency of the …rm is enhanced by adding layers, its revenue-based productivity
declines by around 7%. The new organizational structure lowers the marginal cost of the …rm and it allows
it to increase its scale. This makes …rms expand their quantity and move down their demand curves, thereby
lowering prices and revenue-based productivity.
    We use a detailed data set of Portuguese …rms to show that these facts are very robustly present in
the data. Our data set is somewhat special in that it not only includes employer-employee matched data,
necessary to built a …rm’s hierarchy, but it also includes information on quantity produced. This allows
us to contrast the e¤ect of reorganization, using fairly ‡exible methodologies, to calculate quantity and
revenue-based productivity. Furthermore, given that we have a relatively long panel, we show that the
results hold using a large number of …xed e¤ects on top of time and industry dummies. We do not …nd
any case in which the evidence signi…cantly falsi…es the main hypothesis of the e¤ect of a reorganization on
both types of …rm productivity. In contrast, we present signi…cant evidence of a causal e¤ect of an increase
in layers on both revenue-based and quantity-based productivity.
    Our …ndings underscore the role that organizational decisions play in determining …rm productivity.
Our results, however, can be viewed more broadly as measuring the impact of lumpy …rm level changes on
the endogenous component of …rm productivity. Many changes that increase the capacity of the …rm to
grow (like building a new plant or production line, or creating a new export link with a foreign partner) will
probably result in similar e¤ects on quantity and revenue-based productivity. In our view, the advantage


                                                     42
of looking at reorganizations using a …rm’s management layers, as de…ned by occupational classi…cations, is
that …rms change them often and in a very systematic way. Furthermore, this high frequency implies that
many of the observed ‡uctuations in both quantity-based and revenue-based productivity result from these
endogenous …rm decisions and should not be treated as exogenous shocks to the …rm.
      We also provide new evidence on how …rms change prices conditional on changes in layers. These
results relate to a large body of literature trying to underscore the magnitude of cost pass-through into
prices. While our conditional results are larger than the ones found in this literature, once we calculate the
unconditional pass-through we obtain exactly the same numbers others have computed in similar datasets.
Hence, conditioning on whether or not a …rm has reorganized is important to understand the pricing decisions
of …rms.
      Recognizing that part of a …rm’s productivity changes are endogenous is relevant because the ability
of …rms to change their organization might depend on the economic environment in which they operate.
We have shown that changing the number of management layers is important for …rms to realize large
productivity gains when they grow. Environments in which building larger hierarchies is hard or costly
due, for example, to the inability to monitor managers or to enforce detailed labor contracts prevent …rms
from obtaining these productivity gains.39 This, among other factors, could explain why …rms in developing
countries tend to grow less rapidly (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014).




 39
      See Bloom et al. (2013) for some evidence on potential impediments in India.


                                                              43
References
 [1] Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G, Frazer, 2015. “Identi…cation properties of recent production function
     estimators.” Econometrica, 83:6, 2411-2451.

 [2] Arellano, M. and Bover, O., 1995. “Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of error-
     components models.” Journal of econometrics, 68:1, 29-51.

 [3] Berman, N., P. Martin, and T. Mayer, 2012. “How Do Di¤erent Exporters React to Exchange Rate
     Changes?.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127:1, 437-92.

 [4] Berry, S. J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes, 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.”Econometrica,
     63:4, 841-890.

 [5] Bertrand, M., 2004. “From the invisible handshake to the invisible hand? How import competition
     changes the employment relationship.” Journal of Labor Economics, 22:4, pp.723–765.

 [6] Bilir, L.K. and Morales, E., 2016. “The Impact of Innovation in the Multinational Firm.” National
     Bureau of Economic Research, Working paper 22160.

 [7] Blanchard, O. and Portugal, P., 2001. “What Hides Behind an Unemployment Rate: Comparing Por-
     tuguese and U.S. Labor Markets.” American Economic Review, 91:1, 187-207.

 [8] Bloom, N., B. Eifert, D. McKenzie, A. Mahajan, and J. Roberts, 2013. “Does Management Matter:
     Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128:1, 1-51.

 [9] Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen, 2016. “Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact of
     Chinese Imports on Innovation, It and Productivity.” The Review of Economic Studies, 83:1, 87-117.

[10] Cabral, L. and Mata, J., 2003. “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and Theory.”
     American Economic Review, 93:4, 1075-1090.

[11] Campa, J. M., and L. S. Goldberg, 2010. “The Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates: Distribution
     Margins, Imported Inputs, and Trade Exposure.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:2, 392-407.

[12] Caliendo, L., Monte, F., and Rossi-Hansberg, E., 2015. “The Anatomy of French Production Hierar-
     chies.” Journal of Political Economy, 123:4, 809-852.

[13] Caliendo, L. and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2012. “The Impact of Trade on Organization and Productivity.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127:3, 1393-1467.

[14] Chatterjee, A., R. Dix-Carneiro, and J. Vichyanond, 2013. “Multi-Product Firms and Exchange Rate
     Fluctuations.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5:2, 77-110.

[15] De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski, 2012. “Markups and Firm-level Export Status.”American Economic
     Review, 102:6, 2437-2471.

[16] De Loecker, J., Goldberg, P.K., Khandelwal, A.K. and N. Pavcnik , 2016. “Prices, Markups, and Trade
     Reform.” Econometrica, 84:2, 445-510.



                                                     44
[17] Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. and C. Syverson, 2008. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and E¢ ciency: Se-
     lection on Productivity or Pro…tability?.” American Economic Review, 98:1, 394-425.

[18] Friedrich, B.U. 2015. “Trade Shocks, Firm Hierarchies and Wage Inequality.” Yale University, mimeo.

[19] Forlani, E., Martin, R., Mion, G. and Muuls, M., 2015 “Unraveling Firms: Demand, Productivity and
     Markups Heterogeneity.” CEPR Discussion Papers 11058.

[20] Garicano, L., 2000. “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production.”Journal of Political
     Economy, 108:5, 874-904.

[21] Garicano, L. and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2006. “Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge Economy.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121:4, 1383-1435.

[22] Garicano, L. and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2015. “Knowledge-based Hierarchies: Using Organizations to
     Understand the Economy.” Annual Reviews of Economics, 7, 1-30.

[23] Garcia-Marin, A. and N. Voigtländer, 2014. “Exporting and Plant-Level E¢ ciency Gains: It’s in the
     Measure.” NBER Working Paper No. 19033.

[24] Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow, 2014. “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 129:3, 1335-1384..

[25] Klette, T. J. and Griliches, Z., 1996. “The inconsistency of common scale estimators when output prices
     are unobserved and endogenous.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 11, 343-361.

[26] Levinsohn, J. and Petrin, A., 2003. “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control for
     Unobservables.” The Review of Economic Studies, 70:2, 317-341.

[27] Marschak, J. and Andrews, W., 1944. “Random simultaneous equations and the theory of production.”
     Econometrica 12, 143-205.

[28] Mion, G. and Opromolla, L., 2014. “Managers’Mobility, Trade Performance, and Wages.” Journal of
     International Economics, 94:1, 85-101.

[29] Olley, S. and A. Pakes, 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
     Industry.” Econometrica, 64:6, 1263-97.

[30] Park, A., Yang, D., Shi, X. and Jiang, Y., 2010. “Exporting and …rm performance: Chinese exporters
     and the Asian …nancial crisis.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:4, pp.822–842.

[31] Revenga, A.L., 1992. “Exporting jobs?: The impact of import competition on employment and wages
     in US manufacturing.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107:1, pp.255–284.

[32] Rosen, S., 1982. “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings.”The Bell Journal of Economics,
     13:2, 311-323.

[33] Tåg, J. 2013. “Production Hierarchies in Sweden.” Economics Letters 121:2, 210-213.

[34] Wooldridge, J.M. 2009. “On estimating …rm-level production functions using proxy variables to control
     for unobservables.” Economics Letters 104:3, 112–114.


                                                    45
                                                  Appendix
A      Additional Details about Data, Tables and Figures
We start with the matched employer-employee data set, keeping only …rms in the manufacturing sector
located in mainland Portugal and dropping …rms with non-positive sales. Information for the year 2001
for the matched employer-employee data set was only collected at the …rm-level. Given that worker-level
variables are missing in 2001 we have to drop all …rm-level observations for 2001. There are in total 353,311
…rm-year observations. We then focus on the worker-level information and drop a minority of workers with
an invalid social security number and with multiple jobs in the same year. We further drop worker-year
pairs whenever (i) their monthly normal or overtime hours are non-positive or above 480; (ii) the sum of
weekly normal and overtime hours is below 25 and above 80; (iii) their age is below 16 and above 65 years;
(iv) they are not full-time employees of the …rm. Based on the resulting sample, we trim worker-year pairs
whose monthly wage is outside a range de…ned by the corresponding year bottom and top 0.5 percentiles.
This leaves us with 321,719 …rm-year and 5,174,324 worker-year observations. In the analysis, we focus
on manufacturing …rms belonging to industries (NACE rev.1 2-digits between 15 and 37) excluding 16
"Manufacture of tobacco products", 23 "Manufacture of coke, re…ned petroleum products and nuclear fuel",
30 "Manufacture of o¢ ce machinery and computers", and 37 "Recycling", due to con…dentiality reasons.
    We then turn to the balance sheet data set and recover information on …rms’operating revenues, material
assets, costs of materials, and third-party supplies and services. We compute value-added as operating
revenues minus costs of materials and third-party supplies and services. We drop …rm-year pairs with non-
positive value-added, material assets, cost of materials, and size. This reduces the size of the overall sample
to 61,872 …rm-year observations and 2,849,363 worker-year observations.
    Finally, we turn to the production data set and recover information on …rm-product sales and volume for
each …rm-product-year triple in the data set. In the production data set a product is identi…ed by a 10-digits
code, plus an extra 2-digits that are used to de…ne di¤erent variants of the variable.40 The …rst 8 digits
correspond to the European PRODCOM classi…cation while the additional two have been added by INE to
further re…ne PRODCOM. The volume is recorded in units of measurement (number of items, kilograms,
liters) that are product-speci…c while the value is recorded in current euros. We drop observations where
the quantity produced, quantity sold, and sales are all zero. For each product-…rm-year combination, we
are able to compute a unit value. We adjust the quantity sold, for each …rm-year-product, by multiplying
it by the average (across …rms) product-year unit value. We then construct a more aggregate partition of
products based on the …rst 2-digits as well as on the unit of measurement. More speci…cally, we assign
10-digits products sharing the same …rst 2 digits and unit of measurement to the same aggregate product.
We keep only manufacturing products, and aggregate quantity sold and sales at the …rm-year-product level
following the new de…nition of a product. We restrict the analysis to products with at least 50 …rm-year
observations. Finally, we merge the production data with the matched employer-employee and …rm balance
sheet data.
    Given that we restricted the set of products considered in the analysis, we compute the ratio between
total …rm-year sales in the sample coming from the production data set and …rm-year sales in the …rm
  40
     From the raw data it is possible to construct di¤erent measures of the volume and value of a …rm’s’ production. For the
sake of this project we use the volume and value corresponding to a …rms’sales of its products. This means we exclude products
produced internally and to be used in other production processes within the …rm as well as products produced for other …rms,
using inputs provided by these other …rms. The advantage of using this de…nition is that it nicely corresponds to the cost of
materials coming from the balance sheet data.


                                                             46
balance sheet sample and drop …rm-year pairs we extreme values of the ratio (below 25 percent and above
105 percent). We then adjust …rm sales (from the balance sheet data), cost of materials, material assets,
wage bill, size, value-added, wage bill of layer zero, and number of employees in layer zero using the above
sales ratio. We then split the same set of variables into parts associated with each product, using the
product sales in the production data set. We trim …rm-year-product triples that do not satisfy one or more
of the following constraints: the sum of cost of materials and wages, as a share of sales, below one; unit
value between the 1st and 99th percentiles; cost of materials as a share of sales between the 1st and 99th
percentiles; ratio of material assets to size between the 1st and 99th percentiles. The size of the sample is
now 19,031 …rm-year observations and 1,593,294 worker-year observations.

                               Table A.1: Classi…cation of Workers According to Hierarchical Levels
Level                                            Tasks                                                     Skills
1. Top executives (top management)               Definition of the firm general policy or consulting       Knowledge of management and coordination of firms
                                                 on the organization of the firm; strategic planning;      fundamental activities; knowledge of management and
                                                 creation or adaptation of technical, scientific and       coordination of the fundamental activities in the field to
                                                 administrative methods or processes                       which the individual is assigned and that requires the
                                                                                                           study and research of high responsibility and technical
                                                                                                           level problems
2. Intermediary executives (middle               Organization and adaptation of the guidelines             Technical and professional qualifications directed to
management)                                      established by the superiors and directly linked          executive, research, and management work
                                                 with the executive work
3. Supervisors, team leaders                     Orientation of teams, as directed by the superiors,       Complete professional qualification with a specialization
                                                 but requiring the knowledge of action processes
4. Higher-skilled professionals                  Tasks requiring a high technical value and defined        Complete professional qualification with a specialization
                                                 in general terms by the superiors                         adding to theoretical and applied knowledge

5. Skilled professionals                         Complex or delicate tasks, usually not repetitive,        Complete professional qualification implying theoretical
                                                 and defined by the superiors                              and applied knowledge
6. Semi-skilled professionals                    Well defined tasks, mainly manual or mechanical           Professional qualification in a limited field or practical and
                                                 (no intellectual work) with low complexity, usually       elementary professional knowledge
                                                 routine and sometimes repetitive
7. Non-skilled professionals                     Simple tasks and totally determined                       Practical knowledge and easily acquired
                                                                                                           in a short time
8. Apprentices, interns, trainees                Apprenticeship
Notes: Hierarchical levels defined according to Decreto Lei 121/78 of July 2nd (Lima and Pereira, 2003).




   All monetary values are de‡ated to 2005 euros using the monthly (aggregated to annual) Consumer Price
Index (CPI - Base 2008) by Special Aggregates from Statistics Portugal. Monthly wages are converted to
annual by multiplying by 14.
   In order to construct our …rm level exchange rate shock, we follow Bertrand (2004), Park et al. (2010)
and Revenga (1992). Nominal exchange rates and consumer price indexes data come from the International
Financial Statistics (IFS) dataset provided by the International Monetary fund and refer to the period
1995-2005. Using this data along with …rm-level information on exports and imports across countries we
construct two …rm-time speci…c instruments; one based on …rm-exports and one based on …rm-imports.
   We start by computing the log real exchange rate between Portugal (h) and any other country (k) at
time t using the formula:
                                                            ehkt
                                   log(RERkt ) = log
                                                       CP Iht =CP Ikt
where the nominal exchange rate (ehkt ) is de…ned as units of home currency per unit of k currency at time
t while CP Iht and CP Ikt are the consumer price indexes of Portugal and country k respectively.

                                                                                       47
    In the case of the export IV we look at the portfolio of destinations k served by …rm i at time t 1
and compute export shares for each destination k: EX_sikt 1 . We then use such shares to aggregate
log(RERkt ) at time t across countries to obtain a …rm-time speci…c log real exchange rate:
                                                  X
                              log(EX_RERit ) =        EX_sikt 1 log(RERkt )
                                                    k

    We construct a similar instrument using information on import origins shares: log(IM _RERit ). Note
that the level of log(EX_RERit ) and log(IM _RERit ) does not mean much per se. What does have
a precise meaning is the time change within a …rm which indicates whether there has been an overall
appreciation or a depreciation of the real exchange rate faced by a particular …rm on the export and import
markets. Consequently, we use the change between t 1 and t of log(EX_RERit ) and log(IM _RERit ) as
instruments in t. To be precise, we use the product of these change and the export or import intensity of the
…rm (exports over turnover or imports over inputs expenditure) in t 1 as an instrument. The export-based
appreciation or depreciation is meant to capture shocks to a …rm’s demand while import-based appreciation
or depreciation proxies for cost shocks.
    Some concepts are recurring in the explanation of a majority of the tables and …gures. We de…ne them
here and consider them understood main text:
     Layer number. In the matched employer-employee data set, each worker, in each year, has to be
     assigned to a category following a (compulsory) classi…cation of workers de…ned by the Portuguese law
     (see Table A.1 and Mion and Opromolla, 2014). Classi…cation is based on the tasks performed and
     skill requirements, and each category can be considered as a level in a hierarchy de…ned in terms of
     increasing responsibility and task complexity (qualif ). On the basis of the hierarchical classi…cation
     and taking into consideration the actual wage distribution, we partition the available categories into
     occupations. We assign "Top executives (top management)" to occupation 3; "Intermediary executives
     (middle management)" and "Supervisors, team leaders" to occupation 2; "Higher-skilled profession-
     als" and some "Skilled professionals" to occupation 1; and the remaining employees, including "Skilled
     professionals", "Semi-skilled professionals", "Non-skilled professionals", and "Apprenticeship" to oc-
     cupation 0. The position of the workers in the hierarchy of the …rm, starting from 0 (lowest layer,
     present in all …rms) to 3 (highest layer, only present in …rms with 3 layers of management).
     Number of layers of management. A …rm reporting c occupational categories will be said to have
     L = c 1 layers of management: hence, in our data we will have …rms spanning from 0 to 3 layers
     of management (as in CMRH). In terms of layers within a …rm we do not keep track of the speci…c
     occupational categories but simply rank them. Hence a …rm with occupational categories 2 and 0 will
     have 1 layer of management, and its organization will consist of a layer 0 corresponding to some skilled
     and non-skilled professionals, and a layer 1 corresponding to intermediary executives and supervisors.
     Reorganization in year t. A …rm reorganizes in year t when it changes the number of management
     layers with respect to those observed in the most recent prior available year (year t 1 in most cases).
     Year of the …rst observed reorganization for a …rm. The earliest reorganization year observed
     (for those …rms …rst appearing in the data prior to 1997) or the …rst year in which a …rm appears in
     the data (for those …rms …rst appearing in the data in 1997 or later).
     Firm industry. The industry of the …rm is measured according to the NACE rev.1 2-digits disag-
     gregation. This includes 19 divisions, from division 15 (Manufacture of food products and beverages)

                                                        48
     to division 36 (Manufacture of furniture; manufacturing n.e.c.). We drop division 16 (Manufacture
     of tobacco products), 23 (Manufacture of coke, re…ned petroleum products and nuclear fuel), and 30
     (Manufacture of o¢ ce machinery and computers) because they comprise very few observations.

     Wage bill. A worker annual wage is computed adding the monthly base and overtime wages plus
     regular bene…ts and multiplying by 14. We apply a trimming of the top and bottom 0:5 per cent
     within each year. A …rm wage bill is the sum of the annual wages of all its workers that satisfy the
     criteria listed above.

     Value added. Value added is computed, from the balance sheet data set, as operating revenues minus
     costs of materials and third-party supplies and services.

     Revenue productivity. The log of the ratio between …rm sales and employment.

     Value added productivity. The log of the ratio between …rm value added and employment.

     OLS TFP. Log total factor productivity computed from a standard three factors (labor, capital and
     materials) Cobb-Douglas production function model where output is measured by …rm sales and the
     model is estimated via OLS. Separate estimations have been carried for each industry.

     Olley and Pakes revenue-based TFP. Log total factor productivity computed from a standard
     two factors (labor and capital) Cobb-Douglas production function model where output is measured by
     …rm value-added. Productivity shocks are modeled as in Olley and Pakes (1996) while being further
     enriched with layers along the lines presented in Section 5.1. We use the lagged number of management
     layers to instrument Lit in the second stage of the OP procedure. Separate estimations have been
     carried for each industry.

     Wooldridge revenue-based productivity. Log total factor productivity computed from a standard
     two factors (labor and capital) Cobb-Douglas production function model where output is measured
     by …rm value-added. Productivity shocks are modeled as in Wooldridge (2009) while being further
     enriched with layers as described in Section 5.1. Separate estimations have been carried for each
     industry.

     Quantity-based TFP. We run separate quantity-based productivity estimations for each of the
     aggregate products using variations of the MULAMA methodology. See the next Appendix for a
     detailed explanation of the estimation methodologies.

   Tables and Figures Description
    Table 5: This table reports, for each year, the number of …rms in Sample 1 and corresponding averages
across all …rms for selected variables. Value added, hours, and wage are de…ned above. Value added is in
2005 euros. Wage is average hourly wage in 2005 euros. Hours are yearly. # of layers is the average number
of layers of management across …rms in each year.
    Table B-1: Table B-1 reports summary statistics on …rm-level outcomes, grouping …rm-year observa-
tions according to the number of layers of management reported (# of layers). Firm-years is the number
of …rm-years observations in the data with the given number of layers of management. Value added, hours,
and wage are de…ned above. Value added in 000s of 2005 euros. Wage is either average or median hourly
wage in 2005 euros. Both value added and wages are detrended. Hours are yearly.


                                                   49
    Table B-2 and B-3: Table B-2 reports the fraction of …rms that satisfy a hierarchy in hours, grouping
…rms by their number of layers of management (# number of layers). Hours NLl is the number of hours
reported in layer l in an L layers of management …rm. For L = 1; 2; 3, and l = 0; :::; L 1 we say that a
…rm satis…es a hierarchy in hours between layers number l and l + 1 in a given year if NLl     NLl+1 , i.e. if the
number of hours worked in layer l is at least as large as the number of hours worked in layer l + 1; moreover,
we say that a …rm satis…es a hierarchy at all layers if NLl     NLl+1 8l = 0; :::; L 1, i.e. if the number of
hours worked in layer l is at least as large as the number of hours in layer l + 1, for all layers in the …rm.
Following these de…nitions, the top panel reports, among all …rms with L = 1; 2; 3 layers of management,
the fraction of those that satisfy a hierarchy in hours at all layers (…rst column), and the fraction of those
that satisfy a hierarchy in hours between layer l and l + 1, with l = 0; :::; L 1 (second to fourth column).
    Table B-3 is the same as Table B-2 for the case of wages, where wL   l is the average hourly wage in layer

l in an L layers of management …rm.
    Table B-4: Table B-4 reports the distribution of the number of layers of management at time t + 1,
grouping …rms according to the number of layers of management at time t. Among all …rms with L layers
of management (L = 0; :::; 3) in any year from 1996 to 2004, the columns report the fraction of …rms that
have layers 0; :::; 3 the following year (from 1997 to 2005), or are not present in the dataset, Exit. The table
also reports, in the bottom row, the distribution of the new …rms by their initial number of layers. The
elements in the table sum to 100% by row.
    Table B-5: This table shows changes in …rm-level outcomes between adjacent years for all …rms (All),
and for the subsets of those that increase (Increase L), don’t change (No change in L) and decrease (Decrease
L) layers. It reports changes in log hours, log normalized hours, log value added, log average wage, and
log average wage in common layers for the whole sample. The change in average wage for common layers
in a …rm that transitions from L to L0 layers is the change in the average wage computed using only the
min fL; L0 g layers before and after the transition. To detrend a variable, we subtract from all the log changes
in a given year the average change during the year across all …rms.
    Table B-6: This table reports the results of regressions of log change in normalized hours by layer on
log change in value added for …rms that do not change their number of layers of management L across two
adjacent periods. Speci…cally, we run a regression of log change in normalized hours at layer l (layer) in a
…rm with L (# of layers in the …rm) layers of management on a constant and log change in value added
across all the …rms that stay at L layers of management across two adjacent years. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses.
    Table B-7: This table reports the results of regressions of log change in hourly wage by layer on log
change in value added for …rms that do not change their number of layers of management L across two
adjacent periods. Speci…cally, we run a regression of log change in average hourly wage at layer l (layer) in
a …rm with L (# of layers in the …rm) layers of management on a constant and log change in value added
across all the …rms that stay at L layers of management across two adjacent years. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses.
    Table B-8: This table shows estimates of the average log change in normalized hours and estimates
of the average log change in hourly wage at each layer l (Layer) among …rms that transition from L (#
of layers before) to L0 layers (# of layers after), with L 6= L0 : for a transition from L to L0 , we can only
evaluate changes for layer number l = 0; :::; min fL; L0 g. d ln nlLit is the average log change in the transition,
estimated as a regression of the log change in the number of normalized hours in layer l in two adjacent
                           l
years on a constant. d ln wLit is the average log change in the transition, estimated as a regression of the log


                                                        50
change in the average hourly wage in layer l in two adjacent years on a constant. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses.
    Table 6: The data underlying Table 6 is composed of sequences of …rm-product-years with either one
or zero changes in layers. For a given product, we de…ne a …rm sequence of type L L0 as the series of
years in which a …rm sells the corresponding product and has the same consecutively observed number of
management layers L plus the adjacent series of years in which a …rm sells the product and has the same
consecutively observed number of management layers L0 . For example, a …rm that we observed selling the
product all years between 1996 and 2000 and that has zero layers in 1996, 1997, and 2000 and one layer
in 1998 and 1999 would have two sequences: An (increasing) 0-1 sequence (1996 to 1999) as well as a
(decreasing) 1-0 sequence (1998 to 2000). Firms that never change layers in our sample form a constant-
layer sequence. We group …rm-product sequences into “Increasing”, “Decreasing”, and “Constant”sequence
types.
    For each type of sequence, Table 6 shows estimates of regressions where the dependent variable is
Wooldridge revenue TFP in a given year. The key regressor is the change in the number of management
layers in the …rm in year t. We control for the Wooldridge revenue TFP in the previous year, and include a
set of year and industry dummies. Firm-level clustered standard errors are in parentheses. The last column
of Table 6 shows estimates of a regression that pools all types of sequences.
    Table 7: Table 7 shows estimates of the same type of regressions described for Tables 6 while allowing
for …rm-product-sequence …xed e¤ects. Instead of OLS we employ the system GMM estimator proposed by
Arellano and Bover (1995) within the context of dynamic panel data with endogenous regressors.
    Table 8: Table 8 shows estimates of the same type of regressions described for Table 6 and 7. The only
di¤erence being that the dependent variable is (log) revenue labor productivity.
    Table 9 and Table 10: This set of Tables show estimates of the same type of regressions described
for Tables 6 and 7. The dependent variable is (log) quantity-based productivity computed according to
the MULAMA methodology extended for incorporating changes in the organization of the labor input as
described in Section 4.2.2. In this case the key regressor is the change in the number of management layers
of the …rm in t. We employ product-group dummies instead of industry dummies while always using year
dummies.
    Table 11 and Table 12: In this set of Tables we instrument both for the change in quantity and for the
change in the number of layers using our export- and import-based real exchange rate changes, the number
of layers in t 1, revenue, demand shocks and markups at time t 1, capital at time t, productivity at
time t 2 as well as all of these variables lagged to the …rst available year. We employ both product-group
dummies and year dummies. In all Tables we report the Kleibergen Paap weak instrument statistic.
    Figure B-1, B-2, and B-3: These …gures report kernel density estimates of the distribution of log
value added (Figure B-1), log hours worked (Figure B-2) and log hourly wage (Figure B-3) by number of
layers in the …rm. One density is estimated for each group of …rms with the same number of layers.




                                                    51
B    Portuguese Production Hierarchies: Facts
In this section we reproduce some of the main results in CMRH for France using our data for Portugal in
Sample 1. These results underscore our claim that the concept of layers we use is meaningful. We show
this by presenting evidence that shows, …rst, that …rms with di¤erent numbers of layers are systematically
di¤erent in a variety of dimensions; second, that …rms change layers in a systematic and expected way;
third, that the workforce within a layer responds as expected as …rms add or subtract layers.

                          Table B-1: Firm-level data description by number of layers
                                                                                                      Mean                                           Median
                         # of layers              Firm-years           Value added                      Hours                          Wage          Wage
                             0          14,594         267.2       12,120.7  3.55     3.16
                             1          14,619         648.4       31,532.0  4.03     3.64
                             2          12,144        2,022.7      96,605.2  4.51     4.11
                             3          13,018       10,286.2     327,166.8  5.73     5.20
                         Notes: Value added in 000s of 2005 euros. Wage is either average or
                         median hourly wage in 2005 euros. Hours are yearly.



    Table B-1 presents the number of …rm-year observations by number of management layers as well as
average value added, hours, and wages. It also presents the median wage given that the wage distribution
can be sometimes very skewed. The evidence clearly shows that …rms with more layers are larger in terms of
value added and hours. It also shows that …rms with more layers pay on average higher wages. Figures B-1

                                                  Figure B-1: Value Added Density
                                                                             Raw data, 2005 euros
                                       .5
                                       .4
                                       .3
                             Density
                                       .2
                                       .1
                                       0




                                            100     1000       10000               100000                1000000            10000000     1.000e+08
                                                                                  Value added (log scale)


                                                                         0 lyrs               1 lyr                2 lyrs

                                                                         3 lyrs




to B-3 present the distributions of value added, employment and the hourly wage by layer. The distributions
are clearly ordered. In Figure B-2 the modes in the distribution of hours corresponds to the number of hours
of one full-time employee, two full-time employees, etc. The peaks presented in …rms with zero number of
layers corresponds to the number of hours of discrete numbers of full time workers. This is also appreciated,
although to a lesser degree in …rms with one management layer. For a similar depiction of how hours are
distributed for …rms with di¤erent number of layers please see Figure 3 in Caliendo et al. (2015). The
…gures show that …rms with di¤erent numbers of layers are in fact very di¤erent.
    Table B-2 shows that the implied hierarchical structure of …rms is hierarchical in the majority of cases.

                                                                                     52
                                                  Figure B-2: Employment (Hours) Density
                                                                                   Raw data




                                       .6
                                       .4
                             Density
                                       .2
                                       0




                                             1000            10000                100000                         1000000             10000000
                                                                                 Hours (log scale)


                                                                     0 lyrs                1 lyr        2 lyrs

                                                                     3 lyrs




                                                     Figure B-3: Hourly Wage Density

                                                                         Raw data, 2005 euros
                                       1.5
                                       1
                             Density
                                       .5
                                       0




                                              1          2                           5                           10        15   20      25
                                                                              Hourly wage (log scale)


                                                                     0 lyrs                1 lyr        2 lyrs

                                                                     3 lyrs




Table B-3 shows that lower layers command lower wages in the vast majority of cases. Table B-4 presents a
transition matrix across layers. In Table B-5 we divide …rms depending on whether they add, do not change,
or drop layers, and present measured changes in the total number of hours, number of hours normalized by
the number of hours in the top layer, value added, and average wages. For all these measures we present
changes after de-trending in order to control for the time trends in the data that we highlighted before.
Tables B-6 and B-7 present the elasticity of normalized hours (hours at each layer relative to the top layer)
and wages, respectively, to value added for …rms that do not add layers. The …rst column indicates the
number of layers in the …rm, and the second the particular layer for which the elasticity is calculated. Table
B-8 shows changes in normalized hours and wages when …rms reorganize. The tables show the total number
of layers before and after the reorganization, as well as the layer for which the log-change is computed.



                                                                                 53
                        Table B-2: Percentage of …rms that satisfy a hierarchy in hours
                                           l     l+1                  0              1         1            2      2        3
                            # of layers   NL    NL   all l           NL             NL        NL           NL     NL       NL
                                1               91.64                     91.64           –                           –
                                2               69.62                     92.07         77.35                         –
                                3               50.51                     88.70         74.34                       83.65
                                l = hours at
                               NL              layer l of a …rm           with L layers.



                        Table B-3: Percentage of …rms that satisfy a hierarchy in wages
                                           l      l+1                  0             1        1             2     2         3
                            # of layers   wL     wL   all l           wL            wL       wL            wL    wL        wL
                                 1              75.87                     75.87                      –               –
                                 2              65.66                     85.21                    79.57             –
                                 3              67.11                     92.36                    84.62           87.82




C     MULAMA and Wooldridge (2009) Estimation Details and Extensions
In this appendix we show how to derive the …rst and second stage estimating equations for the baseline
MULAMA procedure (Appendix C.1), for the MULAMA procedure with change in layers (Appendix C.2),
and for the MULAMA procedure with change in layers and quantity (Appendix C.3). In Appendix C.4
we also provide an extension of the Wooldridge (2009) revenue productivity methodology to account for
changes in layers and quantities.

C.1    Baseline MULAMA
Demand in log is given by
                                                                  1                          1
                                           pit =        1                       it                 qit ;                        (1)
                                                                     it                       it
the markup then is
                                                                               it
                                                            it   =                      :                                       (2)
                                                                          it        1
    The production function in log is

                                qit = ait +     O oit   +        M mit         +(                    M          O )kit ;        (3)

and the assumptions over processes for productivity and demand are given by

                                               ait =             a    ait       1    +       ait ;                              (4)
                                                 it     =                 it 1      +        it :                               (5)

    From cost minimization one obtains that the marginal cost is given by
                                                  @Ci                 1                     Ci
                                                      =                                                                         (6)
                                                  @Qi                O+             M       Qi




                                                                     54
                        Table B-4: Distribution of layers at t + 1 conditional on layers at t
                                                                                    # of   layers at     t+1
                                                                 Exit               0          1           2            3            Total
                                                        0        31.19           54.29      12.54        1.69         0.29           100.00
                                                        1        25.75           10.26      51.12        11.35        1.51           100.00
                             # of layers at t           2        21.73            1.49      12.06        49.62       15.09           100.00
                                                        3        15.68            0.37       1.46        12.90       69.59           100.00
                                                       New       85.08            5.31       3.77         3.01        2.83           100.00



                                             Table B-5: Changes in …rm-level outcomes
                              # of layers                       All          Increase L         No Change in L               Decrease L
                        dln total hours                      -0.0068 a          0.2419 a           -0.0080 a                   -0.2992 a
                        - detrended                                             0.2472 a           -0.0011                     -0.2911 a
                        dln normalized hours                  0.0099 b          1.0890 a           -0.0204 a                   -1.1043 a
                        - detrended                                             1.0761 a           -0.0299 a                   -1.1128 a
                        dlnVA                                 0.0173 a          0.0509 a           0.0155 a                    -0.0126 a
                        - detrended                                             0.0323 a           -0.0013                     -0.0307 a
                        dln avg. wage                         0.0369 a          0.0683 a           0.0348 a                     0.0122 a
                        - detrended                                             0.0303 a           -0.0018 c                   -0.0253 a
                           common layers                      0.0356 a          0.0068 b           0.0348 a                     0.0750 a
                           - detrended                                         -0.0295 a           -0.0005                      0.0387 a
                        Notes:      a   p<0.01,    b   p<0.05,    c   p<0.1.




   Using (1) and (2), revenue can be expressed in the following way
                                                                             1
                                                                rit =             (qit +       it ) :                                                          (7)
                                                                             it

   Using (6) note that expenditure shares are related to markups in the following way
                                                                  1          sOit            sM it
                                                                         =             =             :                                                         (8)
                                                                   it             O            L



   First stage

   In order to derive the estimating equation start from (3) and (4) to obtain

                         qit =          O   (oit       kit ) +        M   (mit         kit ) + kit +             a   ait     1   +      ait ;                  (9)

then substituting this expression into (7)

                        O                              M                                                  a                  1                    1
                rit =        (oit       kit ) +              (mit         kit ) +            kit +            ait    1   +             ait    +        it ;
                        it                              it                              it               it                      it               it

rearranging and using (8) we de…ne as in the main body of the text

                                                        rit      sOit (oit             kit ) sM it (mit                  kit )
                                    LHSit =                                                                                      ;                            (10)
                                                                                        sM it




                                                                                  55
             Table B-6: Elasticity of n`L with respect to value added for …rms that do not change L
                                            # of layers  Layer  Elasticity       # observations
                                                 1         0      0.1155 a           6,351
                                                 2         0      0.1146 a           4,998
                                                 2         1      -0.0147            4,998
                                                 3         0      0.1760 a           7,079
                                                 3         1      0.0847 a           7,079
                                                 3         2      0.0987 a           7,079
                                            Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: a p<0.01,
                                            b p<0.05, c p<0.1.




             Table B-7: Elasticity of wL` with respect to value added for …rms that do not change L
                                            # of layers  Layer  Elasticity       # observations
                                                 0         0      0.0056             6,987
                                                 1         0     0.0216 a            6,351
                                                 1         1     0.0283 a            6,351
                                                 2         0     0.0150 b            4,998
                                                 2         1     0.0229 b            4,998
                                                 2         2     0.0303 b            4,998
                                                 3         0     0.0225 a            7,079
                                                 3         1     0.0201 a            7,079
                                                 3         2     0.0298 a            7,079
                                                 3         3     0.0199 b            7,079
                                            Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses: a p<0.01,
                                            b p<0.05, c p<0.1.




or written di¤erently
                                                                                     a                           1                 1
                                        LHSit =                      kit +               ait       1       +           it   +                   ait :
                                                                 M                M                              M                     M
   We need to …nd expressions for ait                        2   and          it 1 :
   From (7) note that
                                                                 it 1     =       it 1 rit 1                     qit   1;                                                 (11)
then using this expression into (5) we obtain

                                                        it   =                it 1 rit 1                   qit   1     +        it :                                      (12)

   Now from (10) we can obtain

                                                        M                                                        1                     1
                                  ait       2   =           LHSit         1                  kit       1               it 1                      ait 1 ;
                                                        a                                a                        a                    a

using (11) we get

                                    M                                                         1                                                         1
                    ait   2   =             LHSit            1            kit    1                         it 1 rit 1            qit        1                   ait 1 ;
                                        a                             a                        a                                                            a

and after substituting this expression in (4) ;

                                   ait          1   =   M LHSit 1                        kit       1             it 1 rit 1                qit     1    :                 (13)



                                                                                         56
                          Table B-8: d ln n`Lit and d ln wLit
                                                          `
                                                              for …rms that transition
                              # of layers   Layer             d ln n`Lit             `
                                                                               d ln wLit        # observations
                            before    after
                               0        1      0               1.2777 a     0.0062                   1,614
                               0        2      0               1.6705 a     0.0207                    218
                               0        3      0               2.3055 a    -.1878 a                    37
                               1        0      0              -1.2304 a    0.0557 a                  1,275
                               1        2      0               0.5178 a     0.0038                   1,410
                               1        2      1               0.4920 a   -0.0624 a                  1,410
                               1        3      0               0.9402 a   -0.0230 a                   188
                               1        3      1               0.8367 a   -0.1710 a                   188
                               2        0      0              -1.6449 a    0.0692 a                   150
                               2        1      0              -0.5645 a    0.0373 a                  1,215
                               2        1      1              -0.5060 a    0.1192 a                  1,215
                               2        3      0               0.6806 a    -0.0015                   1,520
                               2        3      1               0.7098 a   -0.0113 b                  1,520
                               2        3      2               0.6340 a   -0.0676 a                  1,520
                               3        0      0              -2.5187 a    0.2673 a                    38
                               3        1      0              -0.9772 a    0.0691 a                   149
                               3        1      1              -0.8636 a    0.1672 a                   149
                               3        2      0              -0.7977 a    0.0313 a                  1,312
                               3        2      1              -0.7532 a    0.0467 a                  1,312
                               3        2      2              -0.6465 a    0.1114 a                  1,312
                            Notes: Robust standard            errors in parentheses:           a   p<0.01,
                            b p<0.05, c p<0.1.




Using (13) and (12) into (10) we obtain,

                                                                                                        a
                                 LHSit =              kit +             a LHSit 1                           kit   1
                                                  M                                                 M
                                                                           rit 1
                                                 +(                 a)
                                                                          sM it 1
                                                                           1
                                                 +(       a             )     qit        1
                                                                            M
                                                      1
                                                 +            (   ait   +       it ) :
                                                      M

More compactly, we end up with (12)

                          LHSit = b1 z1it + b2 z2it + b3 z3it + b4 z4it + b5 z5it + uit :


Second stage

Using (8) …rm log output qit can be written as

                         qit =    it sOit (oit   kit ) +           it sM it (mit              kit ) + kit + ait :
Further exploiting (4) and (13), as well as ^b1 =                   M
                                                                           =   sM it          and ^b2 =           a,    we get
                                                                                         it




          oit       kit sOit    mit kit         ^b2                                                                     rit 1^b2
  qit =                       +         + kit +     LHSit                         1
                                                                                              ^b2 kit       1                     + ^b2 qit   1   +   ait
                ^b1     sM it      ^b1          ^b1                                                                   ^b1 sM it 1

                                                                   57
and so
                                                      qit     ^b2 qit       1       = b6 z6it +              ait

where
                          oit       kit sOit    mit kit        ^b2                                                                             rit 1^b2
                 z6it =                       +         + kit + LHSit                                              1
                                                                                                                           ^b2 kit   1                   ;
                                ^b1     sM it      ^b1         ^b1                                                                           ^b1 sM it 1
and b6 = .

C.2      MULAMA with Change in Layers
In this case, the production function in logs can be written as

                                qit = a
                                      ~it +          O   ln W Bit +                  M mit      +(                     M         O )kit ;                      (14)

where W Bit is the wage bill at time t of …rm i:
   The processes for productivity and demand shocks are

                                               a
                                               ~it =              a   a
                                                                      ~it        1   +   L          Lit +          ait ;                                       (15)
                                                it       =             it 1          +       it ;                                                              (16)

where ait and it can be correlated with each other.
     Note that small changes in quantity have no impact on marginal costs through a change in organization
  @~
   ait
( @qit = @@qLitit = 0). Therefore, the short-run marginal cost still satis…es

                                                            @Cit                  1                 Cit
                                                                 =                                      :                                                      (17)
                                                            @Qit                 O+          M      Qit

   Using (1) and (2), log revenue can be expressed in the following way:
                                                                            1
                                                             rit =                  (qit +          it ) :                                                     (18)
                                                                            it

   Using (6) note that expenditure shares are related to markups in the following way
                                                              1             sM it             sOit
                                                                      =                  =              :                                                      (19)
                                                               it                   M               O

where sOit here represents the share of total labor expenditure in total revenue.
   Using (14) and (15) one obtains:

                qit =     O   (ln W Bit        kit ) +       M     (mit              kit ) + kit +                     aa
                                                                                                                        ~it 1    +       L    Lit +    ait ;   (20)

then substituting this expression into (18):
                                          O                                              M
                              rit =            (ln W Bit               kit ) +                  (mit           kit )
                                          it                                             it
                                                              a                          L                         1                 1
                                      +             kit +             a
                                                                      ~it       1   +               Lit +                  ait   +           it :
                                               it             it                         it                        it                it



                                                                                    58
   First stage

   Rearranging and using (19) we de…ne LHSit and get:

                                                               rit         sOit (ln W Bit                kit )            sM it (mit                kit )
                             LHSit                                                                                                                                                                            (21)
                                                                                                       sM it
                                                                                         a                1                          L                          1
                                                   =                     kit +                a
                                                                                              ~it     1+              it   +                  Lit +                     ait :
                                                                M                      M                        M                    M                          M

   We need to …nd expressions for a
                                  ~it                                     2    and           it 1 :   From (7) note that:

                                                                                it 1     =        it 1 rit 1          qit       1;                                                                            (22)

then using this expression into (16) we obtain:

                                                                     it   =                  it 1 rit 1         qit       1    +         it :                                                                 (23)

Now from (21) we can obtain:

                                               M                                                            1                       L                           1
                           a
                           ~it       2   =             LHSit              1              kit      1             it 1                      Lit       1                   ait 1 ;
                                                   a                                 a                      a                       a                               a

while using (22) we get:

                             M                                                               1                                                    L                             1
             a
             ~it   2   =             LHSit             1                  kit    1                    it 1 rit 1              qit    1                      Lit         1               ait 1 ;
                                 a                                   a                        a                                                     a                               a

and after substituting this expression in (15)

                                             a
                                             ~it       1   =     M LHSit 1                            kit   1             it 1 rit 1             qit        1   :                                             (24)

Using (24) and (23) into (21) we obtain:

                                                                                                                                          a
                                                   LHSit =                               kit +          a LHSit 1                               kit     1                                                     (25)
                                                                                     M                                                   M
                                                                                                           rit 1
                                                                                 +(                    a)
                                                                                                          sM it 1
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                 +(          a          )     qit          1
                                                                                                                M
                                                                                         L                      1
                                                                                 +                  Lit +             (       ait   +      it ) ;
                                                                                         M                      M

that we can rewrite as

                                 LHSit = b1 z1it + b2 z2it + b3 z3it + b4 z4it + b5 z5it + b6 z6it + uit ;                                                                                                    (26)

where z1it =kit , z2it =LHSit                1,    z3it =kit              1,    z4it = srMitit 11 , z5it =qit                 1,    z6it = Lit , uit =                      1
                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                (   ait   +       it )   as well as
                                                                                             1
b1 = M , b2 = a , b3 =   a
                         M
                           , b4 =(      a ), b5 = M ( a     ) and b6 = ML
                                                                          . Given our assumptions the error
term uit in is uncorrelated with all of the regressors but z6it = Lit . Coherently with our assumptions we

                                                                                                      59
instrument Lit with Lit 1 and Lit 2 . After doing this we set ^ =^b1 and ^ a =^b2 and do not exploit
parameters’constraints in the estimation.

   Second stage

   From (20) and (24) we have that log output is given by

            qit =        O   (ln W Bit          kit ) +       M     (mit       kit ) + kit
                                                                                              M
                       +     a M LHSit 1                  a   kit    1         a                       rit     1       qit   1      +       L   Lit +    ait :
                                                                                       sM it       1

Substituting (19) and known parameters from the …rst stage, we obtain
                             1 sOit                                          1
               qit =                 (ln W Bit             kit ) +             (mit           kit ) + kit
                             ^ sM it                                         ^
                              ^                                                1 ^a
                        +         a
                                      LHSit    1
                                                          ^ kit      1                             rit     1   + ^ a qit       1   +            Lit +   ait:
                               ^                           a                   ^ sM it                                                  L
                                                                                               1

Note that the only parameters to estimate are                            and          L:   These are identi…ed using a linear model:

                                                qit       ^ qit      1   = b7 z7it + b8 z8it + "it ;                                                                          (27)
                                                           a

where:

                  1 sOit                                  1                                        ^                                              1 ^a
      z7it =              (ln W Bit           kit ) +       (mit          kit ) + kit +                a
                                                                                                           LHSit        1
                                                                                                                                   ^ kit    1                      rit   1;
                  ^ sM it                                 ^                                         ^                               a             ^ sM it      1
      z8it =       Lit ; and "it =        ait ;

as well as b7 =      and b8 = L . Note that z7it and z8it are endogenous and we instrument them with kit ,
  Lit 1 and Lit                      ^
                  2 We then set ^ = b7 and obtain
                   .

                                                   ^ sOit                                          ^
                               a
                               ^it = qit                   (ln W Bit                  kit )          (mit              kit )        ^ kit
                                                   ^ sM it                                         ^

                                                             ^                  ^
                                              ^ it =              and ^ it =        r                              qit :
                                                          ^ sM it            ^ sM it it

C.3      MULAMA with Change in Layers and Quantity
In order to incorporate organization into productivity we substitute Oit in the production function for
C (Oit ; w) =AC (Oit ; w). In this case, the production function is given by

                                  qit = a
                                        ~it +         O   ln W Bit +            M mit         +(                   M         O )kit ;                                         (28)

where W Bit is the wage bill at time t of …rm i. The processes for productivity and demand shocks are

                                        a
                                        ~it =             a   a
                                                              ~it    1   +     L      Lit +         q        qit +      ait ;                                                 (29)
                                         it     =             it 1       +     it ;                                                                                           (30)

                                                                               60
where ait and it can be correlated with each other.
   At any given point in time …rms minimize costs for ‡exible inputs (labor input and materials Mit )
considering capital, as well as a
                                ~it 1 , ait , it and the price of materials and knowledge as given. Note that
small changes in quantity have no impact on marginal costs through a change in organization ( @@qLitit = 0).
                                                                                                                                                                                                           @ qit
However, we allow in (29) changes in quantity to impact TFP through other channels ( @~
                                                                                      ait
                                                                                     @qit =                                                                                                               q @qit    =    q ).
Short-run marginal cost thus satis…es
                                          @Cit      1    q Cit
                                                =              :                                                                                                                                                        (31)
                                          @Qit      O + M Qit

   Using (1) and (2), log revenue can be expressed in the following way:
                                                                                            1
                                                                              rit =                  (qit +              it )                                                                                           (32)
                                                                                             it

Using (31) note that expenditure shares are related to markups
                                                                               1                          sM it               sOit
                                                                                                =                        =                ;                                                                             (33)
                                                                     it       1         q                        M                  O

where sOit here represents the share of labor expenditure in total revenue.
   Using (28) and (29) one obtains:

                                   O                                                         M                                                                                  a
              qit =                           (ln W Bi;t              kit ) +                               (mit             kit ) +                           kit +                         a
                                                                                                                                                                                             ~it    1
                           1             q                                              1            q                                         1           q           1            q
                                         q                                L                                  1
                                                   qit   1   +                         Lit +                                 ait ;                                                                                      (34)
                               1              q                  1            q                         1            q

then substituting this expression into (32)
                       O                                                                    M
      rit =                         (ln W Bi;t               kit ) +                                             (mit               kit ) +                                 kit
               1       q       it                                                  1            q           it                                         1         q     it

                           a                                              q                                                   L                                         1                                  1
              +                              a
                                             ~it    1                                   qit         1    +                                         Lit +                                      ait     +          it :
                   1       q        it                       1            q        it                            1              q         it                     1          q           it                  it



   First stage

   Rearranging and using (33) we de…ne LHSit and get:

                                         rit        sOit (ln W Bi;t                     kit )               sM it (mit                    kit )
               LHSit                                                                                                                                                                                                    (35)
                                                                                   sM it
                                                                 a                          q                            1           q                     L                        1
                               =                   kit +             a
                                                                     ~it      1                     qit      1   +                            it   +                 Lit +                    ait :
                                             M               M                              M                                   M                          M                        M

   We need to …nd expressions for a
                                  ~it                            2   and           it 1 :       From (32) note that:

                                                                      it 1         =        it 1 rit 1                   qit         1;                                                                                 (36)



                                                                                                    61
then using this expression into (30) we obtain:

                                                                        it   =                    it 1 rit 1                     qit       1       +        it :                                                                                  (37)

   Now from (35) we can obtain

                                       M                                                           q                             1         q                               L                                   1
                   a
                   ~it       2   =             LHSit         1               kit      1   +            qit          2                               it 1                               Lit         1                  ait 1 ;
                                           a                            a                          a                                   a                                   a                                     a

while using (36) we get

                       M                                                          q                        1             q                                                                     L                                1
     a
     ~it   2   =             LHSit             1             kit   1   +              qit     2                                      it 1 rit 1               qit          1                               Lit        1                 ait 1 ;
                         a                               a                     a                                    a                                                                              a                            a

and after substituting this expression in (29)

                                 a
                                 ~it   1   =       M LHSit 1                          kit     1            1                 q           it 1 rit 1                qit             1       +           q   qit       1:                           (38)

Using (38) and (37) into (35) we obtain

                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                   LHSit =                                kit +            a LHSit 1                                        kit        1                                                                          (39)
                                                                                   M                                                                    M
                                                                                                                    rit 1
                                                                             +(                        a)
                                                                                                                   sM it 1
                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                             +            a                              q   +       q                      qit        1
                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                          L                             1
                                                                             +                    Lit +                              ait       + 1                 q               it      ;
                                                                                          M                              M

that we can rewrite as:

                                           LHSit = b1 z1it + b2 z2it + b3 z3it + b4 z4it + b5 z5it + b6 z6it + uit ;                                                                                                                              (40)

where z1it =kit , z2it =LHSit                       1,   z3it =kit            1,      z4it = srMitit 11 , z5it =qit                                1,   z6it = Lit , uit =                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ait   + 1             q         it
                                                                                                                                 1
as well as b1 = M , b2 = a , b3 =   M
                                     a
                                       , b4 =(     a ), b5 = M    a          q + q      and b6 = ML
                                                                                                    . Given our
assumptions the error term uit in is uncorrelated with all of the regressors but z6it = Lit that we instruments
with Lit 1 and Lit 2 . Therefore (40) can be estimated via simple OLS. After doing this we set ^ =^b1 and
^ =^b2 and do not exploit parameters’constraints in the estimation.
 a

   Second stage

   From (34) and (38) we have that log output is given by:

                       O                                                     M                                                                                         a                                                            a
   qit =                         (ln W Bi;t              kit ) +                          (mit             kit ) +                                 kit +                                M LHSit 1                                           kit   1
               1             q                                         1              q                                          1             q             1                 q                                            1           q

                             a                 M                                                       q                                       L                                       1
                                                       rit    1        qit    1                                    qit       1   +                          Lit +                                      ait :
                   1             q     sM it       1                                          1                q                     1              q                          1               q




                                                                                                                   62
Substituting (33) and known parameters from the …rst stage, we obtain

                               1 sOit                                                          1                                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                                                           a
         qit =                         (ln W Bi;t                 kit ) +                        (mit             kit ) +                          kit +                       LHSit            1
                   1       q   ^ sM it                                          1          q   ^                                   1           q           1       q   ^

                                   ^ kit                          1 ^a                                a              q                         L                       1
                                    a      1                                         rit   1    +                        qit   1   +                       Lit +                       ait :
                       1       q                 1            q   ^ sM it        1                    1           q                        1        q              1           q

   Note that the only parameters to estimate are ,                                              q   and       L.         These are identi…ed using a linear model:

                                                         qit = b7 z7it + b8 z8it + b9 z9it + "it ;                                                                                                  (41)

where:

                  1 sOit                                          1                                          ^                                                   1 ^a
         z7it =           ln n0iL;t             kit +               (mit             kit ) + kit +               a
                                                                                                                      LHSit            1
                                                                                                                                               ^ kit       1                           rit     1;
                  ^ sM it                                         ^                                           ^                                 a                ^ sM it           1
         z8it   = qit 1 ;
                                                     1
         z9it =        Lit ; and "it =                            ait ;
                                               1          q

as well as
                                                                                            a           q                      L
                                                   b7 =                        ; b8 =                       ; b9 =
                                                              1            q               1          q                   1            q

and so
                                               ^                  ^
                                           ^ = b8                     a
                                                                          ; ^ = ^b7 (1              ^ ); ^ = ^b9 (1                        ^ ):
                                            q   ^b8                                                  q    L                                 q
                                                                   1
    Note that z7it and z9it are endogenous and we instrument them with kit ,                                                                        Lit     1   and Lit        2.      With values
of ^ , ^ q and ^ we …nally have

                                                         ^ sOit                                               ^
                                     a
                                     ^it = qit                   (ln W Bit                      kit )           (mit               kit )           ^ kit
                                                         ^ sM it                                              ^

                                                              ^                                                       ^
                                      ^ it =                                    and ^ it =                                             rit         qit :
                                               ^ sM it (1                 ^ )                         ^ sM it (1               ^ )
                                                                           q                                                    q


C.4      Wooldridge (2009) Revenue Productivity with Change in Layers and Quantity
The labor input Oit is not directly observable, but we can use the fact that

                                                                      C (Oit ; w)        C (Oit ; w)
                                                     Oit =                        Oit =              :                                                                                              (42)
                                                                      C (Oit ; w)       AC (Oit ; w)

The numerator of this expression, C (Oit ; w), is the total expenditure on the labor input, i.e., the total wage
bill of the …rm (which is observable) while the denominator, AC (Oit ; w) = C (Oit ; w) =Oit ; is the unit cost
of the labor input (which is unobservable). Substituting (42) into the production function and multiplying




                                                                                           63
by the price leads to an equation for revenue given by

                            rit = ait +   O   ln C (Oit ; w) +           M mit   +(         M        O )kit ;                   (43)

where ait    pit + ait     O ln AC (Oit ; w) denotes revenue-based productivity. In what follows we assume
    O ln AC (O it ; w) = Lit which implies ait = pit + ait + Lit . Note that O ln AC (Oit ; w) = Lit is what
is implied by the CRH model if we substitute the constraint (5) in the organizational problem with nL  L   ;
for small enough > 0:
    Turning to the time evolution of productivity we follow the literature and impose productivity follows
an autoregressive process. We incorporate into such a process both the impact of changes in organization
( Lit ) and other channels a¤ecting productivity via a change in quantity ( qit ):

                                     ait =      a ait 1   +         Lit +    q    qit +    ait ;                                (44)
where ait is a productivity shock that is i.i.d. across …rms and time. We follow again the literature and
assume ait is uncorrelated with all past values of ait . As far as the correlation between ait and Lit
is concerned we assume this to be nonzero, i.e., the …rm can somehow adjust organization in the wake of
contemporaneous shocks ait . The correlation between ait and qit is also nonzero.
    More speci…cally we assume, in line with the literature, that capital is predetermined in t. We further
allow …rms to optimally choose materials in order to minimize short-run costs. As for the labor input, we
follow Ackerberg et al. (2015) and assume it is somewhere in between capital and materials in terms of
its capacity to adapt to contemporaneous shocks. The cost of materials is common across …rms but can
vary over time while the unit cost of the labor input AC (Oit ; w) varies across …rms and time. From …rst-
order cost minimization conditions we have that materials’choice mit is a function of kit and ait . Indeed,
whatever the structure of organization chosen by the …rm (Lit ) and the optimal production scale (qit ), they
will ultimately pin down ait which in turn, together with capital kit , determines the optimal materials’
expenditure. After inverting the …rst-order conditions of the …rm, we can express ait as a function of capital
and materials, namely, ait = g(kit ; mit ).
    From now onwards we follow Wooldridge (2009) and consider the value-added form of the revenue
function which is known in the literature to perform better in terms of identi…cation. In particular, using
(44) as well as the inverted input demand equation of the …rm, ait 1 = g(kit 1 ; mit 1 ); we obtain
                        0                       0               0                           0             0
               vait =   O   ln C (Oit ; w) +    K kit   +       a g(kit 1 ; mit 1 )   +           Lit +   q     qit +   ait :   (45)
                                                                             0
where vait is value added and, for example, the coe¢ cient O equals O times a scaling factor common to
all other coe¢ cients. The error term ait in (44) is uncorrelated with kit and mit 1 . Hence, g(kit 1 ; mit 1 )
is also uncorrelated with ait in (45). The wage bill C (Oit ; w), the change in the number of layers Lit and
the change in quantity qit are instead endogenous and we instrument them with the wage bill at t 1, the
change in the number of layers at t 1, the number of layers in t 2, the change in quantity at t 1 and the
                                           0
level of quantity in t 2. As for the term a g(kit 1 ; mit 1 ) we use a second order polynomial approximation
in kit 1 and mit 1 . We …nally estimate (45) by IV and ultimately get an estimate of revenue TFP as
                                                            0                          0
                                      b
                                      ait = vait          ^ O ln C (Oit ; w)          ^ K kit :




                                                                    64
D    Supplementary Revenue-based Productivity Results
In this Appendix we provide revenue-productivity results— complementing those of Section 4.1— using a
number of alternative estimation techniques. We group this set of results into OLS (C-1 to C-4), within
estimator (C-5 to C-10), and dynamic panel data (C11-C15).



                                  Table D-1: Value added per worker. OLS
                                                      (1)                  (2)                   (3)             (4)
                          VARIABLES               Increasing            Decreasing             Constant          All

                          Productivity t-1           0.627 a                0.811 a              0.833 a       0.748 a
                                                        (0 .0 2 8 )         (0 .0 2 6 )          (0 .0 1 7 )   (0 .0 1 6 )

                          Change in layers           -0.097 a              -0.179 a                            -0.124 a
                                                        (0 .0 1 3 )         (0 .0 2 3 )                        (0 .0 1 2 )

                          Constant                   3.858 a                1.932 a              1.726 a       2.611 a
                                                        (0 .2 8 9 )         (0 .2 5 7 )          (0 .1 8 3 )   (0 .1 6 7 )


                          Observations                  4,206                2,750                3,090        10,046
                          Adjusted R2                   0.619                0.581                0.750         0.650
                                     F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                    a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                              Table D-2: OLS TFP. OLS
                                                      (1)                  (2)                   (3)             (4)
                          VARIABLES               Increasing            Decreasing             Constant          All

                          Productivity t-1           0.661 a                0.648 a              0.683 a       0.671 a
                                                        (0 .0 2 4 )         (0 .0 2 5 )          (0 .0 2 1 )   (0 .0 1 5 )

                          Change in layers           -0.012 a              -0.020 a                            -0.014 a
                                                        (0 .0 0 3 )         (0 .0 0 4 )                        (0 .0 0 2 )

                          Constant                      -0.001              -0.003                0.005         0.001
                                                        (0 .0 0 6 )         (0 .0 0 8 )          (0 .0 0 7 )   (0 .0 0 4 )


                          Observations                  4,171                2,734                3,055         9,960
                          Adjusted R2                   0.435                0.399                0.485         0.443
                                     F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                    a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                       65
                        Table D-3: Olley and Pakes TFP. OLS
                                         (1)                      (2)                     (3)                  (4)
             VARIABLES               Increasing                Decreasing               Constant               All

             Productivity t-1           0.779 a                     0.846 a              0.886 a             0.843 a
                                           (0 .0 2 1 )              (0 .0 2 1 )          (0 .0 2 5 )         (0 .0 1 4 )

             Change in layers           -0.078 a                -0.106 a                                     -0.082 a
                                           (0 .0 1 1 )              (0 .0 1 6 )                              (0 .0 0 8 )

             Constant                      -0.015                   -0.023               -0.023               0.017
                                           (0 .0 1 8 )              (0 .0 3 4 )          (0 .0 2 5 )         (0 .0 1 3 )


             Observations                  4,171                    2,734                3,055                9,960
             Adjusted R2                   0.632                    0.575                0.718                0.649
                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                       a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                     Table D-4: Levinsohn and Petrin TFP. OLS
                                         (1)                      (2)                     (3)                  (4)
             VARIABLES               Increasing                Decreasing               Constant               All

             Productivity t-1           0.839 a                     0.867 a              0.855 a             0.857 a
                                           (0 .0 1 8 )              (0 .0 1 9 )          (0 .0 2 0 )         (0 .0 1 1 )

             Change in layers           -0.041 a                -0.062 a                                     -0.044 a
                                           (0 .0 1 0 )              (0 .0 1 3 )                              (0 .0 0 7 )

             Constant                      0.003                    -0.023               -0.018               0.007
                                           (0 .0 1 6 )              (0 .0 3 3 )          (0 .0 2 6 )         (0 .0 1 3 )


             Observations                  4,171                    2,734                3,055                9,960
             Adjusted R2                   0.670                    0.629                0.692                0.667
                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                       a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table D-5: Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Within estimator
                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)
          VARIABLES                          Increasing              Decreasing             Constant                 All

          Productivity t-1                      0.091 b                  -0.064 c              0.065              0.053 b
                                                 (0 .0 3 8 )              (0 .0 3 8 )          (0 .0 4 1 )        (0 .0 2 4 5 )

          Change in layers                      -0.033 a                 -0.074 a                                 -0.048 a
                                                 (0 .0 0 9 )              (0 .0 1 4 )                              (0 .0 0 8 )

          Constant                              -0.084 a                  -0.022              0.050 b             0.075 a
                                                 (0 .0 1 8 )              (0 .0 3 6 )          (0 .0 2 6 )         (0 .0 1 4 )


          Observations                           4,057                    2,686                2,934               9,677
          Number of …xed e¤ects                  1,630                    1,258                1,248               4,136
          Adjusted R2                            0.053                    0.042                0.031               0.027
                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                       a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                               66
Table D-6: Revenue labor productivity. Firm-product-sequence FE. Within estimator
                                                (1)                  (2)                 (3)              (4)
           VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing           Constant           All

           Productivity t-1                    0.083 b               0.020                0.090 c       0.081 a
                                               (0 .0 3 6 )           (0 .0 6 4 )          (0 .0 5 3 )   (0 .0 2 8 )

           Change in layers                   -0.038 a              -0.136 a                            -0.074 a
                                               (0 .0 1 1 )           (0 .0 2 2 )                        (0 .0 1 2 )

           Constant                           10.439 a             11.183 a              10.527 a       10.509 a
                                               (0 .4 1 4 )           (0 .7 1 8 )          (0 .6 1 7 )   (0 .3 1 9 )


           Observations                         4,206                2,750                 3,090        10,046
           Number of …xed e¤ects                1,687                1,289                 1,310        4,286
           Adjusted R2                          0.019                0.112                 0.026        0.032
                         F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                        a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




 Table D-7: Value added per worker. Firm-product-sequence FE. Within estimator
                                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
           VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

           Productivity t-1                    0.076 c               -0.035                0.030         0.050
                                               (0 .0 3 9 )           (0 .0 7 8 )          (0 .0 5 1 )   (0 .0 3 1 )

           Change in layers                   -0.037 a              -0.138 a                            -0.074 a
                                               (0 .0 1 2 )           (0 .0 2 3 )                        (0 .0 1 2 )

           Constant                            9.412 a              10.611 a             10.032 a       9.720 a
                                               (0 .4 0 0 )           (0 .7 8 8 )          (0 .5 3 2 )   (0 .3 1 6 )


           Observations                         4,206                 2,750                3,090        10,046
           Number of …xed e¤ects                1,687                 1,289                1,310        4,286
           Adjusted R2                          0.021                 0.104                0.017        0.027
                         F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                        a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




        Table D-8: OLS TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Within estimator
                                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
           VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

           Productivity t-1                    -0.048                -0.059              -0.098 b       -0.063 b
                                               (0 .0 4 2 )           (0 .0 5 5 )          (0 .0 4 3 )   (0 .0 2 8 )

           Change in layers                    -0.007 b             -0.013 a                            -0.008 a
                                               (0 .0 0 3 )           (0 .0 0 4 )                        (0 .0 0 2 )

           Constant                           -0.025 a                0.003               -0.005        0.020 a
                                               (0 .0 0 4 )           (0 .0 0 8 )          (0 .0 0 5 )   (0 .0 0 6 )


           Observations                         4,171                 2,734                3,055         9,960
           Number of …xed e¤ects                1,673                 1,280                1,298         4,251
           Adjusted R2                          0.027                 0.017                0.020         0.013
                         F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                        a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                             67
   Table D-9: Olley and Pakes TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Within estimator
                                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
           VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

           Productivity t-1                    0.116 a               -0.031               0.142 a       0.097 a
                                               (0 .0 3 7 )           (0 .0 6 6 )          (0 .0 5 4 )   (0 .0 2 9 )

           Change in layers                   -0.033 a              -0.076 a                            -0.050 a
                                               (0 .0 0 9 )           (0 .0 1 3 )                        (0 .0 0 8 )

           Constant                           -0.096 a              -0.078 b             -0.055 a       0.100 a
                                               (0 .0 1 3 )           (0 .0 3 5 )          (0 .0 1 7 )   (0 .0 1 8 )


           Observations                         4,171                 2,734                3,055         9,960
           Number of …xed e¤ects                1,673                 1,280                1,298         4,251
           Adjusted R2                          0.063                 0.040                0.059         0.041
                         F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                        a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table D-10: Levinsohn and Petrin TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Within estimator
                                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
           VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

           Productivity t-1                    0.133 a               -0.048               0.124 a       0.089 a
                                               (0 .0 4 3 )           (0 .0 5 5 )          (0 .0 4 0 )   (0 .0 2 7 )

           Change in layers                    -0.017 b             -0.047 a                            -0.029 a
                                               (0 .0 0 8 )           (0 .0 1 0 )                        (0 .0 0 7 )

           Constant                           -0.074 a              -0.096 a              -0.013        0.093 a
                                               (0 .0 1 2 )           (0 .0 3 7 )          (0 .0 1 6 )   (0 .0 1 8 )


           Observations                         4,171                 2,734                3,055         9,960
           Number of …xed e¤ects                1,673                 1,280                1,298         4,251
           Adjusted R2                          0.054                 0.023                0.041         0.033
                         F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                        a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table D-11: Revenue labor productivity. Firm-product-sequence FE. Dynamic panel
                                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
           VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

           Productivity t-1                    0.391 a               0.548 a              0.641 a       0.505 a
                                               (0 .0 8 2 )           (0 .0 8 2 )          (0 .0 7 1 )   (0 .0 5 0 )

           Change in layers                   -0.057 a              -0.154 a                            -0.095 a
                                               (0 .0 1 4 )           (0 .0 1 9 )                        (0 .0 1 0 )

           Constant                            7.234 a                0.000               4.258 a        0.000
                                               (0 .9 7 7 )           (0 .0 0 0 )          (0 .8 3 8 )   (0 .0 0 0 )


           Observations                         4,206                 2,750                3,090        10,046
           Number of …xed e¤ects                1,687                 1,289                1,310        4,286
           AR(2) Test Stat                      1.864                 0.082                0.697        1.297
           P-value AR(2)                        0.062                 0.934                0.486        0.195
                         F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                        a
                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                             68
Table D-12: Value added per worker. Firm-product-sequence FE. Dynamic panel
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
        VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

        Productivity t-1                    0.397 a               0.484 a              0.491 a       0.462 a
                                            (0 .0 6 4 )           (0 .0 8 6 )          (0 .0 7 2 )   (0 .0 4 3 )

        Change in layers                   -0.059 a              -0.152 a                            -0.095 a
                                            (0 .0 1 3 )           (0 .0 1 9 )                        (0 .0 1 0 )

        Constant                             0.000                5.301 a              5.258 a       5.545 a
                                            (0 .0 0 0 )           (0 .8 7 3 )          (0 .7 3 5 )   (0 .4 4 2 )


        Observations                         4,206                 2,750                3,090        10,046
        Number of …xed e¤ects                1,687                 1,289                1,310        4,286
        AR(2) Test Stat                      1.555                 0.355                0.726        1.506
        P-value AR(2)                        0.120                 0.722                0.468        0.132
                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                     a
                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




      Table D-13: OLS TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Dynamic panel
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
        VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

        Productivity t-1                    0.255 a               0.314 a              0.179 b       0.265 a
                                            (0 .0 5 7 )           (0 .0 6 3 )          (0 .0 7 8 )   (0 .0 3 9 )

        Change in layers                    -0.006 b             -0.016 a                            -0.010 a
                                            (0 .0 0 3 )           (0 .0 0 3 )                        (0 .0 0 2 )

        Constant                             0.002                -0.000                0.013        0.014 b
                                            (0 .0 0 9 )           (0 .0 0 9 )          (0 .0 1 2 )   (0 .0 0 7 )


        Observations                         4,171                2,734                 3,055         9,960
        Number of …xed e¤ects                1,673                1,280                1,298          4,251
        AR(2) Test Stat                      1.805                -0.277               -1.326         0.526
        P-value AR(2)                        0.071                0.782                 0.185         0.599
                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                     a
                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                          69
  Table D-14: Olley and Pakes TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Dynamic panel
                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
          VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

          Productivity t-1                    0.439 a               0.452 a              0.579 a       0.499 a
                                              (0 .0 6 9 )           (0 .0 9 5 )          (0 .0 8 5 )   (0 .0 4 7 )

          Change in layers                   -0.050 a              -0.092 a                            -0.061 a
                                              (0 .0 0 9 )           (0 .0 1 2 )                        (0 .0 0 7 )

          Constant                             0.041                -0.025                              0.018
                                              (0 .0 2 6 )           (0 .0 3 4 )                        (0 .0 1 7 )


          Observations                         4,171                 2,734               3,055          9,960
          Number of …xed e¤ects                1,673                 1,280               1,298          4,251
          AR(2) Test Stat                      1.459                 0.706               -0.233         0.660
          P-value AR(2)                        0.145                 0.480               0.816          0.509
                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                       a
                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table D-15: Levinsohn and Petrin TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Dynamic panel
                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)             (4)
          VARIABLES                        Increasing            Decreasing            Constant          All

          Productivity t-1                    0.450 a               0.517 a              0.573 a       0.530 a
                                              (0 .0 7 6 )           (0 .0 7 8 )          (0 .0 6 8 )   (0 .0 4 5 )

          Change in layers                   -0.022 a              -0.058 a                            -0.035 a
                                              (0 .0 0 8 )           (0 .0 1 1 )                        (0 .0 0 6 )

          Constant                             0.017                -0.002                              0.027
                                              (0 .0 2 6 )           (0 .0 3 1 )                        (0 .0 1 8 )


          Observations                         4,171                 2,734                3,055         9,960
          Number of …xed e¤ects                1,673                 1,280                1,298         4,251
          AR(2) Test Stat                      1.658                 1.354                1.070         2.074
          P-value AR(2)                        0.097                 0.176                0.284         0.038
                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                       a
                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                            70
E     De Loecker and Warzynski Revenue-based Productivity
In this Section we obtain log total factor productivity computed from a standard two factors (labor and
capital) Cobb-Douglas production function model where output is measured by …rm value-added. Produc-
tivity shocks are modeled as in De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and in particular the capital stock, the
expenditure in materials and …rm export status are used as proxies in the control function. The estimation
of the model is carried using the Wooldridge (2009) GMM approach.
    In all tables, two digit industry dummies and year dummies are included in estimations but are not
reported here. Standard errors clustered at the …rm level.

     Table E-1: De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) revenue contemporaneous. Sequence type regressions, OLS
                                                     (1)                   (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                            VARIABLES            Increasing             Decreasing              Constant              All

                            Productivity t-1         0.782 a                 0.838 a             0.876 a            0.836 a
                                                     (0 .0 2 1 )             (0 .0 2 1 )         (0 .0 2 6 )        (0 .0 1 6 )

                            Change in layers      -0.068 a                   -0.101 a                               -0.075 a
                                                     (0 .0 1 1 )             (0 .0 1 6 )                            (0 .0 0 8 )

                            Constant                 -0.009                  -0.017              -0.016             -0.010
                                                     (0 .0 1 7 )             (0 .0 3 2 )         (0 .0 2 5 )        (0 .0 1 3 )


                            Observations             4,127                    2,708              2,989               9,824
                            Adjusted R2              0.639                    0.587              0.744               0.664

                                                 a
                                                      p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




    Table E-2: De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) revenue contemporaneous. Sequence type regressions, Within.
                                                          (1)                    (2)                 (3)                    (4)
                         VARIABLES                    Increasing              Decreasing           Constant                 All

                         Productivity t-1                 0.110 a                 -0.076               0.068             0.059 b
                                                          (0 .0 4 2 )             (0 .0 4 6 )         (0 .0 4 3 )        (0 .0 2 7 )

                         Change in layers                -0.027 a                -0.065 a                               -0.040 a
                                                          (0 .0 0 9 )             (0 .0 1 2 )                            (0 .0 0 7 )

                         Constant                        -0.088 a                 -0.059              0.024 b            0.094 a
                                                          (0 .0 1 3 )             (0 .0 3 6 )         (0 .0 1 6 )        (0 .0 1 9 )


                         Observations                      4,127                   2,708               2,989              9,824
                         Number of …xed e¤ects             1,655                   1,268               1,276              4,199
                         Adjusted R2                       0.064                   0.036               0.033              0.032

                                                 a
                                                     p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                        71
Table E-3: De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) revenue contemporaneous. Sequence type regressions, Dynamic Panel
                                                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)                     (4)
                        VARIABLES                           Increasing             Decreasing            Constant                  All

                        Productivity t-1                       0.363 a               0.382 a              0.542 a                0.445 a
                                                               (0 .0 7 0 )           (0 .1 0 5 )          (0 .0 7 3 )            (0 .0 4 9 )

                        Change in layers                       -0.036 b             -0.085 a                                     -0.054 a
                                                               (0 .0 1 0 )           (0 .0 1 2 )                                 (0 .0 0 7 )

                        Constant                               0.056 c               -0.011                0.028                 0.031 c
                                                               (0 .0 3 3 )           (0 .0 3 4 )          (0 .0 3 1 )            (0 .0 1 9 )


                        Observations                            4,127                 2,708                2,989                  9,824
                        Number of …xed e¤ects                   1,655                 1,268                1,276                  4,199
                        AR(2) Test Stat                         1.955                 1.124                1.145                  2.277
                        P-value AR(2)                           0.051                 0.261                0.252                  0.023

                                                        a
                                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




F    Supplementary Quantity-based Productivity Results
This Appendix provides results complementary to those in Section 4.2 using the within estimator.

                    Table F-1: Quantity TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Within estimator
                                                                     (1)                  (2)                  (3)                       (4)
                      VARIABLES                                  Increasing            Decreasing            Constant                    All

                      Productivity t-1                              0.207 a                 0.097              0.162 a                0.162 a
                                                                     (0 .0 4 3 )           (0 .0 7 3 )             (0 .0 5 5 )        (0 .0 3 4 )

                      Change in layers                                0.007                0.025 c                                     0.013
                                                                     (0 .0 1 1 )           (0 .0 1 3 )                                (0 .0 0 9 )

                      Constant                                        0.001                 0.069                  0.052               0.040
                                                                     (0 .0 1 6 )           (0 .0 5 0 )             (0 .0 4 8 )        (0 .0 1 2 )


                      Observations                                    4,171                 2,734                  3,055               9,960
                      Number of …xed e¤ects 1,673                     1,280                 1,280                  4,251
                      Adjusted R2                                     0.041                 0.012                  0.030               0.027
                                         F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                        a
                                                            p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                             72
       Table F-2: Quantity TFP. Firm-product-sequence FE. Level e¤ects using layers. Within estimator.
                                                               (1)                   (2)                       (3)                      (4)
                         VARIABLES                         Increasing             Decreasing                 Constant                   All

                         Productivity t-1                     0.316 a               0.345 c                      0.359 a              0.339 a
                                                              (0 .0 5 6 )            (0 .1 7 7 )                 (0 .0 9 2 )          (0 .0 6 8 )

                         Number of layers                     0.040 c                0.008                                            0.030 b
                                                              (0 .0 2 2 )            (0 .0 2 3 )                                      (0 .0 1 5 )

                         Constant                            -0.113 c                0.061                       0.028                0.065 c
                                                              (0 .0 6 2 )            (0 .0 8 9 )                 (0 .0 6 0 )          (0 .0 3 5 )


                         Observations                          4,171                 2,734                       3,055                9,960
                         Number of …xed e¤ects                 1,673                 1,280                       1,298                4,251
                         Adjusted R2                           0.076                 0.112                       0.101                0.094
                                       F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                      a
                                                          p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




G     Alternative Grouping of Firms
In this Appendix we present results for an alternative grouping of …rms. We present the e¤ect of changing
layers on productivity as a function of the di¤erence between the current and the initial number of layers;
the latter corresponding to what we observe when we see the …rm switching for the …rst time (…rst observed
reorganization). In particular, each table contains 4 columns referring to the number of layers (0, 1, 2 or 3)
…rms have in the year of the …rst observed reorganization.

G.1    Revenue-based Productivity OLS Results

                       Table G-1: Alternative grouping. Wooldridge Revenue TFP. OLS
                                                              (1)              (2)                (3)                    (4)
                               VARIABLES                   0 layers          1 layer           2 layers               3 layers

                               Productivity t-1             0.438 a          0.613 a               0.813 a             0.814 a
                                                            (0 .0 8 1 )      (0 .0 3 5 )           (0 .0 2 3 )          (0 .0 1 7 )

                               Change in layers            -0.067 a          -0.065 a          -0.071 a                -0.085 a
                                                            (0 .0 2 2 )      (0 .0 1 7 )           (0 .0 1 0 )          (0 .0 1 8 )

                               Constant                     0.120 c          -0.015                0.000                -0.028
                                                            (0 .0 7 1 )      (0 .0 4 1 )           (0 .0 1 9 )          (0 .0 2 3 )


                               Observations                   528                1,630             3,645                 3,446
                               Adjusted R2                   0.414               0.535             0.639                 0.641
                                       F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                      a
                                                          p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                            73
Table G-2: Alternative grouping. Revenue Labor Productivity. OLS
                                      (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)
        VARIABLES                  0 layers          1 layer          2 layers           3 layers

        Productivity t-1            0.645 a          0.782 a           0.865 a            0.897 a
                                     (0 .0 6 3 )        (0 .0 2 6 )     (0 .0 1 5 )       (0 .0 1 7 )

        Change in layers            -0.102 b        -0.128 a          -0.100 a           -0.153 a
                                     (0 .0 4 7 )        (0 .0 1 9 )     (0 .0 1 5 )       (0 .0 3 0 )

        Constant                    4.048 a          2.511 a           1.620 a            1.221 a
                                     (0 .7 0 8 )        (0 .3 0 1 )     (0 .1 8 3 )       (0 .2 0 0 )


        Observations                  533               1,665           3,690             3,569
        Adjusted R2                  0.581              0.768           0.792             0.812
               F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                              a
                                  p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




  Table G-3: Alternative grouping. Value added per worker. OLS
                                      (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)
        VARIABLES                  0 layers         1 layer           2 layers           3 layers

        Productivity t-1            0.477 a         0.578 a           0.762 a            0.822 a
                                    (0 .0 5 8 )      (0 .0 3 7 )      (0 .0 2 6 )        (0 .0 2 4 )

        Change in layers           -0.091 b         -0.086 b          -0.105 a           -0.143 a
                                    (0 .0 3 7 )      (0 .0 1 9 )      (0 .0 1 5 )        (0 .0 2 8 )

        Constant                    5.533 a         4.301 a           2.484 a            1.836 a
                                    (0 .6 3 1 )      (0 .3 7 0 )      (0 .2 6 9 )        (0 .2 5 3 )


        Observations                  533               1,665          3,690              3,569
        Adjusted R2                  0.489              0.521          0.650              0.706
               F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                              a
                                  p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




        Table G-4: Alternative grouping. OLS TFP. OLS
                                      (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)
        VARIABLES                  0 layers         1 layer           2 layers           3 layers

        Productivity t-1            0.489 a         0.611 a           0.663 a            0.698 a
                                    (0 .0 6 5 )      (0 .0 3 1 )      (0 .0 2 6 )        (0 .0 1 9 )

        Change in layers           -0.019 b         -0.017 a          -0.013 a           -0.010 b
                                    (0 .0 0 8 )      (0 .0 0 4 )      (0 .0 0 3 )        (0 .0 0 4 )

        Constant                    0.048 b             0.000           0.000            -0.003
                                    (0 .0 2 2 )      (0 .0 1 1 )      (0 .0 0 6 )        (0 .0 0 6 )


        Observations                  532               1,649           3,674             3,523
        Adjusted R2                  0.444              0.394           0.418             0.507
               F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                              a
                                  p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                   74
  Table G-5: Alternative grouping. Olley and Pakes TFP. OLS
                                     (1)             (2)              (3)                  (4)
       VARIABLES                  0 layers         1 layer         2 layers             3 layers

       Productivity t-1            0.540 a         0.660 a          0.841 a             0.908 a
                                   (0 .0 6 2 )      (0 .0 3 0 )      (0 .0 2 1 )        (0 .0 2 1 )

       Change in layers           -0.069 a         -0.054 a         -0.071 a            -0.085 a
                                   (0 .0 2 4 )      (0 .0 1 6 )      (0 .0 1 1 )        (0 .0 1 8 )

       Constant                     0.052           -0.054           -0.002             -0.032
                                   (0 .0 7 3 )      (0 .0 4 1 )      (0 .0 1 9 )        (0 .0 2 2 )


       Observations                  532              1,649            3,674             3,523
       Adjusted R2                  0.493             0.526            0.657             0.719
              F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                             a
                                 p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table G-6: Alternative grouping. Levinsohn and Petrin TFP. OLS
                                     (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
       VARIABLES                  0 layers         1 layer         2 layers         3 layers

       Productivity t-1            0.610 a         0.742 a          0.864 a             0.888 a
                                   (0 .0 6 8 )      (0 .0 2 9 )     (0 .0 1 9 )         (0 .0 1 4 )

       Change in layers            -0.041 b         -0.023         -0.040 a             -0.044 a
                                   (0 .0 2 0 )      (0 .0 1 6 )     (0 .0 1 0 )         (0 .0 1 3 )

       Constant                     0.059           -0.026           0.003              -0.025
                                   (0 .0 6 4 )      (0 .0 3 7 )     (0 .0 1 9 )         (0 .0 2 2 )


       Observations                  532              1,649          3,674               3,523
       Adjusted R2                  0.568             0.587          0.671               0.720
              F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                             a
                                 p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                 75
G.2   Revenue-based Productivity Within Estimator Results

       Table G-7: Alternative grouping. Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Firm-product FE. Within estimator
                                                                 (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                          VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer         2 layers        3 layers

                          Productivity t-1                      0.001           0.015           0.185 a        0.126 a
                                                               (0 .0 4 4 )      (0 .0 4 8 )      (0 .0 4 2 )   (0 .0 3 9 )

                          Change in layers                    -0.047 a          -0.021          -0.038 a       -0.055 a
                                                               (0 .0 1 8 )      (0 .0 1 5 )      (0 .0 0 8 )   (0 .0 1 2 )

                          Constant                              0.004           -0.035          -0.057 a       0.048 a
                                                               (0 .0 3 2 )      (0 .0 2 7 )      (0 .0 1 2 )   (0 .0 1 5 )


                          Observations                           525            1,602            3,591          3,385
                          Number of …xed e¤ects                  159             535             1,119          1,096
                          Adjusted R2                           0.049           0.011            0.059          0.040
                                     F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                    a
                                                        p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




      Table G-8: Alternative grouping. Revenue labor productivity. Firm-product FE. Within estimator
                                                                 (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                          VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                          Productivity t-1                     -0.042          0.190 a           0.126 b        0.041
                                                               (0 .0 6 0 )      (0 .0 5 0 )      (0 .0 4 9 )    (0 .0 6 9 )

                          Change in layers                     -0.050          -0.051 a         -0.061 a       -0.097 a
                                                               (0 .0 3 4 )      (0 .0 1 4 )      (0 .0 1 3 )    (0 .0 1 9 )

                          Constant                            11.572 a         9.152 a           9.964 a       11.062 a
                                                               (0 .6 7 1 )      (0 .5 7 2 )      (0 .5 5 5 )    (0 .7 9 2 )


                          Observations                           533            1,665             3,690         3,569
                          Number of …xed e¤ects                  164             552              1,157         1,161
                          Adjusted R2                           0.047           0.054             0.043         0.063
                                     F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                    a
                                                        p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                       76
Table G-9: Alternative grouping. Value added per worker. Firm-product FE. Within estimator
                                                         (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                  VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                  Productivity t-1                     -0.048           0.069            0.095 c        0.076
                                                       (0 .0 5 6 )      (0 .0 6 2 )      (0 .0 5 0 )   (0 .0 6 8 )

                  Change in layers                    -0.066 b         -0.031 c         -0.062 a       -0.093 a
                                                       (0 .0 2 9 )      (0 .0 1 7 )      (0 .0 1 4 )   (0 .0 1 9 )

                  Constant                            10.587 a         9.429 a          9.249 a        9.536 a
                                                       (0 .5 6 5 )      (0 .6 2 9 )      (0 .5 0 8 )   (0 .6 9 5 )


                  Observations                           533            1,665             3,690         3,569
                  Number of …xed e¤ects                  164             552              1,157         1,161
                  Adjusted R2                           0.025           0.015             0.039         0.051
                             F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                            a
                                                p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




      Table G-10: Alternative grouping. OLS TFP. Firm-product FE. Within estimator
                                                         (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                  VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer         2 layers        3 layers

                  Productivity t-1                     -0.012           -0.059           0.040          0.024
                                                       (0 .0 8 1 )      (0 .0 5 9 )      (0 .0 4 3 )   (0 .0 4 3 )

                  Change in layers                     -0.013 c         -0.003          -0.006 b       -0.006 c
                                                       (0 .0 0 7 )      (0 .0 0 4 )      (0 .0 0 3 )   (0 .0 0 3 )

                  Constant                              0.006           -0.004          -0.011 a       0.010 c
                                                       (0 .0 1 1 )      (0 .0 0 6 )      (0 .0 0 4 )   (0 .0 0 5 )


                  Observations                           532            1,649            3,674          3,523
                  Number of …xed e¤ects                  163             549             1,149          1,148
                  Adjusted R2                           0.011           0.002            0.013          0.007
                             F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                            a
                                                p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table G-11: Alternative grouping. Olley and Pakes TFP. Firm-product FE. Within estimator
                                                         (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                  VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                  Productivity t-1                     -0.004           0.019            0.165 a       0.237 a
                                                       (0 .0 6 1 )      (0 .0 6 3 )      (0 .0 4 4 )    (0 .0 4 2 )

                  Change in layers                    -0.051 a          -0.020          -0.040 a       -0.052 a
                                                       (0 .0 1 8 )      (0 .0 1 4 )      (0 .0 0 8 )    (0 .0 1 3 )

                  Constant                            -0.115 a         -0.148 a         -0.066 a       -0.105 a
                                                       (0 .0 3 5 )      (0 .0 3 2 )      (0 .0 1 2 )    (0 .0 1 7 )


                  Observations                           532            1,649             3,674         3,523
                  Number of …xed e¤ects                  163             549              1,149         1,148
                  Adjusted R2                           0.053           0.020             0.062         0.079
                             F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                            a
                                                p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                               77
      Table G-12: Alternative grouping. Levinsohn and Petrin TFP. Firm-product FE. Within estimator
                                                                 (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                          VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                          Productivity t-1                      0.040           -0.014           0.217 a       0.227 a
                                                               (0 .0 6 9 )      (0 .0 6 0 )      (0 .0 4 1 )   (0 .0 3 8 )

                          Change in layers                    -0.033 b          0.006           -0.022 a       -0.031 a
                                                               (0 .0 1 6 )      (0 .0 1 4 )      (0 .0 0 7 )   (0 .0 0 9 )

                          Constant                            -0.076 b         -0.118 a         -0.055 a       0.090 a
                                                               (0 .0 3 5 )      (0 .0 3 1 )      (0 .0 1 2 )   (0 .0 1 5 )


                          Observations                           532            1,649             3,674         3,523
                          Number of …xed e¤ects                  163             549              1,149         1,148
                          Adjusted R2                           0.025           0.027             0.068         0.067
                                     F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                    a
                                                        p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




G.3   Revenue-based Productivity Dynamic Panel Results

       Table G-13: Alternative grouping. Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Firm-product FE. Dynamic panel
                                                                 (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                          VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                          Productivity t-1                     0.251 a          0.183 b         0.481 a        0.533 a
                                                               (0 .0 9 2 )      (0 .0 8 9 )      (0 .0 5 3 )   (0 .0 6 6 )

                          Change in layers                    -0.058 a         -0.028 b         -0.052 a       -0.066 a
                                                               (0 .0 1 4 )      (0 .0 1 3 )      (0 .0 0 8 )   (0 .0 1 6 )

                          Constant                             0.192 c          0.081            0.007         -0.008
                                                               (0 .1 0 1 )      (0 .0 6 6 )      (0 .0 2 5 )   (0 .0 2 6 )


                          Observations                           528            1,630            3,645          3,446
                          Number of …xed e¤ects                  162             543             1,138          1,122
                          AR(2) Test Stat                       1.212           0.359            3.188          1.510
                          P-value AR(2)                         0.226           0.719            0.001          0.131
                                     F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                    a
                                                        p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                       78
Table G-14: Alternative grouping. Revenue labor productivity. Firm-product FE. Dynamic panel
                                                          (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                   VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                   Productivity t-1                     0.369 a         0.577 a           0.386 a       0.469 a
                                                        (0 .1 0 8 )      (0 .1 3 6 )      (0 .0 7 2 )   (0 .0 9 0 )

                   Change in layers                    -0.072 b         -0.083 a         -0.067 a       -0.115 a
                                                        (0 .0 3 2 )      (0 .0 2 2 )      (0 .0 1 3 )   (0 .0 2 4 )

                   Constant                              7.241           0.000             0.000         0.000
                                                        (1 .2 7 0 )      (0 .0 0 0 )      (0 .0 0 0 )   (0 .0 0 0 )


                   Observations                           533            1,665             3,690         3,569
                   Number of …xed e¤ects                  164             552              1,157         1,161
                   AR(2) Test Stat                       0.890           0.712             2.547         0.785
                   P-value AR(2)                         0.373           0.476             0.011         0.432
                              F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                             a
                                                 p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




 Table G-15: Alternative grouping. Value added per worker. Firm-product FE. Dynamic panel
                                                          (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                   VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                   Productivity t-1                      0.150          0.301 a          0.370 a        0.456 a
                                                        (0 .0 9 4 )      (0 .1 0 1 )      (0 .0 6 8 )   (0 .0 8 7 )

                   Change in layers                    -0.060 b         -0.045 b         -0.074 a       -0.113 a
                                                        (0 .0 2 8 )      (0 .0 1 8 )      (0 .0 1 3 )   (0 .0 2 4 )

                   Constant                              0.000          7.110 a           0.000          0.000
                                                        (0 .0 0 0 )      (1 .0 3 9 )      (0 .0 0 0 )   (0 .0 0 0 )


                   Observations                           533            1,665            3,690          3,569
                   Number of …xed e¤ects                  164             552             1,157          1,161
                   AR(2) Test Stat                       1.217           0.372            3.104          0.857
                   P-value AR(2)                         0.224           0.710            0.002          0.391
                              F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                             a
                                                 p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                79
     Table G-16: Alternative grouping. OLS TFP. Firm-product FE. Dynamic panel
                                                       (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                Productivity t-1                     0.201 b          0.180 b         0.299 a        0.302 a
                                                     (0 .0 9 3 )      (0 .0 8 1 )      (0 .0 5 9 )   (0 .0 5 3 )

                Change in layers                    -0.014 a         -0.008 b         -0.009 a       -0.008 b
                                                     (0 .0 0 5 )      (0 .0 0 3 )      (0 .0 0 3 )   (0 .0 0 4 )

                Constant                             0.081 a          -0.001            0.013         -0.003
                                                     (0 .0 3 0 )      (0 .0 1 7 )      (0 .0 1 0 )   (0 .0 1 0 )


                Observations                           532            1,649             3,674         3,523
                Number of …xed e¤ects                  163             549              1,149         1,148
                AR(2) Test Stat                       1.338           0.203             2.092         0.073
                P-value AR(2)                         0.181           0.839             0.036         0.942
                           F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                          a
                                              p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table G-17: Alternative grouping. Olley and Pakes TFP. Firm-product FE. Dynamic panel
                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer         2 layers        3 layers

                Productivity t-1                     0.233 a          0.178 b         0.506 a        0.589 a
                                                     (0 .0 7 9 )      (0 .0 8 1 )      (0 .0 6 3 )   (0 .0 5 8 )

                Change in layers                    -0.060 a          -0.016          -0.052 a       -0.064 a
                                                     (0 .0 1 6 )      (0 .0 1 3 )      (0 .0 0 9 )   (0 .0 1 5 )

                Constant                              0.121           -0.008           0.008          0.022
                                                     (0 .1 1 5 )      (0 .0 6 1 )      (0 .0 2 6 )   (0 .0 2 9 )


                Observations                           532            1,649            3,674          3,523
                Number of …xed e¤ects                  163             549             1,149         1,148
                AR(2) Test Stat                       1.178           0.681            2.732         -0.259
                P-value AR(2)                         0.239           0.496            0.006         0.795
                           F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                          a
                                              p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                             80
        Table G-18: Alternative grouping. Levinsohn and Petrin TFP. Firm-product FE. Dynamic panel
                                                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
                           VARIABLES                            0 layers            1 layer            2 layers           3 layers

                           Productivity t-1                      0.324 a            0.153 c             0.610 a            0.648 a
                                                                 (0 .1 1 1 )         (0 .0 8 7 )        (0 .0 4 7 )        (0 .0 5 0 )

                           Change in layers                     -0.037 a             0.001             -0.032 a           -0.038 a
                                                                 (0 .0 1 4 )         (0 .0 1 2 )        (0 .0 0 8 )        (0 .0 1 2 )

                           Constant                               0.065              0.065               0.038              0.007
                                                                 (0 .1 1 4 )         (0 .0 7 2 )        (0 .0 2 6 )        (0 .0 2 5 )


                           Observations                            532               1,649               3,674              3,523
                           Number of …xed e¤ects                   163                549                1,149              1,148
                           AR(2) Test Stat                        0.693              0.158               2.986              0.995
                           P-value AR(2)                          0.488              0.874               0.003              0.320
                                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                     a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




G.4   De Loecker and Warzynski Revenue-based Productivity

      Table G-19: Alternative grouping. De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) revenue contemporaneous. OLS
                                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)
                             VARIABLES                    0 layers             1 layer             2 layers           3 layers

                             Productivity t-1              0.627 a             0.677 a             0.842 a            0.875 a
                                                           (0 .0 8 2 )         (0 .0 3 0 )         (0 .0 2 0 )        (0 .0 2 4 )

                             Change in layers             -0.070 a             -0.058 a            -0.064 a           -0.083 a
                                                           (0 .0 2 5 )         (0 .0 1 7 )         (0 .0 1 0 )        (0 .0 1 9 )

                             Constant                       0.082              -0.019              -0.000             -0.029
                                                           (0 .0 6 8 )         (0 .0 3 9 )         (0 .0 1 9 )        (0 .0 2 1 )


                             Observations                    528                1,630               3,645              3,446
                             Adjusted R2                    0.610               0.571               0.660              0.732
                                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                     a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                         81
Table G-20: Alternative grouping. De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) revenue contemporaneous. Within estimator
                                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                           VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                           Productivity t-1                      0.024           0.024           0.141 a        0.151 a
                                                                (0 .0 6 4 )      (0 .0 6 5 )      (0 .0 3 9 )   (0 .0 4 6 )

                           Change in layers                    -0.047 b          -0.017          -0.033 a       -0.051 a
                                                                (0 .0 1 9 )      (0 .0 1 5 )      (0 .0 0 8 )   (0 .0 1 2 )

                           Constant                            -0.058 c         -0.078 b         -0.060 a       0.081 a
                                                                (0 .0 3 4 )      (0 .0 3 1 )      (0 .0 1 2 )   (0 .0 1 5 )


                           Observations                           528            1,630            3,645          3,446
                           Number of …xed e¤ects                  162             543             1,138          1,122
                           Adjusted R2                           0.048           0.024            0.052          0.048
                                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                     a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




 Table G-21: Alternative grouping. De Loecker andWarzynski (2012) revenue contemporaneous. Dynamic panel
                                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)
                           VARIABLES                           0 layers         1 layer          2 layers       3 layers

                           Productivity t-1                     0.307 a         0.241 a          0.464 a        0.546 a
                                                                (0 .1 0 9 )      (0 .0 8 7 )      (0 .0 6 4 )   (0 .0 6 6 )

                           Change in layers                    -0.057 a         -0.027 b         -0.048 a       -0.065 a
                                                                (0 .0 1 4 )      (0 .0 1 3 )      (0 .0 0 9 )   (0 .0 1 6 )

                           Constant                              0.173           0.088            0.011         -0.031
                                                                (0 .1 2 7 )      (0 .0 5 6 )      (0 .0 2 7 )   (0 .0 3 0 )


                           Observations                           528            1,630            3,645          3,446
                           Number of …xed e¤ects                  162             543             1,138          1,122
                           AR(2) Test Stat                       1.343           0.496            3.466          1.434
                           P-value AR(2)                         0.179           0.620            0.001          0.152
                                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                     a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                        82
G.5   Quantity-based Productivity Results

                        Table G-22: Alternative grouping. Quantity TFP. OLS
                                                          (1)                (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                           VARIABLES                   0 layers            1 layer             2 layers            3 layers

                           Productivity t-1             0.849 a            0.904 a             0.884 a             0.892 a
                                                        (0 .0 5 1 )        (0 .0 2 0 )         (0 .0 1 3 )         (0 .0 1 4 )

                           Change in layers              0.008             0.003               0.035 a             0.038 a
                                                        (0 .0 2 5 )        (0 .0 1 3 )         (0 .0 1 0 )         (0 .0 1 4 )

                           Constant                     0.589 c            0.127 a             0.304 a             0.368 b
                                                        (0 .3 2 3 )        (0 .0 4 7 )         (0 .0 2 7 )         (0 .1 6 6 )


                           Observations                   532              1,649                3,674               3,523
                           Adjusted R2                   0.772             0.805                0.765               0.782
                                   F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                  a
                                                      p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




           Table G-23: Alternative grouping. Quantity TFP. Firm-product FE. Dynamic panel
                                                               (1)                (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                        VARIABLES                           0 layers            1 layer             2 layers            3 layers

                        Productivity t-1                     0.344 a            0.622 a              0.646 a             0.676 a
                                                             (0 .1 0 9 )         (0 .0 7 1 )         (0 .0 8 5 )         (0 .0 5 7 )

                        Change in layers                     -0.011              -0.003              0.029 a             0.029 b
                                                             (0 .0 2 0 )         (0 .0 1 3 )         (0 .0 1 0 )        (0 .0 1 2 )

                        Constant                            -1.566 a             0.025               0.635 b             0.397 a
                                                             (0 .3 4 0 )         (0 .0 3 1 )         (0 .2 5 6 )        (0 .0 7 4 )


                        Observations                            532              1,649                3,674               3,523
                        Number of …xed e¤ects                   163               549                 1,149               1,148
                        Adjusted R2
                        AR(2) Test Stat                      -1.564             -0.0881               1.587               2.191
                        P-value AR(2)                        0.118               0.378                0.113              0.0284
                                   F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                  a
                                                      p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                      83
            Table G-24: Alternative grouping. Quantity TFP. Firm-product FE. Within estimator
                                                                      (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                          VARIABLES                                0 layers           1 layer          2 layers          3 layers

                          Productivity t-1                          0.154 b           0.226 a           0.263 a           0.215 a
                                                                    (0 .0 6 7 )       (0 .0 6 2 )       (0 .0 3 9 )       (0 .0 5 9 )

                          Change in layers                          -0.003             0.004            0.023 a           0.027 b
                                                                    (0 .0 1 6 )       (0 .0 1 3 )       (0 .0 0 9 )       (0 .0 1 1 )

                          Constant                                  0.209 a           0.080 a           -0.015            0.041 c
                                                                    (0 .0 4 9 )       (0 .0 2 3 )       (0 .0 1 5 )       (0 .0 2 2 )


                          Observations                                532              1,649             3,674             3,523
                          Number of …xed e¤ects 163                   549              1,149             1,148
                          Adjusted R2                                0.017             0.062             0.069             0.051
                                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                     a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table G-25: Alternative grouping. Quantity TFP. Firm-product FE. Level e¤ects using layers. Within estimator.
                                                                  (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
                           VARIABLES                           0 layers           1 layer           2 layers          3 layers

                           Productivity t-1                     0.240 b           0.276 a           0.408 a           0.480 a
                                                                (0 .0 6 6 )       (0 .0 5 6 )       (0 .0 6 1 )       (0 .0 9 9 )

                           Number of layers                      0.055            -0.013            0.029 c           0.049 a
                                                                (0 .0 2 8 )       (0 .0 2 3 )       (0 .0 1 7 )       (0 .0 1 8 )

                           Constant                             0.110 c           0.063             -0.069            -0.086
                                                                (0 .0 6 5 )       (0 .0 4 8 )       (0 .0 4 4 )       (0 .0 5 3 )


                           Observations                           532             1,649              3,674             3,523
                           Number of …xed e¤ects                  163              549               1,149             1,148
                           Adjusted R2                           0.053            0.079              0.140             0.186
                                      F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                     a
                                                         p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                        84
G.6    Instrumental Variables Results

Table G-26: Alternative grouping. Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Instrumental Variable. Both change in layers and
change in quantity as endogenous variables
                                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
                             VARIABLES                         0 layers         1 layer          2 layers        3 layers

                             Productivity t-1                   0.694 a         0.844 a           0.941 a        0.906 a
                                                                (0 .0 7 6 )      (0 .0 2 1 )      (0 .0 1 1 )     (0 .0 1 1 )

                             Change in layers                   -0.068          -0.170 a         -0.059 b        -0.063 b
                                                                (0 .0 4 8 )      (0 .0 5 3 )      (0 .0 3 1 )     (0 .0 3 5 )

                             Change in quantity                -0.784 a         -0.449 a         -0.466 a         -0.085
                                                                (0 .2 1 3 )      (0 .1 4 1 )      (0 .1 2 4 )     (0 .0 6 7 )



                             Observations                        525             1,602             3,591          3,385
                             Kleibergen-Paap stat.              16.92            101.1             238.4          153.4
                             Adjusted R2                        0.514            0.629             0.817          0.834
                                       F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                      a
                                                          p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table G-27: Alternative grouping. Quantity TFP. Instrumental Variable. Both change in layers and change in
quantity as endogenous variables
                                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
                              VARIABLES                        0 layers         1 layer         2 layers         3 layers

                              Productivity t-1                  0.942 a         0.924 a          0.944 a         0.951 a
                                                                (0 .0 4 1 )      (0 .0 3 0 )     (0 .0 1 5 )     (0 .0 1 9 )

                              Change in layers                  -0.017           0.053           0.120 a         0.069 b
                                                                (0 .0 4 8 )      (0 .0 5 3 )     (0 .0 3 1 )     (0 .0 3 5 )

                              Change in quantity                 0.055           -0.057          0.268 b          0.004
                                                                (0 .2 6 6 )      (0 .1 0 8 )     (0 .1 1 1 )     (0 .0 8 7 )



                              Observations                        532            1,649            3,674           3,523
                              Kleibergen-Paap stat.              14.8            108.0            259.2           157.7
                              Adjusted R2                        0.841           0.795            0.851           0.868
                                       F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                      a
                                                          p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                          85
H     Supplementary IV Tables
In this Appendix we provide results that are complementary to those in Section 4.3. The trade instruments
that are used below are built using initial period …xed weights while in Section 4.3 weights are time-varying.
Results are qualitatively identical and quantitatively very similar.

Table H-1: Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Instrumental Variable with initial period …xed weights for trade instruments.
Both change in layers and change in quantity as endogenous variables
                                                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)                     (4)
                           VARIABLES                       Increasing           Decreasing            Constant                  All

                           Productivity t-1                  0.920 a               0.916 a              0.912 a              0.919 a
                                                             (0 .0 1 1 )           (0 .0 2 0 )           (0 .0 1 6 )          (0 .0 0 9 )

                           Change in layers                 -0.065 a              -0.083 a                                   -0.071 a
                                                             (0 .0 1 7 )           (0 .0 2 7 )                                (0 .0 1 7 )

                           Change in quantity                 0.078                0.749 b               -0.219               0.368
                                                             (0 .3 9 2 )           (0 .3 3 5 )           (0 .2 5 3 )          (0 .2 6 6 )



                           Observations                       4,057                 2,686                2,934                9,677
                           Kleibergen-Paap stat.              12.11                 10.84                12.04                18.09
                           Adjusted R2                        0.826                 0.686                0.849                0.809
                                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                       a
                                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table H-2: Alternative grouping. Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Instrumental Variable with initial period …xed weights
for trade instruments. Both change in layers and change in quantity as endogenous variables
                                                                   (1)             (2)               (3)                  (4)
                              VARIABLES                         0 layers         1 layer          2 layers             3 layers

                              Productivity t-1                   0.696 a         0.844 a           0.941 a             0.906 a
                                                                 (0 .0 7 6 )      (0 .0 2 1 )      (0 .0 1 1 )         (0 .0 1 1 )

                              Change in layers                   -0.068          -0.166 a         -0.060 b             -0.063 b
                                                                 (0 .0 4 8 )      (0 .0 4 6 )      (0 .0 2 4 )         (0 .0 2 7 )

                              Change in quantity                -0.740 a         -0.450 a         -0.470 a             -0.085
                                                                 (0 .2 0 4 )      (0 .1 4 2 )      (0 .1 2 3 )         (0 .0 6 7 )



                              Observations                         525            1,602             3,591               3,385
                              Kleibergen-Paap stat.               16.91           98.43             239.5               153.8
                              Adjusted R2                         0.528           0.630             0.817               0.834
                                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                       a
                                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                           86
Table H-3: Quantity TFP. Approach one. Instrumental Variable with initial period …xed weights for trade instru-
ments. Both change in layers and change in quantity as endogenous variables
                                                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                      (4)
                           VARIABLES                       Increasing            Decreasing           Constant                   All

                           Productivity t-1                   0.953 a              0.906 a              0.967 a               0.955 a
                                                              (0 .0 1 4 )           (0 .0 1 9 )          (0 .0 1 7 )          (0 .0 1 2 )

                           Change in layers                   0.054 b              0.051 c                                    0.077 a
                                                              (0 .0 2 1 )           (0 .0 2 9 )                               (0 .0 2 0 )

                           Change in quantity                 0.034                 -0.032                0.139                0.050
                                                              (0 .0 5 8 )           (0 .1 3 3 )          (0 .1 0 7 )          (0 .0 6 1 )



                           Observations                       4,171                 2,840                 3,055                9,960
                           Kleibergen-Paap stat.              46.70                 341.7                 40.65                594.4
                           Adjusted R2                        0.855                 0.767                 0.902                0.872
                                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                       a
                                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




Table H-4: Alternative grouping. Quantity TFP. Instrumental Variable with initial period …xed weights for trade
instruments. Both change in layers and change in quantity as endogenous variables
                                                                   (1)             (2)               (3)                  (4)
                              VARIABLES                         0 layers         1 layer          2 layers             3 layers

                              Productivity t-1                   0.942 a          0.924 a         0.944 a              0.951 a
                                                                  (0 .0 4 1 )     (0 .0 3 0 )     (0 .0 1 5 )          (0 .0 1 9 )

                              Change in layers                    -0.017          0.053           0.120 a              0.069 b
                                                                  (0 .0 4 8 )     (0 .0 5 3 )     (0 .0 3 1 )          (0 .0 3 5 )

                              Change in quantity                  0.055           -0.057          0.268 b               0.004
                                                                  (0 .2 6 6 )     (0 .1 0 8 )     (0 .1 1 1 )          (0 .0 8 7 )



                              Observations                         532            1,649            3,674                3,523
                              Kleibergen-Paap stat.               14.8            108.0            259.2                157.7
                              Adjusted R2                         0.841           0.795            0.851                0.868
                                        F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                       a
                                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                            87
      Table H-5: De Loecker et al. (2016) QTFP. IV.Change in layers and quantity as endogenous variables.
                                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)             (4)
                          VARIABLES                       Increasing           Decreasing            Constant          All

                          Productivity t-1                  0.779 a               0.830 a              0.837 a       0.821 a
                                                            (0 .0 2 2 )           (0 .0 2 2 )          (0 .0 2 3 )   (0 .0 1 3 )

                          Change in layers                   0.007                 0.028                             0.034b
                                                            (0 .0 1 5 )           (0 .0 2 2 )                        (0 .0 1 4 )

                          Change in quantity                 0.140                 0.060                0.416 c      0.256 c
                                                            (0 .2 2 6 )           (0 .2 2 7 )          (0 .2 4 2 )   (0 .1 4 5 )



                          Observations                       4,171                 2,734                3,055        9,960
                          Kleibergen-Paap stat.              6.226                 11.58                13.54        19.27
                          Adjusted R2                        0.634                 0.634                0.676        0.668
                                       F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                      a
                                                          p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




I     Results Using Prices
In this Appendix we present results on the e¤ect of a reorganization on prices. We infer prices as follows:
In our dataset a product is identi…ed by a 10-digit code. The …rst 8 digits correspond to the European
PRODCOM classi…cation while the additional two have been added by INE to further re…ne PRODCOM.
The volume is recorded in units of measurement (number of items, kilograms, liters) that are product-speci…c
while the value is recorded in current euros. For each product-…rm-year combination we are able to compute a
detailed price. In our analysis we aggregate products into coarser categories that we label as product groups.
For each product within a product group we compute, as suggested in Forlani et al. (2015), the average
log price across …rms producing that product in a given year. We then aggregate quantities produced
across products within a …rm-product group-year by …rst considering the product of the exponential of
such average and the actual quantity and then summing across products. The ratio between …rm revenue
and aggregate quantity referring to a particular …rm-product group-year combination— normalized by its
product group-year mean— is what we use as price in our regressions. Table I-1 presents the results using
OLS.

I.1   Cost Pass-through
We now perform two separate exercises to study the pricing behavior of the …rms in our sample. First,
we use the Portuguese trade data to study the e¤ect of exchange rate shocks on export behavior of multi-
product …rms, following the approach, and reproducing the main …ndings of Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and
Vichyanond (2013), who use Brazilian data. Second, we perform a comparable exercise with the Prodcom
data to show the relationship between producer prices, quantity-based productivity, and demand shocks. In
both cases we …nd comparable response of prices to increases in marginal costs, in the order of 15 percent.
    Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and Vichyanond (2013) propose a theoretical framework to describe how het-
erogeneous …rms adjust their prices, quantities and product scope in the event of an exchange rate depreci-
ation. The key ingredients of the theoretical framework are two: (i) Each …rm faces a product ladder, i.e.,
there is a core product that the …rm is most e¢ cient at producing and e¢ ciency decreases along the ladder;


                                                                          88
                        Table I-1: Price e¤ects contemporaneous. Sequence type regressions. OLS
                                                              (1)                   (2)                  (3)             (4)
                                  VARIABLES               Increasing             Decreasing            Constant          All

                                  (log) Price t-1            0.805 a                0.904 a              0.834 a       0.841 a
                                                                (0 .0 2 3 )         (0 .0 4 1 )          (0 .0 2 8 )   (0 .0 1 7 )

                                  Change in layers              -0.014              -0.004                             -0.012 c
                                                                (0 .0 1 1 )         (0 .0 1 2 )                        (0 .0 0 6 )

                                  Constant                   0.202 a                0.100 a              0.152 a       0.158 a
                                                                (0 .0 3 0 )         (0 .0 4 5 )          (0 .0 2 9 )   (0 .0 1 8 )



                                  Observations                  4,206                2,750                3,090        10,046
                                  Adjusted R2                   0.641                0.709                0.721         0.687
                                             F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                            a
                                                                 p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




and (ii) Each …rm pays a local per-unit distribution cost, in the destination country currency, which implies
that markups vary depending on how far the product is from the …rm’s core competency. We consider the
following predictions of their model: (i) Producer prices increase following a real depreciation; and (ii) Pro-
ducer prices increases are more pronounced for more productive …rms, and within-…rm for products closer
to the core competency. The intuition for these predictions is the following. A real depreciation implies an
increase in the per unit distribution costs that a …rm has to pay in order to serve its foreign customers. Then
a larger share of the consumer price does not depend on the producer price, resulting in a lower perceived
elasticity of demand and hence higher markups. Producer prices are then increasing in the real exchange
rate. This e¤ect is even stronger for more productive …rm, whose producer price is generally lower, and
within …rms for the products they are more e¢ cient at producing. We test these predictions estimating the
following model,
                        log pijct = ijc + (t) + log(RERct ) + Xjt 1 + Zict + "ijct ;                         (1)
where pijct is the producer price in 2005 Euros charged by …rm j for product i in destination c in year t, ijc
is a product-…rm-destination …xed e¤ect, (t) is a quadratic time polynomial, RERct is the real exchange
rate of country c in year t with respect to Portugal, Zict is a vector of characteristics of destination c in
year t that may also be product i speci…c, Xjt 1 is a vector of …rm j’s characteristics in year t-1, and "ijct
is an error term.41 The main coe¢ cient of interest, , captures the long-run response of the producer price
to real exchange rate ‡uctuations and is the key parameter to be estimated. Since the real exchange rate is
de…ned as units of Portugal currency per unit of country c currency at time t an increase represents a real
depreciation of the Portugal currency. We estimate (1) using the …xed e¤ect estimator in the presence of …rm-
product-destination …xed e¤ects: the variation that we exploit to identify consists then in the deviations
of the real exchange rate, for a given destination, with respect to its mean over time and in the deviations
of the export price, for a given …rm-product-destination, with respect to its mean over time. We control for
both …rm-time and destination-product-time factors. The Xjt 1 vector includes …rm j’s characteristics, in
year t-1, that the literature has proven to be positively correlated with a …rm productivity: a …rm’s size,
average wage, share of high skilled worker, as well as a measure of the importance of exports and imported
inputs, both relative to the …rm’s wage bill. The Zict vector includes destination and destination-product
 41
      We also ran a speci…cation with year …xed e¤ects instead of the quadratic polynomial. Results are quantitatively similar.



                                                                               89
time varying characteristics: a country GDP, GDP per capita, as well as a measure of demand for product
i in country c at time t constructed as the total imports of product i from all countries except Portugal.

                     Table I-2: Export Price and Quantity Responses to Exchange Rate Shocks
                                                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)                 (5)             (6)
        VARIABLES                                                                  Price           Price          Quantity           Quantity             Price           Price

        log RERct                                                                 0.150 a         0.131 a           0.123 a            0.206 a           0.108 b         0.089 c
                                                                                  (0 .0 2 1 )      (0 .0 2 3 )      (0 .0 5 8 )        (0 .0 6 2 )       (0 .0 5 3 )     (0 .0 5 3 )

        log RERct   Rankingijct                                                                                                                         -0.003 a         -0.003 a
                                                                                                                                                         (0 .0 0 0 )     (0 .0 0 0 )

        log RERct   log Employmentjt                1                                                                                                    0.005 b         0.004 b
                                                                                                                                                         (0 .0 0 2 )     (0 .0 0 2 )

        log RERct   log Avg. Wagejt             1                                                                                                         0.003           0.003
                                                                                                                                                         (0 .0 0 5 )     (0 .0 0 5 )

        log RERct   log Export Importancejt                 1                                                                                            0.004 c         0.004 c
                                                                                                                                                         (0 .0 0 2 )     (0 .0 0 2 )

        log RERct   log Import Importancejt                 1                                                                                            0.004 b         0.004 b
                                                                                                                                                         (0 .0 0 2 )     (0 .0 0 2 )

        log RERct   log Share High Skilljt              1                                                                                                -0.000          -0.000
                                                                                                                                                         (0 .0 0 8 )     (0 .0 0 8 )



        Firm-time controls                                                            X                X                X                  X                 X               X
        Destination-product-time controls                                             X                X                X                  X                 X               X
        Firm-product-destination …xed e¤ects                                          X                X                X                  X                 X               X
        Time …xed e¤ects                                                                               X                                   X                                 X
        Time trend                                                                  X                                 X                                    X
        Observations                                                             410,781          410,781          410,781            410,781           410,781          410,781
        Number of …rm-product-destination …xed e¤ects                            236,263          259,088          236,263            259,088           236,263          259,088
        R2                                                                        0.006            0.933            0.010              0.874             0.012            0.933
                R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs c lu ste re d a t th e …rm -le ve l in p a re nth e se s. W ith in R2 fo r sp e c i…c a tio n s w ith tim e tre n d .
                                                                       a
                                                                           p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




    The …rst column of Table I-2 shows that our baseline estimate of is 0.15, which implies that the import
price elasticity to the real exchange rate is 0.85. This …gure is consistent with what found in the literature
for other countries: Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and Vichyanond (2013), using Brazilian data, …nd that is
0.77; Berman, Martin, and Mayer (2012) …nd 0.83 with …rm-level French data, while Campa and Goldberg
(2010) …nd 0.64 with country- and industry-level OECD data. Column 2 of Table I-2 reports the estimate of
  for a speci…cation where the dependent variable is the quantity exported. Given that the producer price
elasticity with respect to real exchange rates is less than one we …nd that the quantity response to a real
exchange rate depreciation is positive. In the last column of Table I-2 we test the prediction that producer
prices increases are more pronounced for more productive …rms, and within-…rm for products closer to the
core competency. We …nd that …rms that become larger or increase their presence in the export and import
markets become more sensitive to real exchange rate depreciations. Moreover, when ranking their products
according to their position in the …rm’s sales portfolio, we …nd that the most important products— those
with a ranking closer to 1— have a higher producer price elasticity, consistently with the theory and results
in Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and Vichyanond (2013).
    We now switch from trade to production data, and consider the relationship between the (…rm-time)
prices constructed using the Prodcom dataset and the measures of quantity-based productivity and demand

                                                                                          90
                        Table I-3: Producer Price Responses to Productivity and Demand Shocks
                                                                                           (1)                             (2)
                                    VARIABLES                                        Change in Price                Change in Price
                                                                                     (Multi-product)                (Single-product)

                                    Change in Quantity TFP                                  -0.140 a                       -0.189 a
                                                                                             (0 .0 0 7 )                    (0 .0 2 2 )

                                    Change in Demand                                         0.011 a                         0.02 a
                                                                                             (0 .0 0 1 )                    (0 .0 0 3 )



                                    Firm-time controls                                         X                               X
                                    Product …xed e¤ects                                        X                               X
                                    Observations                                             30,723                          2,825
                                    R2                                                       0.103                           0.283
                                        R o b u st sta n d a rd e rro rs c lu ste re d a t th e …rm -p ro d u c t-le ve l in p a re nth e se s
                                                                      a
                                                                          p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




shocks considered later on in the paper. This exercise has two goals. First to explore the response of
prices constructed using production, instead of trade, data to an increase in costs— captured by a decrease
in TFPQ. Second, to provide an implicit test of the measures of quantity-based productivity and demand
shocks constructed, and employed, later on in the paper. We expect prices to be negatively related to TFPQ
and positively to demand shocks. We estimate the following model,

                    log pjt =   i   +           log(T F P Qjt ) +                        log(Demandjt ) +                             log(Capitaljt ) + "jt ;   (2)

where log pjt is the log change in prices (in 2005 euros) of …rm j between t 1 and t, i is a 8-digit product
…xed e¤ect, log(T F P Qjt ) and log(Demandjt ) are the main variables of interest and represent the log
change in TFPQ and demand of …rm j between t 1 and t; log(Capitaljt ) is a …rm-time control capturing
the log change in the material assets of …rm j between t 1 and t. We estimate model (2) twice, using all
…rms and restricting the sample to single-product …rms only. Table I-3 reports the results. The estimate for
  in the …rst column of Table I-3 shows that a reduction in TFPQ, i.e. an increase in marginal costs, of 1
percent corresponds to an increase in production prices of about 0.14 percent, which is almost exactly the
same reaction we found using export prices. When considering only single-product …rms we …nd a slightly
higher elasticity, 0.19, which is consistent with Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and Vichyanond (2013)’s idea that
…rms that focus on their core competencies are more reactive to changes in costs. We also …nd that prices
are positively correlated with our measure of demand shocks, in both samples.42 Overall, we …nd that (i)
prices from the production data respond in a way similar to export prices to an increase in costs; (ii) And
the measures of TFPQ and demand that we build upon later on in the paper show a relationship with prices
that is qualitatively consistent with what expected, as well as quantitatively comparable with what found
in the pass-through literature.




 42
      While not reported in the table, we …nd that prices are also positively correlated with material assets, as expected.


                                                                                        91
J    First stage IV Regressions
The next two tables show the …rst stage estimates for tables 11 and 12, for the change in the number of
layers for all …rms and …rms that increase and decrease the number of layers. First stage estimates for the
change in quantity are available upon requests.

Table J-1: Wooldridge Revenue TFP. Instrumental Variable. Both change in layers and change in quantity as
endogenous variables. First stage estimates for change in layers

                               VARIABLES                                   Increasing            Decreasing            All

                               Productivity t-1                               -0.025                 -0.010          -0.003
                                                                              (0 .0 2 4 )           (0 .0 3 8 )      (0 .0 1 9 )

                               Exports real exch. rate                       -0.000 a               -0.000           -0.000
                                                                              (0 .0 0 0 )           (0 .0 0 0 )      (0 .0 0 0 )

                               Imports real exch. rate                        -0.010                 0.080           -0.006
                                                                              (0 .0 1 0 )           (0 .0 5 0 )      (0 .0 2 3 )

                               Capital …rst year                              0.039 b               0.042 c          0.076 a
                                                                              (0 .0 1 8 )           (0 .0 2 3 )      (0 .0 1 2 )

                               Sales t-1                                       0.020                -0.027           0.023
                                                                              (0 .0 1 8 )           (0 .0 2 3 )      (0 .0 1 4 )

                               Sales …rst year                                -0.037                 0.020           -0.027
                                                                              (0 .0 2 3 )           (0 .0 3 2 )      (0 .0 1 8 )

                               Number of layers t-1                          -0.669 a               -0.706 a         0.205 a
                                                                              (0 .0 1 7 )           (0 .0 2 0 )      (0 .0 1 0 )

                               Number of layers …rst year                     0.542 a               0.653 a          0.152 a
                                                                              (0 .0 2 6 )           (0 .0 2 7 )      (0 .0 0 9 )

                               Productivity t-2                               -0.026                 0.013           -0.009
                                                                              (0 .0 2 5 )           (0 .0 3 2 )      (0 .0 1 8 )

                               Productivity …rst year                         0.070 a               -0.007           0.023
                                                                              (0 .0 2 7 )           (0 .0 4 3 )      (0 .0 1 9 )

                               Markup t-1                                      0.049                -0.057           -0.124
                                                                              (0 .1 2 9 )           (0 .1 5 9 )      (0 .0 1 2 )

                               Demand shock t-1                               -0.006                -0.001           0.005
                                                                              (0 .0 0 9 )           (0 .0 1 2 )      (0 .0 0 8 )

                               Markup …rst year                               -0.131                 0.284           0.146
                                                                              (0 .1 4 5 )           (0 .2 1 6 )      (0 .1 2 8 )

                               Demand shock …rst year                          0.009                -0.017           -0.012
                                                                              (0 .0 1 1 )           (0 .0 1 5 )      (0 .0 0 9 )



                               Observations                                    4,057                 2,686           9,677
                                           F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                          a
                                                              p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                            92
Table J-2: Quantity TFP. Instrumental Variable. Both change in layers and change in quantity as endogenous
variables. First stage estimates for change in layers

                                VARIABLES                                  Increasing            Decreasing             All

                                Productivity t-1                               -0.020                -0.053 c         -0.027 a
                                                                               (0 .0 1 8 )           (0 .0 3 2 )      (0 .0 1 1 )

                                Exports real exch. rate                       -0.000 a               -0.000           -0.000
                                                                               (0 .0 0 0 )           (0 .0 0 0 )      (0 .0 0 0 )

                                Imports real exch. rate                        -0.008                0.084 c          -0.023 b
                                                                               (0 .0 1 0 )           (0 .0 5 1 )      (0 .0 1 1 )

                                Markup t-1                                     0.180                 0.340 c          0.210 a
                                                                               (0 .2 0 9 )           (0 .1 8 1 )      (0 .0 7 0 )

                                Demand shock t-1                               -0.016                -0.027 c         -0.018 a
                                                                               (0 .0 1 5 )           (0 .0 1 5 )      (0 .0 0 6 )

                                Capital t                                      0.039 b                0.031            0.016
                                                                               (0 .0 1 6 )           (0 .0 2 5 )      (0 .0 1 3 )

                                Markup …rst year                               -0.112                -0.162 a         -0.029
                                                                               (0 .2 1 5 )           (0 .0 6 4 )      (0 .0 3 1 )

                                Demand shock …rst year                         0.009                  0.012            0.000
                                                                               (0 .0 1 5 )           (0 .0 0 8 )      (0 .0 0 4 )

                                Capital …rst year                              0.028                  0.011           0.054 a
                                                                               (0 .0 2 1 )           (0 .0 3 1 )      (0 .0 1 6 )

                                Quantity t-1                                  -0.047 c                0.048           -0.032
                                                                               (0 .0 2 8 )           (0 .0 4 6 )      (0 .0 2 3 )

                                Quantity …rst year                             0.031                 -0.089c          -0.019
                                                                               (0 .0 3 2 )           (0 .0 4 7 )      (0 .0 2 4 )

                                Sales t-1                                      0.073 b                0.057           0.059 b
                                                                               (0 .0 3 4 )           (0 .0 4 8 )      (0 .0 2 6 )

                                Sales …rst year                                -0.051                -0.051           -0.010
                                                                               (0 .0 4 1 )           (0 .0 5 6 )      (0 .0 2 7 )

                                Number of layers t-1                          -0.666 a               -0.686 a         -0.240 a
                                                                               (0 .0 1 7 )           (0 .0 2 2 )      (0 .0 1 1 )

                                Number of layers …rst year                    0.535 a                0.613 a          -0.119 a
                                                                               (0 .0 2 6 )           (0 .0 2 8 )      (0 .0 0 9 )

                                Productivity t-2                               0.026 c                0.017           0.018 b
                                                                               (0 .0 1 5 )           (0 .0 1 8 )      (0 .0 0 8 )

                                Productivity …rst year                         -0.009                 0.029            0.007
                                                                               (0 .0 1 8 )           (0 .0 3 1 )      (0 .0 1 0 )



                                Observations                                   4,057                  2,686            9,677
                                            F irm -le ve l c lu ste re d sta n d a rd e rro rs in p a re nth e se s
                                                           a
                                                               p <0 .0 1 , b p <0 .0 5 , c p <0 .1




                                                                             93
K      A Case Study: Firm Outcomes from the Removal of EU Quotas on
       Textile and Apparel
In this Appendix we focus on a speci…c industry, “Textile and Apparel”, that experienced a rise in import
competition from China during our time frame. As a consequence of China joining the WTO a number of
quotas that were imposed at the EU-level on Chinese imports— as well as on imports from other non-WTO
countries— were removed. These quotas used to a¤ect some products within the “Textile and Apparel”
industry but not others.
    We show how the removal of quotas corresponds to a negative demand shock that forced …rms to
reorganize. In particular, we show that …rms that decrease the number of layers experience a reduction
in quantity-based productivity and an increase in revenue-based productivity. The data and estimation
strategy are borrowed from Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen (2016) to which the reader may refer for further
details. To provide some context, when these quotas were abolished this generated a 240% increase in
Chinese imports on average within the a¤ected product groups. The underlying identifying assumption of
this strategy is that unobserved demand/technology shocks are uncorrelated with the strength of quotas to
non-WTO countries (like China) in 2000. Since these quotas were built up from the 1950s, and their phased
abolition negotiated in the late 1980s was in preparation for the Uruguay Round, Bloom, Draca, and Van
Reenen (2016) conclude that this seems like a plausible assumption.
    Operationally we compute for each 6-digit Prodcom product category, the proportion of the more detailed
6-digit HS products that were covered by a quota, weighting each HS6 product by its share of EU15 imports
over the period 1995-1997. Then, for each …rm, we measure the …rm-level exposure to the quota by adding
each of the 6-digit Prodcom products weighted by the initial share of sales of the …rm in that product. We
keep this sales shares constant. We label this variable QuotaCoveragei ;, and focus on the period 2000-2005.
    Figure K-1: Average number of management layers for …rms a¤ected and not a¤ected by the quota removals,
                      .2
                      .1
                      0
                      -.1
                      -.2
                      -.3
                            98




                                 99




                                          00




                                                    01




                                                                 02




                                                                      03




                                                                                  04




                                                                                       05
                            19




                                 19




                                         20




                                                  20




                                                                 20




                                                                      20




                                                                                 20




                                                                                       20




                                                          year

                                                 Not affected              Affected



    Figure K-1 shows the average number of layers for …rms a¤ected and not a¤ected by the quota removals,
as a deviation from the common year average. The number of layers tend to increase for …rms that were

                                                         94
                                   Table K-1: Textile and Apparel, …rst stage

                        VARIABLES                               Change in layers
                        QuotaCoveraget                               0.321
                                                                    (0.212)
                        QuotaCoverage2t                               -0.395b
                                                                      (0.230)
                        (log) Capital …rst year                       0.062a
                                                                      (0.013)
                        # of layers t-1                               -0.262a
                                                                      (0.035)
                        constant                                      -0.0348a
                                                                       (0.171)


                        Observations                                    831
                        Kleibergen-Paap stat.                          63.12
                        Cragg-Donald Wald F stat.                      14.81
                        Robust standard errors in parentheses     a   p<0.01,    b   p<0.10




not a¤ected by the quota removals, while it decreases for …rms that were a¤ected by the quota removals.
We use this relationship as a …rst stage in a 2SLS speci…cation. Namely, we instrument the change in the
number of management layers with the QuotaCoveragei ; (QuotaCoveragei )2 ; the lagged number of layers
and capital stock.
    Table K-1 presents the results from the …rst stage. As we can see, the coe¢ cients from the …rst stage
are signi…cant and with the expected sign. Table 13, in the main text, reports IV estimates of the e¤ect of
the change in the number of layers on either revenue-based or quantity based productivity as well as the
OLS coe¢ cients.




                                                      95
