NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PLAZA ACCORD, 30 YEARS LATER
Jeffrey Frankel
Working Paper 21813
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21813

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015

This paper was written for a conference on Currency Policy Then and Now: 30th Anniversary of the
Plaza Accord, Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice University, October 1, 2015. The author would
like to thank for comments C. Fred Bergsten, Jin Chen, Russell Green and Ted Truman. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21813.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Jeffrey Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Plaza Accord, 30 Years Later
Jeffrey Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 21813
December 2015
JEL No. F33,F42,N1
ABSTRACT
The paper reviews an event of 30 years ago from the perspective of today: a successful G-5 initiative
to reverse what had been an overvalued dollar. The “Plaza Accord” is best viewed not as the precise
product of the meeting on September 22, 1985, but as shorthand for a historic change in US policy
that began when James Baker became Treasury Secretary in January of that year. The change had
the desired effect, bringing down the dollar and reducing the trade deficit. In recent years concerted
foreign exchange intervention, of the sort undertaken by the G-7 in 1985 and periodically over the
subsequent decade, has died out. Indeed the G-7 in 2013, fearing “currency manipulation,” specifically
agreed to refrain from intervention in a sort of “anti-Plaza accord.” But some day coordinated foreign
exchange intervention will return.

Jeffrey Frankel
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

The Plaza Accord, 30 Years Later
September 2015 marks the 30th anniversary of the Plaza Accord. It was probably the most
dramatic policy initiative in the dollar foreign exchange market since Richard Nixon originally
floated the currency in 1973. At the Plaza Hotel in New York on September 22, 1985, US
officials and their counterparts among the Group of Five largest industrialized countries agreed
to act to bring down the value of the dollar. Public statements from the officials were backed
up by foreign exchange intervention, selling dollars in exchange for other currencies in the
foreign exchange market.
The Plaza is justly celebrated as a high-water mark of international policy coordination. The
value of the dollar had climbed 44 per cent against other major currencies in the five years
leading up to 1985.1 (See Figure 1.) Largely as a result of the strong dollar and lost price
competitiveness, the US trade balance had fallen to record lows as of 1985, a deficit of $122
billion. The trade deficit spurred congressional support for proposed trade interventions that
an economist would have found damaging.
In the two years 1985-87, the dollar came back down 40 per cent. After the exchange rate
turned around, so did the trade balance (with the usual lag). In the end, the US Congress
refrained from enacting protectionist trade barriers.
The Plaza Accord made institutional history as well. The group of officials that had met in New
York developed into the G-7 Finance Ministers group, which has continued to meet ever since. 2
While the Plaza Accord is generally viewed as having been a major public success, it is sobering
to realize that the essence of the initiative -- a deliberate effort to depreciate a major currency - would be anathema today. In recent years, policy actions by a central bank that have the
effect of keeping the value of its currency lower than it would otherwise be are likely to be
called “currency manipulation” and to be considered an aggressive assault in the “currency
wars.“ In light of the currency war concerns, the G-7 has refrained from foreign exchange
intervention in recent years. The G-7 partners in February 2013 even accepted a proposal by
the US Treasury to agree to refrain from unilateral foreign exchange intervention, in an
insufficiently discussed ministers’ agreement that we could call the “anti-Plaza” accord.3

1

In log terms. The Fed index of the dollar against major currencies rose from 93 in September 1980 to
144 at the February 1985 peak (1973=100).
2
In 1986, Secretary Baker persuaded the G-7 to agree to monitor a set of “objective indicators,”
including GDP and other economic variables, hoping to coordinate economic expansion. In February
1987, the G-7 ministers agreed at the Louvre that the dollar had fallen far enough, especially against the
yen, and that they would try to prevent it from falling further. Funabashi (1988), Baker (2006, 431-32).
3
G7 (2013).
2

Part 1 of this paper reviews what actually happened at the Plaza in September 1985 and
during the months leading up to it. 4 Parts 2 and 3 of the paper consider the effects of foreign
exchange intervention and then the current worries regarding currency manipulation and
currency wars. Part 4 concludes with a consideration of intervention policy and the dollar as of
2015.
Figure 1: The dollar’s value (1973-2015).
The 1985 peak was far higher than any other point in the last 40 years.

1. History of the Plaza Agreement
1.1 The appreciation of the dollar in the early 1980s
At first, when the dollar appreciated by some 26% during the period 1980 to 1984, it was not
difficult to explain the movement by the traditional macroeconomic fundamentals of
textbooks. A combination of tight monetary policy associated with Federal Reserve Chairman
Paul Volcker during 1980-82 and expansionary fiscal policy associated with President Ronald
Reagan during 1981-84 pushed up long-term interest rates, which in turn attracted a capital
4

Frankel (1994a) gives a more extensive account of American policy with respect to the exchange rate
during the decade of the 1980s. See also Baker (2006, 427-433), Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz (2015),
Destler and Henning (1989), Funabashi (1988), and Mulford (2014, 169-172).

3

inflow and appreciated the currency. This is what the famous Mundell-Fleming model
predicted would happen.
Martin Feldstein, Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, popularized the “twin deficits”
view of this causal chain. As a result of the fiscal expansion – tax cuts and increased spending –
the budget deficit rose (and national saving fell). As a result of the strong dollar, the trade
deficit rose. The budget deficit and trade deficit were thus linked. The exchange rate in this
view is not the fundamental problem, but only the natural symptom of the monetary/fiscal
policy mix, the channel whereby it is transmitted to the trade deficit.5
Some trading partners expressed concerns at the magnitude of the dollar appreciation. The
French, in particular, favored intervention in the foreign exchange market to dampen such
movements. But Treasury Secretary Donald Regan and other Administration officials rejected
the view that the US trade deficit was a problem, argued instead that the strong dollar reflected
a global vote of confidence in the US economy, and opposed proposals for intervention in the
foreign exchange market to bring the dollar down. Their policy was “benign neglect” of the
exchange rate. The Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs, Beryl Sprinkel, had announced in the
third month of the Administration that its intention was not to undertake such intervention at
all, except in the case of "disorderly markets." For Sprinkel, a long-time member of the
monetarist "Shadow Open Market Committee" and follower of Milton Friedman, the matter
was a simple case of the virtues of the free market.
At the Versailles Summit of G-7 leaders in 1982, the US responded to complaints about
excessive exchange rate movements by agreeing to request an expert study of the effectiveness
of foreign exchange intervention. But when the resulting Jurgensen Report was submitted to
the G-7 leaders at the Williamsburg Summit in 1983, its findings were not as supportive of
intervention as the other countries had hoped. 6 The basic argument of the underlying
research, common among economists, was that sterilized intervention has no long-lasting
effect and unsterilized intervention is just another kind of monetary policy.
From March 1984 to February 1985 the dollar appreciated another 17 percent. This final phase
of the currency’s ascent differed from the earlier phases, not only in that the appreciation was
at an accelerated rate, but also in that it could not readily be explained on the basis of
economic fundamentals, whether by means of the textbook theories or otherwise. The interest
rate differential peaked in June 1984 and thereafter moved in the wrong direction to explain
the remainder of the upswing. Some economists argued at the time that the foreign exchange
market was “misaligned” or had been carried away by an irrational “speculative bubble”
(Bergsten 1984; Krugman 1985; Cooper 1985; Frankel 1985). In any case, the trade deficit
reached $112 billion in 1984 and continued to widen. Some who had hitherto supported a
freely floating exchange rate for the dollar began to change their minds.
5

Feldstein (1984) and Council of Economic Advisers (1984).
Report of the Working Group, 1983; Henderson and Sampson, 1983; Obstfeld, 1990. Putnam and
Bayne, 1987, p.179, report the debate within the G-7 at the Williamsburg Summit in May 1983.
6

4

1.2 Dating the 1985 shift in dollar policy
Between the first Reagan Administration and the second, there was a change in policy with
respect to the exchange rate, a shift from a relatively doctrinaire laissez-faire policy during
1981-84, to a more flexible policy of activism during 1985-88.
An obvious point from which to date the switch is 22 September 1985, when finance ministers
and central bank governors met at the Plaza Hotel and agreed to try to bring the dollar down. 7
The Plaza Accord was certainly the embodiment of the new regime. But I would prefer to date
the start of the new era from the beginning of that year. With the inauguration of the second
Reagan administration in January 1985, Don Regan and James Baker, decided to trade jobs,
Regan becoming White House Chief of Staff and Baker taking Regan’s job leading the Treasury
Department.8 At the same time, Beryl Sprinkel left Treasury. Baker’s aide Richard Darman
became Deputy Secretary at the Department. David Mulford happened to join the team in
January as well, as the new Assistant Secretary for International Affairs.9
Baker had developed at the White House a reputation for greater pragmatism than other, more
ideological members of the administration. In January confirmation hearings, the incoming
cabinet official explicitly showed signs of the departure with respect to exchange rate policy,
stating at one point that the Treasury’s previous stance against intervention was “obviously
something that should be looked at.” 10
Another reason to date the change from early in the year is that the dollar peaked in February
and had already depreciated by 13 percent by the time of the Plaza meeting. Some, such as
Feldstein (1986) and Taylor (2015), have argued that the gap in timing shows that exchange
rate “policy” had in fact little connection with the actual decline of the dollar, which was
instead determined in the private marketplace regardless of what efforts governments made to
influence it. Notwithstanding that official policy did not change until September, however,
there are two persuasive respects in which the bursting of the bubble at the end of February
may have been in part caused by policy change. First, it was widely anticipated that Baker and
Darman would probably be more receptive to the idea of trying to bring down the dollar than
their predecessors had been. If market participants have reason to believe that policy changes
to reduce the value of the dollar will be made in the future, they will move to sell dollars today
in order to protect themselves against future losses, which will have the effect of causing the
dollar to depreciate today.
Second, some intervention was agreed on at a G-5 meeting on 17 January – Baker attended the
dinner -- and did take place subsequently (Funabashi 1988, 10). Surprisingly, the G-5 public
announcement in January used language that, on the surface at least, sounds more prointervention than was used later in the Plaza announcement: “in light of recent developments
7

Funabashi (1988, 9-41); Mulford (2014, 169-172).
Regan (1988), Baker (2006, 219-220).
9
Mulford (2014, 156).
10
Destler and Henning (1989, 41-42).
8

5

in foreign exchange markets,” the G-5 “reaffirmed their commitment made at the Williamsburg
Summit to undertake coordinated intervention in the markets as necessary.”
The U.S. intervention that winter was small in magnitude.11 But the German monetary
authorities, in particular, intervened heavily to sell dollars in foreign exchange markets in
February and March. 12 The February intervention was reported in the newspapers and, by
virtue of timing, appears a likely candidate for the instrument that pricked the bubble. It is in
turn likely that the accession of Baker to the Treasury in January and the G-5 meeting were the
developments that encouraged the Germans to renew their intervention efforts at that time.
One could take a narrow viewpoint and define the “Plaza Accord” to include only the
deliberations made on September 22 at the Plaza Hotel and not other developments in 1985.
But my view is that it is appropriate to use the term to include all the elements of the shift in
dollar policy that occurred when Baker became Treasury Secretary that year: the other
meetings, public statements, perceptions and – especially – foreign exchange market
interventions.
History routinely uses this sort of short-hand. We also celebrate 2015 as the 800th anniversary
of the Magna Carta, even though the precise paper signed at Runnymede in 1215 had no
immediate effect in England and did not even bear that name. Versions were reissued in
subsequent years (a 1217 version is the one that was first called “Magna Carta”) and eventually
came to represent the principle that the king was bound by law.
To take another example closer to home, we use “Bretton Woods” to denote the postwar
monetary system based on pegged exchange rates facilitated by the IMF, with gold and the
dollar as the international reserve assets. But the system that was agreed at Bretton Woods,
New Hampshire, in 1944 had been negotiated over the preceding two years, did not really
come into full operation until some 15 years later (initially the IMF had little role to play and
European countries delayed restoring currency convertibility), and by then was already
beginning to break down (as the convertibility of the dollar into gold was increasingly in
question). 13 Nevertheless “Bretton Woods” is a useful shorthand, like “Magna Carta.” It is
similarly useful to apply “Plaza Accord” to the set of changes in policy with respect to the dollar
that took place in 1985.
1.3 The Plaza meeting itself
In April 1985, at an Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) meeting,
Baker announced, “The US is prepared to consider the possible value of hosting a high-level
meeting of the major industrial countries” on the subject of international monetary reform.
11

A total of $659 million in foreign exchange purchases from 21 January to 1 March, as compared to $10
billion by the major central banks in total (Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review 10, Spring
1985: 60; and 10, Autumn 1985: 52).
12
Intervention was particularly strong on 27 February and appeared at the time to have an impact on
the market (e.g., Wall Street Journal, 23 September, 1985, p.26).
13
Steil (2013).
6

Similar trial balloons were floated in the Congress. 14 But the other shoe was yet to drop.
Monetary and exchange rate issues were not extensively discussed at the Bonn Summit of G-7
leaders in May 1985.15
Preparations for the Plaza meeting began soon thereafter, but were kept closely guarded. In
June, top Treasury officials discussed the possibility of concerted intervention with top officials
in Japan’s Ministry of Finance. 16 The G-5 Deputies met secretly in July and August, led by
Assistant Secretary Mulford. 17 Details were worked out in a final preparatory meeting of G-5
deputies in London on 15 September.
Finally, on 22 September, the G-5 ministers and central bankers met at the Plaza and agreed on
an announcement that “some further orderly appreciation of the non-dollar currencies is
desirable” and that they “stand ready to cooperate more closely to encourage this when to do
so would be helpful,” language that by the standards of such communiques was considered (at
least in retrospect) to have constituted strong support for concerted intervention, even though
the word intervention did not appear. A figure of 10-12 percent depreciation of the dollar over
the near term had been specified as the aim in a never-released “non-paper” drafted by
Mulford, for the September 15 meeting in London. 18 The numbers were accepted as the aim by
the G-5 ministers at the Plaza (according to American government sources). 19 There was,
apparently, little discussion among the participants at the Plaza as to whether changes in
monetary policy would be required to achieve the aim of depreciating the dollar, suggesting
that the agreed intervention would probably be appropriately classified as sterilized.
On the Monday that the Plaza announcement was made public, the dollar fell a sudden 4
percent against a weighted average of other currencies (slightly more against the mark and the

14

E.g., Putnam and Bayne (1987, 199).
The G-7 summit of May 1985 was overshadowed by the public relations set-back of Bitburg, which
arose when President Reagan embarrassingly found himself committed to visiting a German cemetery
that contained graves of Nazi SS soldiers (Putnam and Bayne 1987, 200-201). According to some
reports, this mistake on the part of the White House advance team was an indirect consequence of the
strong dollar: On the afternoon when aide Michael Deaver was meant to have been inspecting the
Bitburg cemetery, he and other White House aides reportedly were instead out buying BMWs (Bovard,
1991, p.316), which at the time could be had in Germany for half the U.S. price as the result of the
appreciation of the dollar against the mark. (President Reagan later blessed the Plaza initiative: Baker,
2006, 431.)
16
Gao (2001, p.175).
17
Mulford (2014, p. 169-170).
18
Funabashi (1988, 16-21).
19
The “nonpaper” also specified the total scale of intervention to be undertaken over the subsequent six
weeks (up to $18 billion) and the allocation among the five countries (Funabashi, 1988, 16-21).
Intervention actually undertaken by the end of October turned out to be $3.2 billion on the part of the
United States and $5 billion on the part of the other four countries, plus over $2 billion on the part of G10 countries that were not represented at the Plaza, particularly Italy (Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Quarterly Review 10, Winter 1985-86: 47).
15

7

yen). Subsequently, it resumed a gradual depreciation at a rate similar to that of the preceding
seven months. 20
2. Is Intervention Effective?
Those who question that the Plaza was in fact effective are skeptical of the answer to one or
the other of two separate questions regarding the effects of foreign exchange intervention.
First, is intervention effective at changing the exchange rate even if it is sterilized, that is, even
if it does not take the form of a change in the money supply? Second, if it does change the
exchange rate, does that change the trade balance? Both questions remain of general interest,
well beyond the events of 30 years ago. We briefly consider each in turn.
2.1 Is intervention effective at moving the exchange rate?
In the decade following the Plaza, the U.S. and other major governments continued periodically
to intervene in the dollar market, sometimes in one direction, sometimes in the other. During
most of this period, market participants believed that such interventions were important:
traders would leap for their terminals when reports on central bank sales or purchases came
out. But a majority of American economists and central bankers retained the view of the early
1980s, that intervention is ineffective except to the extent it changes money supplies.21
Using previously-unavailable data on daily intervention by the Bundesbank and Federal Reserve
in the 1980s, Dominguez and Frankel (1993 a,b,c) re-examined the issue. We found statistically
significant effects. For example in ten out of eleven major episodes during the period 19851991, the DM/$ rate in the month subsequent to the episode moved the direction in which the
monetary authorities were trying to push it. Some others found similar results on broader data
sets. 22 Others reported more negative findings regarding the effectiveness of intervention.23
The literature grew. Edison (1993) and Sarno and Taylor (2001) surveyed empirical research up
to those respective dates.
The econometric part of the Dominguez-Frankel research sought to disentangle two distinct
possible effects of intervention. First is the portfolio effect that may result from actual
purchases and sales of marks and dollars in the marketplace (regardless whether the central
bank's actions are publicly known at the time, or are kept secret). Second is the additional
expectations effect, whereby public reports of intervention may alter expectations of the future
exchange rate (regardless whether the intervention has in fact taken place), which will feed
20

That the rate of depreciation in the six months after the Plaza was no greater than in the six months
before the Plaza is Feldstein (1986)’s reason for claiming that the change in policy had no effect.
21
With the advent of quantitative easing, it has become more widely accepted that changes in the
balance sheet of the central bank can have effects on interest rates even controlling for the size of the
monetary base, as in the venerable portfolio balance model. Why not, then, effects on exchange rates?
This is one reason why the effectiveness of sterilized intervention deserves a fresh look.
22
For example Catte, Galli, and Rebecchini (1994) extended the data set to include intervention
operations by other central banks, and claimed to find even stronger evidence of effects on the
exchange rate. Ito (1987, 2003) focused on the yen/dollar exchange rate.
23
E.g., Beine, Bénassy-Quéré, and Lecourt (2002).
8

back to the current equilibrium price. The study used data that had not been widely used by
other researchers: in addition to daily intervention data, it used newspaper reports on
intervention, survey data on the expectations of market participants, and a measure of
portfolio risk. Results showed significant effects of intervention through both of the two
channels, though only in the case of the expectations effect was the impact estimated to be
quantitatively large.
Not all attempts at foreign exchange intervention were found to be successful. A number of
lessons were drawn as to the circumstances under which intervention was most likely to be
work. 24
* First, the conventional wisdom is correct that, because the foreign exchange market is now so
large (several trillion dollars in daily turnover, worldwide), purchases and sales on the scale that
governments are generally prepared to make will not have much effect if the market is already
firmly convinced of the proper value of the currency. The authorities will lose the battle if the
market is determined to be on the other side. This is particularly relevant when the government
is trying to support a parity that is no longer justified by macroeconomic fundamentals. The
successful effect of intervention comes when the market holds weak views as to the true worth
of the currency, particularly in the case of a speculative bubble, and is willing to be led by the
authorities. A good example of this was the dollar in 1985.
* Second, the initial intervention in any given episode during the post-Plaza period (1985-1991)
had a greater effect than follow-up interventions on subsequent days. Surprise may be an
important element. The effort generally has an effect within the first few days or weeks if it is
going to have an effect at all.
* Third, the operations are more likely to be effective if they are "concerted," i.e., coordinated
among a number of major central banks as they were in 1985 and subsequent years. It is
particularly important that the U.S. be one of the countries participating.
* Fourth, the major effect comes via expectations. The average effect of reports of intervention
(by wire services and newspapers) on forecasts (of what the rate will be one month ahead) was
estimated at 0.4 per cent, and this effect translated almost one-for-one into the
contemporaneous spot exchange rate itself. Thus if authorities reveal intervention to the public
it is more likely to have a major effect. Explicit announcements by U.S. officials had even
greater effects (estimated about 0.8 per cent) than when the New York Fed merely allowed the
banks through which it trades to share the information. Examples include the Plaza statement
of September 1985, the Louvre statement of February 1987, and the Bush Administration's
"ambush" to reverse dollar appreciation in July 1991.
* Fifth, the authorities are not necessarily able to affect the exchange rate for a long period,
absent a corresponding change in fundamentals. The effect usually appeared still to be present
one month after the intervention. Whether the effect is still there a year later was impossible
24

Dominguez (1990, 2006), Dominguez and Frankel (1993a, b, c), Fratzscher et al (2015), and research by
others cited in the surveys by Edison (1993) and Sarno and Taylor (2001).
9

to say. Critics of sterilized intervention say that it can at most have an effect in the short run.
But even short-term effects can be useful. Examples of episodes where the effect lasted long
enough to be useful included such operations as the "pricking of the dollar bubble" in 1985, the
"bear squeeze" of January 1988 -- which supported the dollar as a bridge until expected
improvements in the trade balance materialized -- and the successful placing of a floor and
ceiling, respectively, on the dollar in February and July 1991.
Occasional intervention continued during the first Clinton Administration, 1992-95, mainly to
support the dollar.25 G-7 intervention in May 1995, after the dollar had depreciated to a record
low against the yen, at appears to have been successful in turning the trend around, consistent
with the mantra of the new Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin “a strong dollar is in the national
interest.”
Subsequently, however, intervention virtually died out among the G-7. The European
Central Bank intervened in 2000, to support its then over-depreciated euro. (Operations in
September of that year were undertaken in cooperation with the US and others.) The last time
the Bank of Japan intervened in the foreign exchange market was in March 2011, again in
cooperation with the US and others, to dampen a strong appreciation of the yen that came in
the aftermath of the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami. 26 Since then, nothing. As noted in the
introduction, the G-7 partners in February 2013 agreed to refrain from foreign exchange
intervention.
One might think that foreign exchange intervention is not in current use and therefore the
question of whether it is effective would be only of historical interest. But that would not be
right.27 True, most big advanced countries don’t intervene in the foreign exchange market
these days. But, for one thing, major Emerging Market countries do intervene. Around the time
that the G-7 moved to the free-floating corner (i.e., stopped intervening), many emerging
market countries switched to managed floating (having abandoned exchange rate targets after
the currency crashes of 1994-2002).
We need an updating of research on the effectiveness of foreign exchange intervention. It
would still be useful to figure out if it works, as an additional tool that is at least partly
independent of monetary policy. An updating means looking at the last 15 years of data for
emerging market countries and a few of the smaller advanced countries that still intervene.
One use for such research is for thinking about policy alternatives routinely faced by emerging
markets coping with inflows (e.g., 2003-08 or 2010-12) or their reversal (in the Global Financial
Crisis of 2008-09 and perhaps again as the Fed ends its period of monetary easing and starts to
raise interest rates). Another use is for thinking about the major advanced countries, which,
someday, will intervene again.
25

Frankel (1994b).
That the yen had appreciated strongly in response to the disaster was counterintuitive to most. The
explanation is that Japan had been taking out insurance against major earthquakes for many years, with
the result that money flooded into the country in March 2011.
27
Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz (2012).
26

10

There is a growing empirical literature on intervention in emerging market countries and it
seems generally to find effects. So far, most studies look at the experience of only one or two
individual countries.28 The topic is crying out for panel studies. Adler and Tovar (2011),
Blanchard, Adler and de Carvalho (2015) and Fratzscher, et al, (2015) are a start. But there is
room for more.
2.2 Effects on the trade balance
While some skeptics claim that intervention does not move the exchange rate, in 1985 or
otherwise, other skeptics claim that the exchange rate does not move the trade balance. The
latter sort of skepticism steadily gained adherents in the first two years after the Plaza when,
even though the dollar had depreciated, the US trade deficit in 1986 and 1987 continued to
worsen rather than improve. 29 A host of explanations for the lack of trade balance response
arose. Many of these explanations (even if not entirely new) gave rise to new areas of
academic research. One was the point that pass-through of exchange rate changes to prices of
imports in domestic currency is not immediate or complete, especially when the question is
passing a dollar depreciation through to higher dollar prices for imports into the large US
market. 30
In the end, the US trade balance did turn around, with a lag of two years. This was not, after all,
very different from traditional estimates of the lags. According to the “J-curve,” in the short run
the depreciation worsens the trade balance because the rising price of imports outweighs the
fall in import quantity or rise in export quantity. After two years or so have passed, the
elasticities have risen enough that the quantity effects begin to outweigh the valuation effect.
The US trade deficit in goods and services peaked in the third quarter of 1987 at $152 billion
per annum [$38 billion per quarter]. By 1991 it was down to $30 billion per year. 31 As Krugman
(1991) pointed out, adjustment in the end turned out to work pretty much as it was supposed
to. Observers had been too impatient.
We have seen some similar developments in recent years. An effect of Abenomics in Japan was
a strong depreciation of the yen in 2013. That was as expected. Many were disappointed,
however, when the Japanese trade balance did not quickly improve. Various explanations were
adduced as to how “Japan is different” because it is so dependent on oil and other imported
28

See, for example, Disyatat and Galati (2007), Dominguez, Fatum and Vacek (2013), Menkhoff (2013)
and the papers cited therein.
29
Typical was Rose and Yellen (1989). Also relevant was the subsequent “exchange rate disconnect”
literature: e.g., Devereux and Engel (2002).
30
Two other explanations in 1986 and 1987 for the failure of the depreciation to improve the trade
balance were (i) the idea that the preceding loss of market share from the strong dollar might have
become near-permanent in some sectors (“hysteresis”), and (ii) the new importance of trade with
emerging market countries whose currencies were not in the traditional exchange rate indices.
31
In addition to the depreciation, a US recession was also an important reason for reduced imports in
the years 1990-91. The record US trade deficits of the mid-1980s were exceeded in the mid-2000s, even
as a share of GDP.
11

inputs (which are inelastically demanded). But it appears that after two years passed, Japan’s
trade deficit has been much reduced in the first half of 2015.32
2.3 Did the Plaza Accord sabotage Japan?
One legacy of the Plaza is a sort of conspiracy theory that has continued to circulate widely in
Asia. The theory is that the United States deliberately sabotaged the Japanese economy. The
most common version is that the effect came via endaka, the strong yen, which priced Japanese
manufacturing out of world markets. 33 The idea is that the US successfully used this weapon
against Japan at the Plaza in 1985, then against Korea in 1988-89, and against China in the years
since 2004.
In some ways the suspicion is understandable, given the long-time pattern of pressure from the
US Treasury on Asian countries to appreciate their currencies. It is true that the yen
appreciated sharply against the dollar after the Plaza, more than did the European currencies.
It is also true that Japan’s GDP has mostly stagnated since 1990, after decades of strong growth.
But the timing is not quite right for the conspiracy theory. In between the 1985-86
appreciation of the yen and the Japanese recessions of the 1990s came the bubble years 198789, when exchange rate policy was no longer working to push the yen up, but rather to support
the dollar. A variant of the conspiracy theory is that Japanese purchases of dollars during the
bubble years led to excessive money growth and thereby to the soaring prices of equities and
real estate in Japan. The bursting of that bubble then led to the Japanese recession. But this is
virtually the opposite of the theory that the Plaza did it: buying dollars is the opposite of selling
dollars. 34

3. Currency manipulation
In 1985, G7 coordination meant joint intervention in the foreign exchange market. Today G7
coordination means refraining from intervention, which is called currency manipulation. Some
specify that foreign exchange intervention is a necessary criterion in the definition of currency
manipulation. Others think that it can qualify as currency manipulation even if the policy that is
used is monetary stimulus rather than intervention.
The first sentence of the 2013 communique (G7, 2013) delegitimizes foreign exchange
intervention: “We, the G7 Ministers and Governors, reaffirm our longstanding commitment to
market determined exchange rates…” The second sentence seems to accept the broadening of
the definition of manipulation to other policies that can affect the exchange rate: “We reaffirm
that our fiscal and monetary policies have been and will remain oriented towards meeting our
respective domestic objectives using domestic instruments, and that we will not target
exchange rates.” The implication is that monetary stimulus is valid so long as the authorities
32

The 2014-15 global decline in oil prices also helped.
Gao (2001).
34
Corbett and Ito (2010).
33

12

are not aware that it is likely to depreciate their currency, or at least so long as this is not their
purpose. In the absence of mind-reading skills, the communique in practice rules out
intervention plus statements by officials to influence currencies, but not monetary stimulus.
3.1 Beggar-thy-neighbor policies
Is currency depreciation a “beggar-thy-neighbor” policy that calls for enforced rules against
currency manipulation? Let us stipulate that because a depreciation of the currency raises the
country’s price competitiveness on world markets, it stimulates the country’s net exports –
perhaps with a delay of a year or two – and thus that it achieves a switching of world spending
toward the goods and services of the originating country, which comes at the expense of
spending on goods and services of other countries. (To be careful, notice that we are assuming
that the “switching” effects that the exchange rate has via the trade balance dominate any
other effects that the exchange rate may have. 35)
It is then easy to see why such an exchange rate policy is often viewed as a classic “beggar-thyneighbor” policy, analogous to putting up tariffs against imports. And it might seem a short
step from there to the view that everyone would be better off in a cooperative regime where
they all agreed to refrain from deliberate intervention to depreciate their currencies, by
analogy with agreeing to refrain from protectionist trade barriers. But the analogy may be
misplaced. A non-coordinated world in which each country chooses its monetary policy
independently, subject to the choices of other countries, is very different from the problems of
a non-coordinated world in which each country chooses its tariffs independently.
The classic examples of both kinds of beggar-thy-neighbor policies came in the 1930s. The
Smoot-Hawley tariff enacted by the US in 1930 was emulated by other countries, collapsing
global trade. Britain, the US, France, and others pursued competitive devaluations in the early
1930s, as each in turn took its currency off the gold standard. 36 The disasters of the 1930s
motivated the architects of the postwar system who met at Bretton Woods in 1944 to adopt
both the principle of free trade and the principle of pegged exchange rates. The dollar couldn’t
be devalued. Other exchange rates were adjustable in the event of fundamental
disequilibrium; but to devalue otherwise would be unfair currency manipulation under IMF
Article IV.
But Eichengreen and Sachs (1985, 1986) offered a powerful revisionist interpretation of the
exchange rate developments of the 1930s. They argued that (unlike the tariffs) the
devaluations were not collectively damaging but may actually have been beneficial. Each of
these devaluations was not just a reduction in the value of the currency in terms of other
35

In some countries, especially emerging markets or developing countries, a depreciation of the currency has
contractionary effects, which may even be big enough to offset the expansionary switching effect on the trade
balance. These include especially balance sheet effects (if the depreciating country has large debts denominated
in foreign currency) and the effect on the local-currency price of oil or other imported inputs. If these
contractionary effects of depreciation were important, it would seem to follow that an appreciation of other
currencies – because the dollar is depreciating – would have expansionary effects on their economies. Beggar-thyneighbor would be converted to “enrich-thy-neighbor.”
36
Eichengreen (2015).

13

currencies but also in terms of gold. When each country had taken its turn, the net effects on
exchange rates largely canceled out; but the net effects vis-à-vis gold did not. Each country was
left with a currency that was worth less in terms of gold, which is to say that the price of gold
was higher in terms of their currency. As a result the nominal value of gold reserves was raised.
Since gold reserves were the ultimate backing for the money supply, this allowed an expanded
money supply in each country and lower interest rates, which is just what the world needed at
the time.
The Bretton Woods system came crashing down in the early 1970s. After the Members of the
Fund ratified the move to floating exchange rates in the Jamaica Communique of January 1976,
they agreed a framework for mutual surveillance under what is called the “1977 Decision on
Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies,” and they amended Article IV in 1978. Principle (A) of
the 1977 Decision and Clause 3 of Section 1 of Article IV both require that each member shall
“avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to prevent
effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive advantage over
other members.” [It is almost as if they shifted from interpreting manipulation as failure to
intervene sufficiently in the foreign exchange market to interpreting it as excessive intervention
in the foreign exchange market.]
3.2 US complaints about currency manipulation by others
Congressional concerns about US trade in the mid-1980s did result in one major piece of
currency legislation. In its Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 the US Congress
mandated biannual reports from the US Treasury regarding whether trading partners were
manipulating currencies. More specifically, in Section 3004, the Treasury is required to
“consider whether countries manipulate the rate of exchange between their currency and the
United States dollar for purposes of preventing effective balance of payments adjustments or
gaining unfair competitive advantage in international trade.'' The law says the US must hold
talks with governments deemed to be breaking the rules.
In the first of the Reports to Congress on International Economics and Exchange Rate Policy,
filed in October 1988, Korea and Taiwan, Province of China, were found to be guilty of
manipulation, while Singapore and Hong Kong SAR “got off with a warning” in that policy
changes were recommended. In subsequent years, those countries pronounced manipulators,
or given warnings, have always been Asian.
In 2003 the United States began to put increasing pressure on China to revalue its currency
upward.37 Persuasive arguments were made for China to move in the direction of increasing
exchange rate flexibility and/or allowing its currency to appreciate. (This was true whether the
criterion was China’s own economic interest or facilitating an orderly unwinding of record
global current account imbalances.) But especially in election years, such as 2004, much of the
political pressure was tied to the bilateral US-China trade deficits and loss of American jobs in
manufacturing, criteria that have little basis either in IMF agreements or in economic logic.
37

More extensive analysis of this history and other relevant references are available in Frankel and Wei
(2007).
14

Much of the pressure on the Treasury to name China a manipulator came from Capitol Hill. The
Schumer-Graham bill, originally proposed in February 2005, would have imposed (WTO-illegal)
tariffs of 27.5 percent against all Chinese goods if China did not substantially revalue its
currency. It did not pass, but other proposed versions followed.
Many in the US congress in 2015 would not support giving Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) to
President Barack Obama because the legislation did not include language to enforce prohibition
of currency manipulation by other countries.38 TPA is the same “fast track” authority that every
president since Nixon has been granted to allow international trade negotiations to precede.
Obama wanted it, in particular, to be able to finish negotiations for a Trans Pacific Partnership
(TPP) with Asian countries and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TPP) with
Europe.
There are other forums for addressing currency manipulation: bilateral, G-20, IMF surveillance.
Critics think those venues are too weak and want to be able to apply the penalty of trade
sanctions. If the US had insisted that strong currency manipulation language go into the TPP,
then (1) other countries would have refused and so there would have been no TPP, and (2) they
would have had genuine reasons for refusing. There is too much disagreement over what
constitutes unfair currency manipulation. Some US interest groups and congressmen, for
example, think that China and Japan are manipulating their currencies right now, in 2015. So
the provision could be mis-used.
An analogy could be made with anti-dumping legislation. The original intellectual rationale for
the legislation was predatory pricing. And yet the way the laws ended up being written and
enforced, the cases seldom involve predatory pricing. AD countermeasures in practice are
usually a disguised form of protectionism. The same could happen with currency manipulation
rules.
It is true that there are times when a particular country’s currency can be judged undervalued
or overvalued and times when its trading partners have a legitimate interest in raising the
question with its government. But in my view, even in those rare cases when the currency
misalignment is relatively clear, trade agreements are not the right venue to address it. The
undervalued RMB was addressed in bilateral China-US discussions, 2004-11, eventually with
success: China allowed the currency to appreciate 35% over time. Today it is well within
a normal range. 39 Although the People’s Bank of China did indeed buy up huge quantities of
dollars in exchange for renminbi from 2004 to 2014, and thereby kept its currency from
appreciating as fast as it otherwise would have, it stopped doing that in 2014. 40

38

Some economists (e.g., Bergsten, 2013, 2015a, and Gagnon, 2012, 2013), support such provisions
regarding currency manipulation, enforced by trade sanctions, while many of us are opposed (e.g.,
Bénassy-Quéré, Gourinchas, Martin, and Plantin, 2014; and Frankel, 2015).
39
IMF (2015); Kessler and Subramanian (2014); Cline (2015).
40
If anything, the Chinese have been selling dollars in exchange for renminbi during this period, keeping
the value the currency higher than it would otherwise be. China’s reserves peaked at $3.99 trillion in July
2014 and then declined to $3.69 trillion by June 2015.
15

China isn’t even in the TPP, nor in the TTIP. Japan is in the TPP and it is true that the yen
depreciated a lot over 2014-15. Some US economic interests, particularly the auto industry,
accuse Japan of manipulation to keep the yen unfairly undervalued. Many congressional critics
cite Japan as the target of their proposals to insist that currency manipulation language be part
of the TPP. But as we have already noted that the Bank of Japan has stopped intervening in the
foreign exchange market, beyond one episode in 2011. In 2013 Japan joined the other G-7
countries in agreeing to refrain from foreign exchange intervention.
Similarly with Europe: members of the Eurozone are in the TTIP negotiations; the euro too has
depreciated a lot over the last year. But the European Central Bank has not intervened to push
down the euro. The ECB was party to the 2013 agreement not to intervene as well.
3.3 Does monetary stimulus constitute currency manipulation?
Of those who focus on currency manipulation some, such as Gagnon (2012, 2013), specify that
foreign exchange intervention is a necessary criterion in the definition of currency manipulation
(not a sufficient condition, of course; nobody expects all countries to float freely all the time).
Others believe that monetary stimulus even without intervention can qualify as currency
manipulation. The latter sort of policy was not at stake at the Plaza.
Both Japan and the ECB have undertaken substantial monetary easing since 2013, which
explains some of the depreciation of their currencies. This is what US critics of TPA, TPP and
TTIP have in mind when they accuse Japan and Europe of currency manipulation. But monetary
expansion is not currency manipulation. For one thing, countries can hardly be blamed for
undertaking monetary stimulus when domestic economic conditions require it. As the US
Treasury explains to the domestic critics, that is what the United States did with its Quantitative
Easing of 2008-2012, which is the context in which Brazilian Minister Guido Mantega, backed up
by President Dilma Rousseff, originally coined the term “currency war.”
Furthermore, when monetary stimulus is the cause of currency manipulation, as opposed to
sterilized foreign exchange intervention, the presumption of a negative impact on other
countries’ economies via the trade balance disappears. Counteracting the effect via the
exchange rate and consequent expenditure-switching is the intended increase in income and
consequent boost to imports.
Finally is the point that even if the expenditure-switching effect of monetary stimulus
dominates the expenditure-increasing effect, so that there is an overall loss of demand to
trading partner countries, this is not the end of the question. Countries need not be passive.
They can respond to a loss in demand with macroeconomic stimulus of their own.
There is an argument for our time that is analogous to the Eichengreen-Sachs (1985, 1986)
reinterpretation of the 1930s. 41 Yes, U.S. developments have major impacts on other countries
even when exchange rates are floating.42 But if trading partners don’t like the implications for
41
42

Eichengreen (2013).
E.g., Rey (2015).

16

them of a dollar depreciation such as resulted in 2010-11 from the second round of US
quantitative easing, their central banks are free to ease their own monetary policies in return
(buying domestic assets) or even intervene in the foreign exchange market (buying dollars) and
thus to prevent the unwanted appreciation of their own currencies. This is what China and
many other emerging market countries did during that period. The currency wars critique is
right in the indisputable respect that not every country can depreciate its currency, by
definition. But it does not follow that a system in which every central bank is buying assets
(domestic or foreign) is a system in which everybody is worse off. To the contrary, it may even
be the sort of global monetary expansion that the world needs during a time such as the 1930s
or such as the aftermath of the 2008-09 global recession.
4. Conclusion: Is It Time for Another Plaza, 30 Years Later?
Although the G-7 countries have not found a need to intervene in their foreign exchange
markets in recent years, it would be short-sighted to think that this will always be the state of
affairs. Coordinated intervention is a legitimate option. Almost by definition, if a set of major
countries jointly agree to intervention operations, they must believe it is in their interests. We
do not need a set of rigid multilateral rules either prohibiting intervention or requiring,
particularly not in the context of trade rules.
Intervention is most likely to make sense in those infrequent occasions when the exchange rate
has wandered far away from macroeconomic fundamentals as it had by early 1985. The
weakness of the euro in 2000-2001 and the strength of the yen in 2011 were two such
“misalignments.” 43 As it happens they are also the most recent two occasions on which the US
joined with partners in concerted foreign exchange intervention. One might have argued that
the euro was again getting close to meeting the criterion (in the other direction) when it
strengthened in early 2014 despite very low growth in the eurozone.44 But on that occasion
ECB plans for quantitative easing, which eventually went into effect in January 2015, soon
succeeded in depreciating the euro to a more appropriate level.
The dollar appreciated 20% from mid-2014 to late-2015. The US trade balance is expected to
deteriorate as a result. Congressional worries over trade have again been strong enough in
recent years to seriously endanger President Obama efforts to negotiate trade agreements.
Some have asked whether the dollar might be getting close to the level where there could be
“another Plaza,” to bring down the dollar as in 1985. 45 But the situation is rather different
today.46
For one thing, the dollar's recent appreciation is nowhere near as big as it was leading up to
1985. For another thing, unlike then, the elementary macroeconomic fundamentals of
43

Misalignments can arise equally from unwarranted exchange rate movements when the currency is floating and
from the absence of warranted movements when the currency is pegged.
44
I.e., the ECB could have decided to buy dollars, if it had not agreed the year before to refrain. Frankel (2014).
45
E.g., Bergsten (2015b).
46

Green, Papell, Prodan (2015).

17

textbook theories explain the recent appreciation episode unusually well. The U.S. economy
performed relatively strongly from mid-2014 to mid-2015 -- compared to the preceding six
years or compared to other countries. This is why the Fed ended quantitative easing in 2014
and is said to be getting ready to raise interest rates -- again in contrast to other countries,
where central banks have moved toward monetary stimulus rather than the other way around.
American economic performance and the change in monetary policy are both explanations for
the strong dollar. These developments are good news, taken as a whole, notwithstanding the
effect on exports.
Won’t a rising trade deficit have a negative effect on US growth? Not really. The dollar
appreciation is probably one of the major reasons why the Fed held off past June 2015 on its
long-anticipated decision to raise short-term interest rates, to avoid a growth slowdown or
even a descent into deflation. Precisely because the Fed can be relied upon to target the
overall economy, the dollar and trade balance primarily affect the composition of GDP, not the
total.
The Plaza remains the classic precedent for coordinated G-7 intervention in the foreign
exchange market when one or more of their currencies is very far out of line. The conditions do
not apply today. But the pendulum will swing back. The day will come when Plaza-style
intervention returns.

References

Adler, Gustavo, and Camilo E. Trevor Mora. "Foreign exchange intervention: a shield against
appreciation winds?" IMF Working Papers. International Monetary Fund, 2011.
Baker, James. Work Hard, Study....and Keep Out of Policitics! New York: Penguin Groups, 2006.
Beine, Michel, Agnes Bénassy-Quéré, and Christelle Lecourt. "Central Bank Intervention and Foreign
Exchange Rates: New Evidence from FIGARCH Estimation." Journal of International Money and Finance,
2002: 115-144.
Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Philippe Martin, and Guillaume Plantin. "The Euro in
the 'Currency War'." Les notes du conseil d' analyse économique 11, 2014.
Bergsten, Fred C. "Currency Wars, The Economy of the United STates and Reform of the International
Monetary System." Lecture. Washington D.C. : Peterson Institute for Internation Economics, May 16,
2013.
—. "The Truth About Currency Manipulation." Foreign Affaris, January 18, 2015.

18

—. "The United States trade deficit and the dollar." Statement before the SEnate Committe on Banking,
Housing and Urban Affairs, Subcommitte on International Finance and Monetary Policy. Washington,
D.C., 2009.
—. "Time for a Plaza II?" Conference on The Plaza at 30. Houston, TX: Baker Institute for Public Policy,
Rice University , 2015.
Blanchard, Olivier, Gustavo Adler and Irineu de Carvalho Filho. "Can Foreign Exchange Intervention Stem
Exchange Rate Pressures from Global Capital Flow Shocks." International Monetary Fund Working Paper
15/159. Internations Monetary Fund, 2015.
Bordo, Micahel, Owen Humpage and Anna Schwartz. "Foreign-Exchange-Market-Operations in the
Twenty-First Century." NBER Working Paper 17984. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
—. US Foreign-Exchange Operations and Monetary Policy in teh Twentieth Century . Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2015.
Bovard, James. The Fair Trade Fraud. New York: St. Martin's , 1991.
Catte, P., G. Galli and S. Rebecchini. Concerted Invtervention and the Dollar: An Analysis of Daily Data.
Edited by F. Papadia and F. Saccomani P. Kenen. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Cline, William. "Estimates of Fundamental Equilibrium Exchange Rates." Policy Brief. Peterson Institute
of International Economics, May 2015.
Cooper, Richard. "The U.S. payments deficit and the strong dollar: Policy options." The U.S. dollar-recent
developments, outook, and policy options. Federal Bank of Kansas City, 1985.
Corbett, Jenny and Takatoshi Ito. "What should the US and China learn from the past US-Japan conflict?"
VoxEu. April 30, 2010.
Council of Economic Advisers. Washington, D.C: GPO: Economic Report of the President, 1984.
Destler, I. Mac, and C. Randall Henning. "Dollar politics: Exchange rate policymaking in the United
States." Institute for International Economics. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics,
1989 1989.
Devereux, Michael and Charles Engle. "Exchange rate pass-through, exchange rate volatility, and
exchange rate disconnect." Journal of Monetary Economics 49.5, 2002: 913-940.
Disyatat, Piti, and Gabriele Galati. "The effectiveness of foreign exchange intervention in emerging
market countries: Evidence from the Czech Koruna." Jouranl of International Money and Finance 26.3,
2007: 383-402.
Dominguez, kathryn and Jeffrey Frankel. "Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Matter? The Portfolio
Effect." American Economic Review 83, 1993: 1356-1369.
19

Dominguez, Kathryn and Jeffrey Frankel. "Does Foreign Exchange Intervention Work?" Institute for
International Economics 83, 1993: 1356-1369.
Dominguez, Kathryn and Jeffrey Frankel. "Foreign Exchange Intervention: An Empirical Assessement." In
On Exchange Rates, by Jeffrey Frankel. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993.
Dominguez, Kathryn. "Market Responses to Coordinated Central Bank Intervention." Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy Vol. 32, 1990.
Dominguez, Kathryn. "When Do Central Bank Interventions Influence Intra-Daily and Longer-Term
Exchange Rate Movements?" Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 2006: 1051-1071.
Edison, Hali. "The Effectiveness of Central Bank Intervention: A Survey of the Post-1982 Literature."
Special Papers on International Economics. Princeton, NJ, 1993.
Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. "Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s." Journal of
Economic History 45 (1985): 925-946.
Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs,. "Competitive Devaluation and the Great Depression: A
Theoretical Reassessment." Economic Letters (North Holland) 22 (1986): 67-71.
Eichengreen, Barry. "Currency War on International Policy Coordination?" Journal of Policy Modeling,
May/June 2013: 1-9.
—. Hall of Mirrors: The Great Depression, The Great Recession, and the Used-and Misuses- of History.
Oxford: Oxford University Press , 2015.
Feldstein, Martin. "New Evidence on the Effects of Exchange Rate Intervention." National Bureau of
Economic Research. Cambridge, MA, October 1986.
—. "The Dollar Exchange Rate." Remarks before the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia . February 29,
1984.
Frankel, Jeffrey and Shang-Jin Wei. "Assessing China's Exchange Rate Regimes." Economic Policy 51.
National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2007.
Frankel, Jeffrey. "Clinton's Dollar Policy and The Effectinvess of Foreign Exchange Intervention." Revue
d'Economie Financiere. December 1994.
Frankel, Jeffrey. The Chimera of Currency Manipulation. June 10, 2015.
Frankel, Jeffrey. "The Dazzling Dollar." Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 1985: 199-217.
—. "The Making of Exchange Rate Policy in the 1980s." American Economic Policy in the 1980s.
Cambridge : University of Chicago, January 1, 1994.

20

—. "Why the ECB Should Buy US Treasuries." Keynote Speech, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and
Southern Methodist University . Dallas, 2014.
Fratzscher, Marcel, Oliver Gloede, Lukas Menkhoff, Lucio Sarno and Tobias Stohr. When is Foreign
Exchange Intervention Effective? Berlin , August 2015.
Funabashi, Yoichi. Managing the dollar: From the Plaza to the Louvre. Washington, D.C. , 1988.
G7. Statement by G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors. February 12, 2013.
www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm130212.htm.
Gagnon, Joseph E. "Combating Widespread Currency Manipulation." Policy Brief in International
Economics. Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2012.
Gagnon, Joseph E. "Currency Wars." Milken Institute Review 15.1 47-55.
Gao, Bai. Japan's Economic Dilemma: The Institutional Origins of Prosperity and Stagnation . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Green, Russell, Daivd Papell and Ruxandar Prodan. "Why Was the Plaza Accord Unique?" Conference on
Currency Policy Then and Now: 30th Anniversary of the Plaza Accord. Houston, TX: James Baker Institute
for Public Policy, Rice University, 2015.
Henderson, Dale and Stephanie Sampson. "Intervention in Foreign Exchange Markets: A Summary of
Ten Staff Studies." Federal Reserve Bulletin 69, 1983: 830-836.
IMF. "IMF Completes the 2015 Article IV Consultation Mission to China." Internation Monetary Fund
Press Release. IMF Press Release No. 15/237, May 26, 2015.
Ito, Takatoshi. "Is Foreign Exchange Intervention Effective: The Japanese Experience in the 1990s."
National Bureau of Economic Council. National Bureau of Economic Council, April 2003.
Ito, Takatoshi. "The Intradaily Exchange Rate Dynamics and Monetary Policies After the Group of Five
Agreement." Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 1.3, 1987: 275-298.
Kearns, Jonathan and Roberto Rigobon. "Identifying the Efficacy of Central Bank Interventions: Evidence
from Australia and Japan." Journal of Internation Economics 66, 2005: 31-48.
Kessler, Martin and Arvind Subramanian. "Is the Renminbi Still Undervalued? Not According to New PPP
Estimates." Peterson Institute for International Economics. Peterson Institute for International
Economics, May 1, 2015.
Krugman, Paul. "Introduction ." In International Adjustment and Financing: The Lessons of 1985-1991, by
C.F. Bergsten, 3-12. Washington : Institute for International Economics, 1991.
—. "Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable? ." NBER Working Paper No. 1644 . National Bureau of Economic
Research, June 1985.
21

Mulford, David. Packing for India: A Life of Action in Global Finance and Diplomacy. Washington, D.C.:
Potomac Books, 2014.
Obstfeld, Maurice. "The effectiveness of foreign-excahnge intervention: Recent experience." In
International Policy Coordination and Exchange Rate Fluctuations, by J. Frenkel and M. Goldstein W.
Branson. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Portes, Richard. "Monetary Policies and Exchange Rates at the Zero Lower Bound." Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 44.s1, 2012: 157-163.
Putnam, Robert and Nicholas Bayne. Hanging together: The seven-power summits. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1987.
Regan, Donald. For the Record: From Wall Street to Washington . New York: St. Martin's , 1988.
Report. of the Working Group on Exchange Market "Jurgensen Report". Washington D.C.: Department of
Treasury, 1983.
Rey, Hélène. "Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy independence." WP
No. 21162. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.
Rose, Andrew and Yellen, Janet. "Is there a J-curve?" Jourrnal of Monetary Economics 24.1, 1989: 53-68.
Sarno, Lucio, and Mark Taylor. "Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange Market: Is It Effective and,
If So, How Does It Work?" Journal of Economic Literatute 39, 2001: 839-868.
Stein, Benn. The Battle of Bretton Woods. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013.
Taylor, John. "A Rule-Based Cooperatively_Managed International Monetary System for the Future."
Conference on Currency Policy Then and Now: 30th Anniversary of the Plaza Accord. Houston, TX: James
A. Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice University , October 1, 2015.
Truman, Edwin M. "The limits of exchange market intervention ." In Dollar Overvaluation and the World
Economy, by Fred Bergsten and John Williamson, 247-265. Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for
International Economics, 2003.

22

