                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE QUANTITY-QUALITY TRADE-OFF AND THE FORMATION OF COGNITIVE
                      AND NON-COGNITIVE SKILLS

                                             Chinhui Juhn
                                           Yona Rubinstein
                                          C. Andrew Zuppann

                                         Working Paper 21824
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21824


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2015




All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Chinhui Juhn, Yona Rubinstein, and C. Andrew Zuppann. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Quantity-Quality Trade-off and the Formation of Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills
Chinhui Juhn, Yona Rubinstein, and C. Andrew Zuppann
NBER Working Paper No. 21824
December 2015
JEL No. J13,J24

                                                ABSTRACT

We estimate the impact of increases in family size on childhood and adult outcomes using matched
mother-child data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. Using twins as an instrumental
variable and panel data to control for omitted factors we find that families face a substantial quantity-quality
trade-off: increases in family size decrease parental investment, decrease childhood cognitive abilities,
and increase behavioral problems. The negative effects on cognitive abilities are much larger for girls
while the detrimental effects on behavior are larger for boys. We also find evidence of heterogeneous
effects by mother's AFQT score, with the negative effects on cognitive scores being much larger for
children of mothers with low AFQT scores.


Chinhui Juhn                                           C. Andrew Zuppann
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of Houston                                  204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204-5882                                 University of Houston
and NBER                                               Houston, TX 77204-5019
cjuhn@uh.edu                                           cazuppann@uh.edu

Yona Rubinstein
Department of Management
London School of Economics
London
United Kingdom
y.rubinstein@lse.ac.uk
1       Introduction

What is the impact of the quantity of children in a family on the quality of those children?
Following the pioneering work of Becker and co-authors (Becker (1960), Willis (1973), Becker
and Lewis (1973), and Becker and Tomes (1976)), a large body of research documents a neg-
ative relation between family size and children’s educational and labor market outcomes(see
Blake (1989) and Hanushek (1992) among others). While the empirical association is well
documented, establishing a causal relationship between family size and human capital and
earnings is challenging since parental choices are influenced by latent factors that influence
children’s development via other channels than family size. Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980)
first addressed this problem by using twin births as a natural source of variation in family
size.
    Other researchers have followed their instrumental variables approach. These studies,
while using similar methods, have found conflicting results. On the one hand, Rosenzweig
and Wolpin (1980) originally found that increases in family size do indeed lower average
schooling of children in Indian families. Similar results have also been found in China in
Rosenzweig and Zhang (2009) and in Liu (2014). In the U.S. context, Caceres-Delpiano
(2006) and Conley and Glauber (2006) have found, using twin births and sibling-gender
composition to instrument for family size, that children in larger families are less likely to
attend private school. In contrast to these studies, several prominent studies have found
little evidence of a quantity-quality trade-off. Black et al. (2005) use large samples from
Norway and find that the negative relationship between family size and education disappears
once birth order controls are included or twin births are used to instrument for family size.
Similarly, Angrist et al. (2010) use the Israeli Census and alternative instruments - twin births
and sex composition of children - and find no relationship between family size and education.

                                               2
Understanding why the quantity-quality trade-off seemingly holds in some countries but not
in others is thus an important question for further study.1
       Another important aspect of the quantity-quality trade-off that has yet to be fully ex-
plored in the literature is the exact mechanisms that underlie the trade-off. Most of the
literature to date has focused on adult outcomes such as education and earnings but have
not examined directly measures of parental investment which lies at the heart of the original
theory by Becker. How is the home environment different in larger families? Are there fewer
material resources to go around per child, such as books and toys, or is parental time the
critical factor?
       In this paper we take a different approach. We take advantage of the mothers of the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 who are surveyed with their children in the
corresponding Children and Young Adult Survey (jointly hereafter NLSY) to evaluate the
impact of family size on the formation of cognitive abilities and personality traits. A key
feature of the NLSY is that the data contains detailed information about childhood cognitive
abilities and non-cognitive traits (measured for ages 5-14 and ages 4-14) biannually from 1986
to 2012, as well as measures of parental investment and home environments. We exploit
these rich panel data and make use of the timing of expansions in family size to estimate the
dynamics of the quality-quantity trade-off among young children and shed light on parental
   1
    More recently, researchers have proposed alternative explanations for why conventional instrumental
variable methods may erroneously lead to finding no evidence of a quantity-quality trade-off. Mogstad and
Wiswall (forthcoming) argue that a linear specification for family size may mask significant heterogeneity
in how the trade-off varies for the second birth versus the third birth, etc. Bagger et al. (2013) argue that
both conventional OLS and IV approaches for testing the quantity-quality trade-off may have a theoretical
limitation because it is impossible to simultaneously vary family size while keeping the distribution of birth
orders constant within the household. Thus if an additional child changes the optimal trade-off along the
entire birth order distribution OLS regressions at the individual level cannot correctly estimate the quantity-
quality trade-off alongside birth order effects. They propose an alternative estimation strategy: estimate
birth-order effects using family fixed effects, residualize to net out birth-order effects and then estimate the
relationship between average family size and average outcomes, net of these birth-order effects.



                                                       3
investment.
   Using child fixed effects estimation strategies we find evidence that families face a sub-
stantial quantity-quality trade-off: increases in family size decrease parental investment, de-
crease childhood performance on cognitive tests and measures of social behavior. Our fixed
effect estimates indicate that the arrival of a younger sibling reduces measures of parental in-
vestment as well as cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes of older children by approximately
one-tenth of a standard deviation. Importantly, we find that these negative effects are not
merely temporary disruptions following a birth but in fact persist throughout childhood.
When we decompose parental investments into time, resources, affection, and house safety,
we find time to be the most critical input that decreases with additional children.
   While fixed effect estimates condition out family and child time-invariant factors it does
not address the endogeneity of family size and the timing of births. We address this concern
in three ways. First, we use an event study approach. Next, we utilize the natural gap
between conception and birth. Finally, we exploit the plausibly random timing of the NLSY
survey with respect to a sibling’s birth that allows us to compare first-borns in households
that just expanded to their counterparts in households that are about to expand.
   We find negligible evidence of pre-trends in parental investment measures, test scores and
behavioral problems leading up to births. We also find no evidence of a conception effect.
The decline in parental investments and first-born’s outcomes are driven by the actual arrival
of the younger sibling. Moreover, we find that families appear to time fertility to minimize
the negative impact of additional siblings, suggesting that endogenous timing of fertility may
in fact be biasing us against finding a quantity-quality trade-off.
   The impact of family size may vary by type of parents or households. It might also vary
by gender of the children. Indeed we find that the negative effects on cognitive abilities


                                               4
are much larger for girls, while the detrimental effects on behavior are larger for boys. The
negative effects on cognitive scores are also much larger among children of mothers with low
Armed Force Qualification Test (AFQT) scores within race groups. Last but not least we
look at how mothers’ employment and hours worked change after childbirth. We find that
there are disparate work responses between these same groups; mothers with high AFQT
scores are more likely to leave employment and reduce hours worked following the birth
of younger siblings. This disparity we find within the U.S. across families with different
levels of resources provides a possible explanation for the disparate results documented in
the literature across developed and developing countries.
   By examining early childhood outcomes, as well as direct measures of parental invest-
ment, our paper also makes a natural and important connection between the quantity-
quantity literature and recent studies on the importance of early childhood development pi-
oneered by Heckman and co-authors (Cunha and Heckman (2007) and Cunha et al. (2010),
see also Almond and Currie (2011) for a survey). Previous studies have found that a child’s
early environment, both at home and in school, plays a crucial role in the development of
cognitive and non-cognitive abilities and that this development has lifelong impacts on later
adult outcomes. Our study contributes to this literature by examining how the arrival of ad-
ditional siblings impact parental decision making and children’s early environment influence
his or her development of human capital.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data. Section 3 discusses OLS and
IV results using twins as an instrumental variable. Section 4 presents our main results from
fixed effects models. Section 5 addresses the issue of endogenous timing of births. Section 6
presents heterogeneous effects by gender and mother’s characteristics. Section 7 concludes.




                                             5
2        Data

The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth - 1979 (NLSY) provides a unique opportunity to
evaluate the quantity-quality trade-off as it contains information on childhood development
as well as adult education and labor market outcomes. We match mothers from the 1979
survey with all their children from the Children and Young Adult survey, resulting in a
sample containing 4,925 mothers and 11,464 children. Children were surveyed biannually
from 1986 to 2012. By matching children to their mothers we can identify siblings and twins,
as well as the precise timing of when family size expands.
        The matched NLSY mother-child data contains detailed information about childhood
cognitive and non-cognitive abilities as well as longer term outcomes. Children aged 5 to
14 are given Peabody Individual Achievement Tests (PIATs) that measure cognitive skills
in mathematics, reading recognition, and reading comprehension.2 We report results of the
combined math and reading recognition scores which were constructed by taking a simple
average of the two.3 To measure non-cognitive abilities, the survey calculates a Behavioral
Problem Index (BPI) for children aged 4 to 14 from subindices which measure particular
problems including antisocial behaviors, anxiety, dependence, headstrongness, hyperactivity,
and social problems. To measure parental investment, the NLSY asks questions to construct
a HOME (Home Observation Measurement of the Environment-Short Form) score, “a unique
observational measure of the quality of the cognitive stimulation and emotional support
provided by a child’s family.” Examples of these questions include how many books a child
    2
     For 1986 to 1992 children aged 5 and older were given PIAT tests. This was changed to children aged 5
to 14 in 1994 and subsequent surveys. We include all respondents in our main analysis; results are robust to
excluding children aged 15 and older. A similar change in age eligibility is true for respondents of the BPI
as well. Details available upon request.
   3
     We have also examined math and reading scores separately. We find somewhat stronger results for math
and weaker results for reading when we disaggregate. Results are available upon request.



                                                     6
has, how often parents read to the child, and whether parents assist with homework. HOME
scores have been shown to be a significant determinant in a child’s development(Mott (2004),
Todd and Wolpin (2007), Cunha and Heckman (2007), Cunha et al. (2010), and others).
Table A.1 presents summary statistics of the children in our matched mother-child sample.


2.1    Twins in the NLSY mother-child data

Table A.2 shows the distribution of households of various family sizes as well as the incidence
and birth of twins in the mother-child data. Using twins as an IV for family size is identified
off individuals who have twins as younger siblings. For example, there are 35 families where
twins are the second and third children born in the family, implying that there are 35 older
children in these families who are in our sample. Likewise, there are 19 families where twins
are third and fourth children born implying there are 38 older children added to our sample
from these families. Altogether, the table indicates that there are 142 of these individuals
in our data. The small number of older children residing in twin households is a concern.
It is worth investigating these twin households in more detail to ensure that there are not
substantial observable differences between households with and without twins.
   Table A.3 shows demographic information for mothers in our sample split by the presence
of twins in the household. There is not a significant difference in mothers that have twins
and those that do not. If anything, mothers without twins have slightly lower cognitive and
non-cognitive measures.
   The two bottom panels of Table A.3 provides suggestive evidence for the quantity-quality
trade-off. Although maternal characteristics do not differ across households with and with-
out twins there do appear to be substantial differences across children in these households.
Children born in households with twins have worse test scores at all ages, lower parental


                                              7
investments, and more behavioral problems.


2.2    Sibling-pair data

For our fixed effects estimates, we construct a “sibling-pair” data set where we match test
scores, HOME and behavioral index measures of older siblings with the birthdate of each
subsequent younger sibling. We use the whole sample of children to estimate the effects of
age and other demographic variables. However, since our fixed effects estimation relies on
before-after comparisons of outcomes for the same child, our main coefficient of interest is
identified from a sub-sample of children with valid observations before and after a sibling’s
birth. While this is not an issue for HOME scores which are measured since birth, the
behavioral problem index is measured for children aged 4-14 and NLSY PIAT tests are only
administered to children aged 5-14. For test scores, older children who identify the younger
sibling effect are significantly older than the average child at the birth of a younger sibling.
   Table A.4 shows summary statistics of demographic characteristics of mother and children
in both the full sample of older siblings and our most restricted sample of older siblings
who have valid PIAT test scores before and after the arrival of a younger sibling. Not
surprisingly, children in the restricted sample have substantially greater spacing between
births (26 months). However on other dimensions these children appear similar to the full
sample. Mothers have similar cognitive and non-cognitive ability measures, have a similar
distribution of race, and start their fertility at similar ages. Children in the restricted sample
are of similar birth weight and slightly less likely to be living in a blended family.




                                                8
3         OLS and IV estimates of family size

Our OLS and instrumental variable estimates directly follow Black et al. (2010). We estimate
the effects of family size on outcomes as described by the following equations:


                                        Y = β0 + β1 F AM SIZE + Xβ2 + ε                                 (1)

                            F AM SIZE = α0 + α1 T W IN + Xα2 + ν                                        (2)


where Y is an outcome of interest, eg. years of education, F AM SIZE is the number of
children in the family, and X is vector of individual characteristics. T W IN is a dummy
variable indicating whether the family has any twins. For households with twins present,
we restrict the sample to children who were born prior to the twin birth. Families with
twin births have had a plausibly exogenous increase in family size. Differences in outcomes
for older children in households with twins versus households without twins can thus be
interpreted as a causal estimate of how family size affects outcomes.4
        Table 1 presents both OLS and IV estimates of the impact of family size on years of
education.5 As reported in Column 1, the OLS estimate is large and highly significant.
The coefficient implies that raising final family size by an additional child reduces average
schooling of children by -.13 years. Since we add additional maternal controls, the coefficient
is slightly smaller than the -0.18 reported in Black et al. (2005) and -.20 reported in Blake
(1989) using U.S. data. Similar to Black et al. (2005), we also find that the addition of
    4
     Readers may be curious why we do not use the sibling-sex composition of the first two children as
an additional instrument, a method used by Angrist et al. (2010). Unfortunately, in the NLSY matched
mother-children data this instrument is weak - the F-test in the first stage is only 5.83.
   5
     In order to ensure the highest grade completed in our sample represents completed education we restrict
our sample to children who were surveyed at least once after age 24. We include demographic controls for the
child such as age, gender, and race and maternal controls such as mother’s race, mother’s AFQT, mother’s
age at first birth, and mother’s non-cognitive measures such as Rosenberg score and Rotter scale score.


                                                     9
birth order controls in Column 2 reduces the size and significance of the family size effect
considerably.
    Column 4 reports estimates of family size using younger twin birth as an instrument. In
contrast to Black et al. (2005), our IV estimates are negative and large. Older children in
families with twins have education levels that are four-tenths of a year lower compared to
children in families without twins. A similar pattern is found for other adult outcomes. As
shown in Table A.5, IV estimates indicate that larger families not only have children with
lower educational attainment, but also lower earnings, and increased likelihood of criminal
behavior and teenage pregnancies.
    Column 4 shows that the first stage coefficient for the IV is 1.81, which suggests that
having a twin birth increases the final family size by more than one child. One potential
concern is that families with higher desired fertility are more likely to experience a twin birth.
Black et al. (2005) address this potential selection problem by estimating the family size effect
by parity. Column 5 reports the results for second parity only. While the coefficient is still
large and negative, we lose considerable precision given the small number of twin births in
our data.6
    Education has been the focus of most previous studies on the quantity-quality trade-off.
While education is the most common measure of child quality, it is likely to be a function
of institutions as well as parental investments. For example, the lack of family size effects
in Black et al. (2005) may reflect the existence of a generous public welfare system and a
    6
      We have also experimented with the parity-pooled approach suggested by Angrist et al. (2010). Using
this method, we combined twin births at different parities by regressing the presence of a twin birth for older
children at a given birth parity on other covariates, calculating the residual from this regression, interacting
this residual with a dummy indicating whether a child was an older sibling at that birth parity, and using
this interacted residual as the instrumental variable for an increase in family size. See section IV.C in Angrist
et al. (2010) for technical details on this estimation strategy. Using this approach our coefficient on family
size is even larger at -0.833 and significant at the 5 percent level.



                                                       10
strong public education system in Norway where at the margin, parental investments may
not result in variations in educational outcomes. An important advantage of the NLSY is
that it provides a variety of child cognitive and non-cognitive skill measures as well as direct
measures of parental investments that affect the home environment. Thus, we can more
directly test the original quantity-quality theory which is about parental choices and child
skill formation.7
       Table 2 presents estimates of how family size impacts outcomes during childhood. The
estimating equations are modified versions of equations 1 and 2 with t subscripts:


                                      Yit = β0 + β1 F AM SIZEit + Xit β2 + εit                           (3)

                          F AM SIZEit = α0 + α1 T W INit + Xit α2 + νit                                  (4)


where F AM SIZEit refers to current family size and T W INit refers to an indicator vari-
able whether there are twins currently in the household. We report estimates clustering
observations at the child level.8
       According to the IV estimates reported in Column 2, an additional sibling reduces the
HOME score - the NLSY’s measure of parental investment in a child - by 1.7 percentile
points. This finding speaks directly to the trade-offs in a quantity-quality model of child-
rearing. Parents in larger families reduce their per-child investment. Similarly, an extra
sibling reduces an older sibling’s cognitive score by 2.6 percentile points. Since the standard
   7
      Several previous papers have moved in this direction by using alternative child quality measures.
(Hanushek 1992) finds a strong effect of family size on reading comprehension and vocabulary test scores
using data from the Gary Income Maintenance Experiment merged with school level data. Interestingly,
Black et al. (2010) find a negative family size effect on child IQ in the Norwegian data even though they did
not find any effect on education. Caceres-Delpiano (2006) and Conley and Glauber (2006) find that children
in larger families are less likely to attend private school and more likely to repeat a grade.
    8
      We have also clustered at the mother level with similar results.




                                                     11
deviation of cognitive scores is 24 percentile points, this translates into a slightly larger than
a tenth of a standard deviation reduction. We do not find significant effects of family size
on the Behavioral Problem Index (BPI), however.



4     Estimates with child fixed effects

A simple cross-sectional analysis of family size on child outcomes is confounded by differential
selection as larger families are likely to differ from smaller families in other important ways.
Additionally, there may be concerns of reverse causality. Child outcomes themselves may
affect whether parents choose to have an additional child. For example, parents may follow
an optimal stopping rule where if the just-born child is of high quality, they decide to have an
additional child. The opposite may also occur if parents decide to have additional children
to compensate for a just-born child who is of low quality.
    While these issues may be addressed by instrumenting family size with twin births, there
are a number of problems with using twins in our data. First, the birth of twins is a rare
event and our small sample sizes of twin births limit our ability to estimate the family size
effect with precision, particularly when we estimate by parity, our preferred specification.
An additional concern is that twins may have a direct effect on other siblings through the
close spacing of births or by being of poorer health and drawing resources away from other
siblings (Angrist et al. 2010). These concerns suggest that the twins instrument may fail the
exclusion restriction and therefore may be an invalid instrument for family size.
    In light of these concerns, we take a different approach. The panel structure of the
NLSY gives us multiple observations on the same child and we can examine how the arrival
of siblings impact cognitive and non-cognitive scores as well as the measure of the home en-



                                               12
vironment. Issues of selection or reverse causality are addressed by controlling for individual
child fixed effects. Our baseline fixed effects model is


                              Yijt = β0 + β1 1{af ter}ijt + Xit β2 + λi + εijt                           (5)


where Y is an outcome of interest for child i with a sibling at birth parity j , 1{af ter} is a
dummy variable for whether the birth at parity j has occurred at time t, λi is a child fixed
effect and X is a vector of individual characteristics. Our sample for this specification is all
older children whose mother will have a birth at parity j .
       Table 3 presents estimates from the fixed effects model of the impact of an additional
child on older children’s outcomes at second birth parity.9 Column 2 estimates the average
decline in test scores and parental investments after the second child is born. We see that
parental investment in the older child, as measured by the HOME Inventory index, falls by 3
percentile points after the birth of a younger child. Older siblings are generally worse off in
both cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes following the birth of a younger child. Cognitive
scores falls by 2.8 percentile points which is slightly larger than one-tenth of a standard
deviation. Similarly, behavioral problems also increase, with the index increasing by more
than one-tenth of a standard deviation.


4.1       Long-term effects

We might expect that the birth of an additional child is a disruptive but transitory shock to
the home environment and that the negative effects of an additional sibling would dissipate
   9
    Results at third parity are reported in Table A.6. We find that, at third parity, the results for HOME
score and behavioral problems remain significant and while cognitive test results are still negative they are
not significant.



                                                     13
over time as the household adjusts. Column 3 of Table 3 tests this hypothesis by showing
estimates of the negative effects of an additional sibling both in the short run (the first 3
years following a sibling birth) and the long run (the remaining years after 3 years). Not
only do we fail to find evidence that the impact is transitory, effects appear to substantially
worsen over the longer run. Test scores and parental investments are both worse over the
longer horizon than in the short run. Only in behavioral problems do we find that the effects
may dissipate over the longer run.


4.2       Understanding the decline in parental investment: HOME

          subcomponents

The matched mother-child data of the NLSY provide rich detail on the home environment.
We utilize this data to shed further light on what aspect of the home environment changes
as an additional sibling is introduced. We decompose the HOME index into four broad
sub-categories corresponding to time, resources, affection, and home safety. We chose a set
of questions for each of these aspects of parenting that are asked to children in the 3-14
age range in the NLSY. We chose questions that both (a) are available and comparable
across all child ages from 3 to 14 and (b) can reasonably be categorized as representing time,
resources, affection, or safety. For each of these categories we then form a single measure by
performing factor analysis on the questions and constructing the first factor that explains
the most variance between the questions. The details of each question are listed in Appendix
Table A.7.10
       Table 4 reports our estimates of the impact of an additional child on these different
  10
    Exploratory factor analysis on a larger set of questions in the HOME Index suggests that grouping these
questions together into these separate clusters is a good fit in explaining the patterns of variation in the
overall HOME Index. Details of this factor analysis are available upon request.


                                                    14
measures of parental investment. The table shows that parental time is the most critical
input that falls after the arrival of an additional child. The coefficient -0.107 indicates that
our index measure of parental time falls by approximately one tenth of a standard deviation.
We find little evidence of a decline in other measures with the possible exception of the home
safety measure in the longer run.



5     Endogenous birth timing

Our fixed effects estimates control for all unobservable characteristics of children that are
constant over time but do not address the issue of endogenous timing of fertility. Time-
varying shocks may both drive parents’ decision of whether and when to have a child as
well as affect older sibling’s test scores. It may be the case that parents choose to have
additional children when the negative impact on older children is minimal. For example,
they may choose to have additional children at the time of an expected promotion or when
a grandparent retires. Alternatively, parents may choose to have additional children when
times are good in terms of either household income or older children’s outcomes. If these
shocks are transitory, however, then the household environment will worsen due to regression
to the mean. In this case we would be overstating the negative impact of additional siblings.
A related concern is that parents make compensatory investments in older children prior to
the birth of an additional sibling. In this case, the amount of parental investments in the
“before” period may reflect a temporary upsurge, thereby exaggerating the drop in parental
investment in the “after” period.
    We conduct three exercises to assess and account for time-varying unobservable shocks
that are correlated with the decision to have an additional child. First, we check for pre-



                                              15
trends in our outcome variables prior to the birth of the sibling. Second, we estimate our
model in first-differences to distinguish between the timing of the decision to get pregnant
and the actual arrival of an additional child. Third, we utilize the randomness of the timing
of NLSY interviews with respect to pregnancies and births to compare families observed just
prior to the birth of a child to those observed just after the birth of a child.


5.1    Pre-trends

To examine whether endogenous timing is a concern we first check for pre-trends. We adopt
an event-study framework where we estimate coefficients on year dummies prior to and after
the arrival of the additional sibling. Our estimating equation is the following:

                                   −1
                                   X                    R
                                                        X
                                           r                   r
                     Yijt = β0 +          Dijt δr   +         Dijt δr + Xit β2 + λi + εijt   (6)
                                   r=−R                 r=1


          r
   where Dijt is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the survey date, t, is r months relative to
sibling birth month at parity j . We examine outcomes up to 4 years before and up to 4 years
after the sibling birth with the birth month (r = 0) being the omitted category. Figure 1
graphs the pre and post trends in our outcome measures. While our confidence intervals are
large, we find little evidence of pre-trends which may be biasing our results. There is little
evidence of an upsurge in parental investments or a change in the older child’s achievement
preceding a sibling birth.




                                                        16
5.2       First-differences with controls for timing of pregnancy deci-

          sion

The decision of when to have an additional child may be correlated with unobservable time-
varying shocks. However, there is a built-in time lag between when parents decide to have
an additional child and when the child actually arrives. Our second method exploits this
time lag to distinguish between the impact of actual sibling arrival from the timing of the
pregnancy decision. To more precisely identify these separate channels, we switch to a first-
differences specification. While we do not directly observe when parents decide to start a
pregnancy, we use mother’s pregnancy to proxy for the timing of the pregnancy decision.
      Let Pijt be an indicator of a household’s decision to have a child of parity j (to older
child i), which is equal to 1 when a household decides to have an additional child and is then
1 forever. Sijt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the younger sibling has arrived. Taking
first differences, we have


                                    ∆Yijt = β1 ∆Sijt + β2 ∆Pijt + νijt                                (7)


We do not directly observe Pijt as it is when the parents decide to start a pregnancy (and
not when the mother actually becomes pregnant). In what follows, we proxy for Pijt with an
indicator variable which equals 1 once the mother becomes pregnant with the child of parity
j , approximately 10-months before the arrival of the child.11 Note that our primary interest

is not in the pregnancy state itself but in the timing of the decision to have an additional
child. As such, our indicator variable is turned on to equal 1 when the mother becomes
pregnant and is then 1 forever.
 11
      We have also investigated 9 and 12-months leads to approximate pregnancy and found similar results.



                                                    17
   Estimates of this first-differences specification with and without the control for “Preg-
nancy occurred” are presented in Table 5. Column 1 presents baseline estimates of our
first-differences; we see similar estimates as from the fixed effects estimates. Column 2
presents estimates when we regress an older child’s change in outcomes on the change in
“Pregnancy occurred” variable. According to Column 2, in the 10th month before birth,
it appears that older children have worse cognitive test scores and actually improved be-
havioral outcomes even though neither effect is statistically significant. Column 3 reports
estimates including both variables. The important takeaway is that the actual arrival of the
sibling remains negative and significant even when we include a control for the timing of the
pregnancy decision.


5.3    Comparing just after with just before

In general our identification strategy can be thought of as exploiting the timing of the arrival
of the sibling to identify the effect of family size for those families who have a child at parity
j. Using notation from the event study framework, we have:

                                      −1
                                      X                    R
                                                           X
                                              r                   r
                        Yijt = β0 +          Dijt δr   +         Dijt δr + Xit β2 + εijt      (8)
                                      r=−R                 r=1



where again r = 0 refers to the birth month. The “treatment” effect is the average of the δr
coefficients in the after period relative to the average in the before period. The identifying
assumption is that there are no omitted factors in the error term that are correlated with Yijt
and the timing of the sibling arrival. One possible violation of this assumption is if there is an
individual specific component of the error term that is correlated with the timing of sibling
birth. This problem can be addressed in our fixed effects framework. As already discussed,


                                                       18
however, another violation of the identifying assumption which cannot be addressed with
fixed effects is time-varying shocks that are correlated with both the timing of the sibling
birth and Yijt . In this sub-section we assess the extent that time-varying latent factors
contaminate our fixed effects and first differences estimates.
       Our basic approach is to compare families who make “similar” timing decisions. In other
words we compare outcomes of the first born children whose sibling was “just born” to first
born children whose sibling is “about to be born.” The idea is to compare families with as
similar as possible spacing between first and the second born. The smaller the gap in spacing
between the treatment and the control group the smaller should be the bias associated with
the timing of the second birth.
       Formally, we estimate the following equation:


                              Yijtr = β0 + β1,r 1{af ter}ijt,r + Xit β2 + εijt                           (9)


where Yijtr is again the outcome of interest for an older child i at younger sibling birth parity
j measured sometime between r months before and 12 months after the birth of the 2nd

child and t refers to the interview date. We run our regression on a sample where the child
is interviewed between r months prior to the sibling’s birth and 12 months after the sibling’s
birth at parity j . 1{af ter}ijt,r is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the child is interviewed
between 0 to 12 months after the sibling’s birth.12
       Random assignment across “before” and “after” categories is more plausible if we restrict
the time difference between the interview and the sibling’s birth to a narrow window.13
  12
     More specifically, we estimate the effects of child age, birth spacing, and other characteristics of the
mother using the entire sample of mothers and children. We calculate the residuals and estimate β1,r on
the sub-sample of children who are interviewed between r months prior to the sibling’s birth and 12 months
after the sibling’s birth.
  13
     For such a narrow window, the precise timing of births varies due to two plausibly random events:


                                                     19
In our main results, we set r equal to 12 months. We also conduct exercises where we
increase r, the size of the window in the “before” period. In effect, in these exercises we
compare older children who “just had” a sibling to all older children who will have a sibling
sometime within the next 2, 3, or 5 years. As our window of comparison, r, increases, the
assumption of random assignment into before and after categories becomes worse and more
selection bias resulting from endogenous timing is introduced. The change in estimates of
the quantity-quality trade-off as we increase r therefore tells us about the direction of bias
due to endogenous timing.
    We report our findings in Table 6 and Figure 2. Two main facts emerge. First, estimates
are similar in magnitude to fixed effects and first differences, but only when we restrict the
sample to a narrow window. Second the gap between treated and control groups shrinks, in
absolute terms, as we expand the experiment window. Column 1 of Table 6 shows estimates
with r = 12 where we restrict the sample to those observations where the interview date is
within 12 months before or 12 months after a sibling birth. Estimates of the sibling effect
are negative for all three measures. Given the small samples, however, we lose precision
and the effect on cognitive scores is no longer significant. The effects on HOME index and
behavioral problems, however, remain. In Column 2 and Column 3 we broaden the window
in the “before” period to 24 and 36 months while keeping the “after” period to 12 months.
the timing of when the NLSY interviews a woman within a calendar year and the inability of parents to
precisely time when their pregnancy will occur. The NLSY conducts interviews in several months throughout
the calendar year of a particular survey wave. Although the NLSY attempts to keep the month of interview
constant for a single respondent this is often not possible for many reasons. Most notably the NLSY often
changes the months of surveying from wave to wave (e.g., from June-December in 1994 to April-October
in 1996). The month of interview can also change from wave to wave because of problems contacting
the respondent or due to organizational/budgeting delays. Another source of plausible randomness is that
parents are unable to precisely time the birth of a child to a particular month. Even if we assume that all
pregnancies are planned there is still a great deal of uncertainty about when the pregnancy and birth will
actually occur. Of course, parents are capable of moving the date of birth by a few days or a week through
induced labor or voluntary Caesarean sections but this will change, at most, one month.



                                                    20
When we extend the “before” period, the sibling effect becomes less negative which suggests
that families time fertility decisions as to minimize the negative impact on older children.
    To further illustrate this pattern Figure 2 shows how the estimated effect of an additional
sibling varies as we expand the period of time before birth (i.e. as we increase r). The
highlighted numbers in the figures correspond to those already shown in Table 6 and the
dotted lines refer to the 95 percent confidence intervals around our estimates. While the
estimates are somewhat imprecise, the figure shows that the effect of an additional sibling
becomes smaller as we expand the window in the “before” period, thereby allowing for
more endogenous timing of fertility. The evidence here suggests that endogenous timing of
fertility biases our coefficients to be too small, and therefore, biases us against finding a
quantity-quality trade-off.
    As a check on whether the before and after assignments for our narrowest window, r = 12,
are random, Table A.8 shows average mother and child characteristics of the before and
after groups in the years before they entered the sample. If previous shocks to child test
scores influenced the timing of births within our narrow window then we would expect to
find differences across these groups. Looking at Table A.8 it does not appear there are
any significant differences in either maternal characteristics or child test scores across these
groups.



6     Heterogenous effects across gender, race, and mother’s

      AFQT

One advantage of the NLSY sample is that we have detailed characteristics on the mothers
of these children and can investigate whether there is heterogeneity in the impact of an


                                              21
additional child across different types of children and families. To do this we interact the
child’s and mother’s characteristics with the after dummy in our fixed effects regressions.
   Table 7 reports the effects by gender. We report estimates of a pooled specification where
age effects are restricted to be equal across gender. The table shows different family size
effects by gender. The effects on cognitive scores are small and insignificant for boys. They
are large and significant for girls. In contrast, the family size effect is larger for boys for
”Behavioral Problems.” These latter results are consistent with Bertrand and Pan (2013)
who find that disruptive behavior of boys are particularly sensitive to adverse shocks to the
family environment.
   Table 8 reports the effects separately by mother’s AFQT group. There are strikingly
different results by mother’s AFQT score. For children with mothers with below median
AFQT scores, the arrival of younger siblings have large and significantly negative effects
on cognitive skills while for children with mothers with above median score, the effects are
much smaller and not significant. With regards to ”Behavioral Problems” index, however,
the results are opposite. It is the children of high ability mothers who are more likely to
act up when a younger sibling arrives. Mother’s AFQT effect could be confounded by race.
Column 2 examines white mothers only, where median AFQT is constructed conditional on
the race of the mother. Even conditioning on race, we find a strong AFQT gradient, with
the HOME index and cognitive scores falling more for children with mothers with below
median AFQT scores, and behavioral problems increasing more for children with mothers
with above median AFQT scores. Among black mothers shown in Column 3 we continue
to observe a strong AFQT gradient for cognitive scores although no differential effects by
AFQT for Home index and behavioral outcomes.
   The differential effects by mother’s AFQT score provide insight into why empirical papers


                                              22
have found a quantity-quality trade-off in some, but not in all, cases. In countries with
a comprehensive welfare system and a strong public education system, parental resource
constraints may not be binding for educational outcomes. In a country such as the U.S. with
limited income support programs and limited quality public education, lower ability mothers
with limited monetary resources may face a real trade-off between quantity of children and
the resources she can devote to invest in their skills.
    To investigate this hypothesis that mothers of different cognitive ability face different
resource constraints and that this effect leads to the heterogeneity in the quantity-quality
trade-off we look at how maternal work behavior adjusts in response to increases in family
size. Table 9 presents estimates of the effect of an additional sibling on whether the mother
worked last week in the top panel and total annual hours worked in the bottom panel. We
see that there are differential responses by mother’s AFQT. As shown in the top panel,
mothers who have below median AFQT scores do not respond to an additional child by
reducing work while mothers above the median do. When we examine hours worked last
year in the bottom panel, we see declines for both mothers above and below AFQT scores.
However, examining what happens over the long run in Column 3, we see that hours worked
diverge with above median AFQT mothers reducing hours even further in the longer run.
This evidence is consistent with maternal resources being an important factor in whether
there is a quantity-quality trade-off among children.



7     Conclusion

Using a variety of approaches we have documented a significant trade-off between quantity
and quality of children for NLSY mothers and their children. On average, children in larger



                                              23
families have lowered parental investment and worse cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes.
We found this trade-off in three separate specifications that control for possible confounds.
First, we examined older children in households that experienced an exogenous shock to
family size due to twin births. Second, we compared older children to themselves before
and after the arrival of a younger sibling. Finally, we examined older children who were
surveyed within a narrow window of a sibling birth with the “before” and “after” status
being plausibly random.
   These results differ substantially from previous research so it is worthwhile to consider
why our estimates are so different. One potential explanation for our results in contrast to
(Black et al. 2005) may be institutional differences between Norway and the U.S. In partic-
ular, at the margin, parental investments may matter more in the U.S. where a substantial
fraction of young men and women, particularly from lower income backgrounds, are at risk
of not finishing high school. A recent paper by (Black et al. 2010) offers some support for
the idea that the particular country and the particular cohort examined matters. In contrast
to their earlier paper which examined an older cohort, their recent paper finds a negative
impact of family size on IQ among younger birth cohorts in Norway. Likewise, Li et al.
(2008) also find that the negative family size effect on schooling is particularly strong in
rural areas of China where the public education system is less well developed.
   Although we consistently find, on average, the presence of a quantity-quality trade-off
in the NLSY sample, the strong differences across mother’s AFQT score provide suggestive
evidence of the importance of resource availability or institutions in determining the extent
of the quantity-quality trade-off. High AFQT mothers of all races appear to face less of a
trade-off than mothers with low AFQT scores. Differences in mother’s AFQT scores are
correlated with a wide set of lifestyle differences that could explain these differences. For


                                             24
instance, having worse child care coverage, maternity policies, or flexibility in household
labor supply could all make the presence of an additional child more detrimental to other
children in the household. Understanding the mechanisms underlying these differentials in
the quantity-quality trade-off remains an important question for future research.



References

Douglas Almond and Janet Currie. Human Capital Development before Age Five, volume 4
  of Handbook of Labor Economics, chapter 15, pages 1315–1486. 2011.

Josh D. Angrist, Victor Lavy, and Analia Schlosser. Multiple experiments for the causal link
  between the quantity and quality of children. Journal of Labor Economics, 28:773–824,
  2010.

Jesper Bagger, Javier A. Birchenall, Hani Mansour, and Sergio Urzua. Education, birth
  order, and family size. Nber working papers, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc,
  June 2013.

Gary S. Becker. An economic analysis of fertility. Demographic and Economic Change in
  Developed Countries, 1960.

Gary S. Becker and H. Gregg Lewis. On the interaction between the quantity and quality
  of children. Journal of Political Economy, 81:S279–288, 1973.

Gary S. Becker and Nigel Tomes. Child endowments and the quantity and quality of children.
  Journal of Political Economy, 84:S143–162, 1976.

Marianne Bertrand and Jessica Pan. The trouble with boys: Social influences and the


                                            25
  gender gap in disruptive behavior. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5:
  32–64, 2013.

Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. The more the merrier? the
  effects of family size and birth order on children’s education. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 120:669–700, 2005.

Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. Small family, smart family?
  family size and the iq scores of young men. Journal of Human Resources, 35:33–58, 2010.

Judith Blake. Family Size and Achievement. University of California Press, 1989.

Julio Caceres-Delpiano. The impacts of family size on investment in child quality. Journal
  of Human Resources, 41:738–754, 2006.

Dalton Conley and Rebecca Glauber. Parental educational investment and children’s aca-
  demic risk: Estimates of the impact of sibship size and birth order from exogenous variation
  in fertility. Journal of Human Resources, 41:722–737, 2006.

Flavio Cunha and James J Heckman. The technology of skill formation. American Economic
  Review, 97(2):31–47, May 2007.

Flavio Cunha, James J Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach. Estimating the technology of
  cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78(3):883–931, May 2010.

Eric Hanushek. The trade-off between child quantity and quality. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 100:84–117, 1992.

Hongbin Li, Junsen Zhang, and Yi Zhu. Cheap children and the persistence of poverty.
  Demography, 45:223–243, 2008.

                                             26
Haoming Liu. The quality-quantity trade-off: evidence from the relaxation of china’s one-
  child policy. Journal of Population Economics, 27:565–602, 2014.

Magne Mogstad and Matthew Wiswall. Testing the quantity-quality model of fertility: Es-
  timation using unrestricted family size models. Quantitative Econoomics, forthcoming.

Frank L. Mott. The utility of the home-sf scale for child development research in a large
  national longitudinal survey: The national longitudinal survey of youth 1979 cohort. ”Par-
  enting: Science and Practice”, 4(2-3):259–270, 2004.

Mark R. Rosenzweig and Kenneth I. Wolpin. Testing the quantity-quality fertility model:
  The use of twins as a natural experiment. Econometrica, 48:227–240, 1980.

Mark R. Rosenzweig and Junsen Zhang. Do population control policies induce more human
  capital investment? twins, birth weight and china’s one-child policy. Review of Economic
  Studies, 76:1149–1174, 2009.

Petra E. Todd and Kenneth I. Wolpin. The production of cognitive achievement in children:
  Home, school, and racial test score gaps. Journal of Human Capital, 1(1):91–136, 2007.

Robert J. Willis. A new aproach to the economic theory of fertility behavior. Journal of
  Political Economy, 81:S14–64, 1973.




                                            27
                                  Table 1: Effect of an additional child on years of education
                                  (1)                        (2)                    (3)                     (4)                           (5)
                    Maternal controls     + Birth order controls      OLS, — IV sample         IV, full sample       IV, second parity births
      Family Size              -0.131**                  -0.0287                -0.0613                  -0.395***                     -0.531
                             (0.0519)                   (0.0531)               (0.0595)                 (0.143)                       (0.586)
      2nd Child                                           -0.600***              -0.620***               -0.506***
                                                         (0.123)                (0.126)                 (0.141)
      3rd Child                                           -0.664**               -0.622**                -0.203
                                                         (0.265)                (0.273)                 (0.337)
      4th Child                                           -1.441***              -1.332***               -0.601
                                                         (0.299)                (0.311)                 (0.445)
      5th Child                                           -1.911**               -1.978**                -0.958
                                                         (0.752)                (0.799)                 (0.963)
      6th Child                                           -2.038                  0.312                   1.661
                                                         (1.481)                (1.264)                 (1.387)




28
      7th+ Child                                          -2.574***
                                                         (0.332)
      N                         7931                        7931                   7316                   7316                          4320
      r2                       0.139                       0.155                  0.155                  0.143                         0.106

                                                                                             First Stage Coeff.            First Stage Coeff.
                                                                                                          1.805***                      0.809***
                                                                                                        (0.148)                       (0.177)
     All results include controls for child age and gender. Maternal controls are mother’s age at first birth, race, AFQT,
     Rosenberg and Rotter scores. Robust standard errors are clustered at the child level. Data from Children of the NLSY79
     sample, 1986-2010. The sample is restricted to children who are surveyed after age 25. The sample size changes between
     Columns (2) and (3) as children born after the birth of twins are dropped from the overall sample. The sample size
     changes between Columns (4) and (5) as we restrict the sample to only second-parity births.
     ∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.
                                 Table 2: Childhood outcomes

  Panel A: Parental Investment

                                       (1)                         (2)                         (3)
                          OLS, — IV sample             IV, full sample    IV, second parity births

  HOME Index                           -1.127***               -1.764                      -1.453
                                      (0.328)                 (1.119)                     (2.033)
  N                                    40529                   40529                       14241

  Panel B: Ability Measures

                                       (1)                         (2)                         (3)
                          OLS, — IV sample             IV, full sample    IV, second parity births

  Cognitive Ability                    -0.909**                -2.647**                    -1.464
                                      (0.309)                 (1.047)                     (1.963)
  N                                    28108                   28108                       10664

  Behavioral Problems                  -0.912**                0.0405                      -1.975
                                      (0.379)                 (1.584)                     (3.050)
  N                                    31984                    31984                      11916

  Birth order controls                    Yes                     Yes                          No
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Cognitive ability is constructed by
averaging a child’s PIAT math and reading recognition test scores. All results include controls for
child age, gender, mother’s age at first birth, AFQT, race, Rosenberg and Rotter scores. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the child level. Data from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-
2010. The sample size changes between Columns (2) and (3) as we restrict the sample to only
second-parity births.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.




                                                  29
                         Table 3: Individual fixed effects: 2nd parity

 Panel A: Parental Investment

                                                       (1)                (2)                  (3)
                                                      OLS     Individual FEs       Individual FEs

 After sibling birth     HOME Inventory           -2.325**              -3.030**
                                                 (1.015)               (0.986)
 0-3 years after                                                                             -3.066**
                                                                                            (0.986)
 3+ years after                                                                              -4.925***
                                                                                            (1.306)
 N                                                14218                 14218                14218

 Panel B: Ability Measures

                                                       (1)                (2)                  (3)
                                                      OLS     Individual FEs       Individual FEs

 After sibling birth     Cognitive Ability        -3.644**              -2.812**
                                                 (1.217)               (1.044)
 0-3 years after                                                                             -2.519**
                                                                                            (1.056)
 3+ years after                                                                              -4.011***
                                                                                            (1.183)
 N                                                10645                 10645                10645

 After sibling birth    Behavioral Problems        1.030                 3.875**
                                                 (1.532)               (1.194)
 0-3 years after                                                                              3.960***
                                                                                            (1.196)
 3+ years after                                                                               2.870**
                                                                                            (1.424)
 N                                                11897                 11897                11897
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Controls are child’s age at test and
child fixed effects. Cognitive ability is constructed by averaging a child’s PIAT math and reading
recognition test scores. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Data from
Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.


                                                 30
                    Table 4: Effects for HOME subcomponents: 2nd parity

                                                                              (1)                (2)
                                                                  Individual FEs     Individual FEs
 After sibling birth          HOME, time with child                        -0.107***
                                                                         (0.0217)
 0-3 years after                                                                             -0.0740***
                                                                                            (0.0219)
 3+ years after                                                                               -0.172***
                                                                                            (0.0232)
 N                                                                           7095               7095

 After sibling birth          HOME, resources spent                        -0.0269
                                                                          (0.0300)
 0-3 years after                                                                                  -0.00678
                                                                                                  (0.0308)
 3+ years after                                                                                    -0.0541*
                                                                                                  (0.0315)
 N                                                                           10361                   10361

 After sibling birth    HOME, parental quality/affection                    0.0151
                                                                          (0.0308)
 0-3 years after                                                                                    0.0178
                                                                                                  (0.0313)
 3+ years after                                                                                     0.0113
                                                                                                  (0.0331)
 N                                                                            8096                    8096

 After sibling birth        HOME, house environment                        -0.0475
                                                                          (0.0334)
 0-3 years after                                                                                  -0.00785
                                                                                                  (0.0350)
 3+ years after                                                                                    -0.0755**
                                                                                                  (0.0344)
 N                                                                           12020                   12020
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Controls are child’s age at test and
child fixed effects. The indices are constructed as the fitted (first) factor following a factor analysis
on a set of questions for each subcomponent. See Table A.7 for list of questions used to construct
each index. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Data from Children of
the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.

                                                   31
                        Table 5: First difference estimates: 2nd parity

          Panel A: Parental Investment

                                                             (1)          (2)       (3)

          Sibling arrived         HOME Inventory          -1.866                 -2.014
                                                         (1.171)                (1.459)
          Pregnancy occurred                                           -0.814     0.315
                                                                      (1.244)   (1.554)
          N                                               10247        10247     10247

          Panel B: Ability Measures

                                                             (1)          (2)       (3)

          Sibling arrived         Cognitive Ability       -2.333**               -2.615*
                                                         (1.174)                (1.434)
          Pregnancy occurred                                           -1.144     0.562
                                                                      (1.259)   (1.560)
          N                                                7339          7339      7339

          Sibling arrived        Behavioral Problems       4.706***                 8.017***
                                                         (1.402)                  (1.849)
           Pregnancy occurred                                             -1.590   -6.734**
                                                                         (1.606) (2.109)
           N                                                 8274           8274     8274
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Controls are child’s age at test and
child fixed effects. Cognitive ability is constructed by averaging a child’s PIAT math and reading
recognition test scores. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Data from
Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.




                                                 32
Table 6: Controlling for endogeneity of timing through smaller sampling windows around
births: 2nd parity

          Panel A: Parental Investment

                                  0-12 months        0-24 months       0-36 months

          HOME Index                     -2.928**           -2.227*           -1.896
                                        (1.481)            (1.199)           (1.171)
          N                                1426               1973              2355

          Panel B: Ability Measures

                                  0-12 months        0-24 months       0-36 months

          Cognitive Ability              -1.887             -0.537            -0.989
                                        (2.296)            (1.872)           (1.789)
          N                                 438                567               675

          Behavioral Problems             8.964***           5.688**           5.413**
                                        (2.433)            (2.058)           (2.018)
          N                                 639                813               963
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Column (1) restricts sample to
interviews taken 0-12 months before and 0-12 months after the birth of a younger sibling. Column
(2) restricts sample to interviews taken 0-24 months before and 0-12 months after the birth of
a younger sibling. Column (3) restricts sample to interviews taken 0-36 months before and 0-12
months after the birth of a younger sibling. Regressions include controls for child age, gender,
mother’s age at first birth, AFQT, race, Rosenberg and Rotter scores. Cognitive ability is con-
structed by averaging a child’s PIAT math and reading recognition test scores. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the individual level. Data from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.




                                               33
                    Table 7: Fixed effects estimates by gender - 2nd parity

                Panel A: Parental Investment

                                                                       Difference
                                                 Individual FEs       (Std. Err.)

                Boys     HOME Inventory                   -3.113**
                                                         (1.184)
                Girls                                     -2.943**          0.170
                                                         (1.230)          (1.390)
                N                                         14218            14218

                Panel B: Ability Measures

                                                                       Difference
                                                 Individual FEs       (Std. Err.)

                Boys      Cognitive Ability               -1.025
                                                         (1.290)
                Girls                                     -4.947**         -3.922*
                                                         (1.618)          (2.019)
                N                                         10645            10645

                Boys    Behavioral Problems                4.430**
                                                         (1.653)
                Girls                                      3.277**         -1.153
                                                         (1.642)          (2.273)
                N                                         11897            11897
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Regressions include controls for
child age and child fixed effects. Cognitive ability is constructed by averaging a child’s PIAT math
and reading recognition test scores. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
Data from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.




                                                34
               Table 8: Fixed effects estimates by mother’s AFQT - 2nd parity

 Panel A: Parental Investment

                                          Individual FEs        White mothers       Black mothers

 Below median       HOME Inventory                 -3.260**              -4.884**            -0.419
                                                  (1.507)               (1.717)             (2.621)
 Above median                                      -2.943**              -3.056**            0.0169
                                                  (1.103)               (1.333)             (2.187)
 N                                                 14218                   7690                3813
 Difference                                         0.317                 1.828               0.436
 (Std. Err.)                                        1.635                 1.827               3.035

 Panel B: Ability Measures

                                          Individual FEs        White mothers       Black mothers

 Below median       Cognitive Ability              -6.006***             -5.953**            -5.555**
                                                  (1.822)               (2.323)             (2.464)
 Above median                                      -1.035                -0.211               2.118
                                                  (1.219)               (1.622)             (2.010)
 N                                                 10645                   5498                3091
 Difference                                         4.971                 5.742               7.672
 (Std. Err.)                                        2.149                 2.784               3.086

 Below median     Behavioral Problems                  1.921                -0.294             6.183**
                                                    (1.714)                (2.143)           (3.124)
 Above median                                          4.926**               6.577**           6.800**
                                                    (1.541)                (2.103)           (2.110)
 N                                                    11897                   6276              3298
 Difference                                            3.006                 6.872             0.617
 (Std. Err.)                                           2.252                 2.945             3.636
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Regressions include controls for
child age and child fixed effects. Cognitive ability is constructed by averaging a child’s PIAT math
and reading recognition test scores. Mother’s median AFQT is constructed conditional on the race
of the mother. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Data from Children of
the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.




                                                 35
                          Table 9: Impact on maternal labor supply

                                     Whole sample         By AFQT           Short vs. Long Run
 Worked last week (CPS)                    -0.0981***
                                          (0.0291)
 Below median                                                 -0.0409
                                                             (0.0383)
 Above median                                                  -0.122***
                                                             (0.0333)
 Below median, 0-3 years after                                                             -0.0512
                                                                                          (0.0397)
 Below median, 3+ years after                                                              -0.0274
                                                                                          (0.0459)
 Above median, 0-3 years after                                                              -0.119***
                                                                                          (0.0337)
 Above median, 3+ years after                                                               -0.119**
                                                                                          (0.0427)
 N                                             8451              8451                         8451
 Mean of dependent variable                   0.383             0.383                        0.383

                                     Whole sample         By AFQT           Short vs. Long Run
 Hours last year                            -357.9***
                                           (32.05)
 Below median                                                  -297.4***
                                                              (45.91)
 Above median                                                  -381.0***
                                                              (35.69)
 Below median, 0-3 years after                                                              -371.8***
                                                                                           (48.57)
 Below median, 3+ years after                                                               -280.8***
                                                                                           (55.00)
 Above median, 0-3 years after                                                              -358.6***
                                                                                           (36.24)
 Above median, 3+ years after                                                               -421.5***
                                                                                           (45.81)
 N                                            14877            14877                        14877
 Mean of dependent variable                    1145             1145                          1145

Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Regressions include controls for
child age and child fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Data
from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.
                                                 36
  Figure 1: Effect of an additional sibling on firstborns before and after 2nd sibling birth
 Estimated effect (percentile points)




                                                                                         Estimated effect (percentile points)
                                         10

                                          5                                                                                      10

                                          0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                        −5

                                        −10                                                                                     −10

                                        −15
                                              −4       −2      0         2      4                                                     −4        −2       0         2    4
                                                    Years since sibling birth                                                               Years since sibling birth
                                                   (a) HOME Inventory                                                                      (b) Cognitive Ability
 Estimated effect (percentile points)




                                         10



                                          0



                                        −10


                                              −4       −2      0         2      4
                                                    Years since sibling birth
                                               (c) Behavioral Problems
Each panel presents estimates of the effect of an additional child on an older sibling’s outcome for
the years preceding and following the year of birth. The omitted category is the year of birth.
Regressions include controls for child age and child fixed effects. Cognitive ability is constructed
by averaging a child’s PIAT math and reading recognition test scores. The dashed lines are 95%
confidence intervals for robust standard errors clustered at the individual level. Data from Children
of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.

                                                                                    37
 Estimated effect (percentile points)   Figure 2: Estimated impact of an additional sibling for different window lengths




                                                                                               Estimated effect (percentile points)
                                          2                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                       2
                                          0
                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                             -0.54
                                        −2                          -2.23
                                                                                                                                      −2                                    -1.89
                                                                              -2.93

                                        −4                                                                                            −4

                                                                                                                                      −6
                                        −6
                                                                                                                                      −8
                                          −60   −50    −40    −30      −20   −10           0                                           −60   −50    −40    −30       −20   −10      0
                                              Months included in ‘before’ sample                                                           Months included in ‘before’ sample
                                                  (a) HOME Inventory                                                                           (b) Cognitive Ability
 Estimated effect (percentile points)




                                         12

                                         10
                                                                              8.96
                                          8

                                          6                     5.69

                                          4

                                          2

                                          0

                                          −60   −50    −40    −30      −20   −10           0
                                              Months included in ‘before’ sample
                                                 (c) Behavioral Problems
Each panel shows how the estimated effect of an additional sibling changes as we increase the
sample to include more months prior to a sibling birth. The circled estimates correspond to the
point estimates presented in Table 6. Regressions include controls for child age, gender, mother’s
age at first birth, AFQT, race, Rosenberg and Rotter scores. Cognitive ability is constructed by
averaging a child’s PIAT math and reading recognition test scores. Robust standard errors are
clustered at the individual level. Data from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.

                                                                                      38
                     Table A.1: Children of NLSY79: Summary Statistics

                                                           Mean     Std. Dev.     # of Obs.
         Age in 2010                                        23.5       4.89         6084
         At least 25 years old in 2010                      0.43       0.50         6084
         Female                                             0.49       0.50         6084
         Black                                              0.15       0.36         6084
         Hispanic                                          0.076       0.26         6084
         Birth weight of child (oz)                        118.7       21.0         5619
         Family size                                        2.85       1.27         6084
         Twins in family                                   0.037       0.19         6084

         Yrs of education — At least 25 years old   13.1                2.43         2738
         HS grad — At least 25 years old            0.80                0.40         2738
         2009 Wage + salary income                25128.8             23304.8        2477
         Log 2009 wage + salary income              9.97               0.98          2002
         Worked 35+ hours at 1st job, 2010          0.77                0.42         2396
         Child was convicted of a crime             0.26                0.44         2736
         Child had a teenage pregnancy indicator   0.098                0.30         2740

         Cognitive ability                                 59.8         24.4        33426
         HOME Inventory score (percentile)                 52.0         28.5        49680
         Behavioral Problems Index (percentile)            57.9         28.1        38334
Data from Children of the NLSY79, 1986-2010. The data is based on 4,925 mothers and 11,464
children. For the first panel, each child is a unit of observation. For the second panel, each child is
an observation, conditional on being at least 25 years old during at least one survey wave. For the
third panel, a child-year is the unit of observation. Cognitive ability is constructed by averaging a
child’s PIAT math and reading recognition test scores. Statistics calculated using NLSY sampling
weights.




                                                  39
Table A.2: Distribution of family size and twin births

          Family size   Birth order of twins within family
           # of HHs                 # of HHs
1            1179                       44
2            1966                       35
3            1126                       19
4             430                       10
5             135                        6
6              49                        3
7              22
8              7
9              4
10             2
11             2
Total        4922                      117
        Data from Children of the NLSY79, 1986-2010.




                             40
           Table A.3: Maternal characteristics by twin and non-twin households

                                                  HH w/o twins       HH w/ twins      Difference
    Mothers AFQT Score (percentile)                   40.2              44.0            -3.779
    Mother’s self-esteem index                        22.1              22.6            -0.554
    Mother’s locus-of-control index                   8.82              8.74            0.0745
    Age of mother at birth of child                   22.9              23.3            -0.436
    Black                                             0.26              0.26           0.00234
    Hispanic                                          0.17              0.17          0.0000758

                                                  HH w/o twins       HH w/ twins      Difference
    Cognitive ability                                 55.0              48.0           7.007∗∗∗
    HOME Inventory score (percentile)                 46.8              42.8           3.937∗∗
    Behavioral Problems Index (percentile)            58.9               61.3           -2.347
    Birth weight of child (oz)                       116.4              116.7           -0.286

                                                  HH w/o twins       HH w/ twins      Difference
    Yrs of education — older than 22                  12.7              11.9           0.810∗∗
    HS grad — older than 22                           0.75              0.57           0.175∗∗∗
    Log 2009 wage + salary income                     9.92              9.61            0.308
    Teen pregnancy                                   0.076              0.22          -0.147∗∗∗
Data from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010. For the first panel, the mother is the unit
of observation. For the second panel, a child-year is the unit of observation. For the third panel,
a child (surveyed after age 25) is the unit of observation. For households with twins present we
restrict the sample to children born prior to the birth of the twins. The last column reports p-values
of an unpaired t-test for difference in means between households with and without twins.




                                                 41
                       Table A.4: Summary statistics: Sibling-pair data

                                            Full Sample     Restricted Sample      Difference
       Mother’s AFQT pctile                    37.12              37.81               0.69
                                              (27.02)            (27.01)

       Mother’s self-esteem index               21.65              21.68              0.03
                                               (4.104)            (4.132)

       Mother’s locus-of-control index          8.935              8.949             0.014
                                               (2.508)            (2.519)

       Age of mother at birth of child          20.30              20.75              0.45*
                                               (2.969)            (2.803)

       Black                                    0.204              0.194              0.10
                                               (0.403)            (0.396)

       Hispanic                                 0.104              0.108              0.04
                                               (0.305)            (0.311)

       Birth order                              1.405              1.424             0.019
                                               (0.722)            (0.725)

       Birth weight of child (oz)               116.4              116.5              0.12
                                               (20.44)            (20.16)

       Spacing to next birth (months)           302.7              328.2              25.5***
                                               (58.87)            (44.87)

       Current number of siblings               2.576              2.227            -0.349
                                               (1.274)            (1.120)

       Living in blended family                0.0961             0.0776           -0.0185*
                                               (0.295)            (0.268)

       Living with single mother                0.315              0.349             0.034
                                               (0.465)            (0.477)
       Observations                             5742               2469
Data from Children of the NLSY79, 1986-2010. “Restricted sample” includes older children-younger
siblings pairs where the older child has a valid PIAT test score. PIAT tests were administered to
children aged 5 to 14. Standard deviations in parentheses. To test for significant differences between
the restricted and full sample for each variable we regress the variable on a dummy indicating
restricted sample status.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5%42
                                                   level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.
                                Table A.5: Long-term outcomes

                                    (1)                   (2)                            (3)
                                   OLS       IV, full sample        IV, second parity births
     Years of education         -0.0287                -0.395**                       -0.531
                               (0.0531)               (0.143)                        (0.586)
     N                             7931                  7316                           4320

     Graduated HS              -0.0204**                -0.126***                    -0.00929
                             (0.00967)                (0.0376)                        (0.106)
     N                            7931                    7316                           4320

     Log earnings               -0.0289                 -0.184**                       -0.104
                               (0.0310)               (0.0598)                        (0.136)
     N                             4098                   3732                           2091

     Criminal conviction        0.0169*                 0.0746*                         0.268*
                             (0.00969)                (0.0399)                        (0.157)
     N                            7931                    7316                           4320

     Teen pregnancy             0.0129*                 0.0936**                      -0.0259
                             (0.00731)                (0.0311)                       (0.0549)
     Birth order controls          Yes                     Yes                            No
     N                            7931                    7316                           4320

Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. All results include controls for
child age, gender, mother’s age at first birth, AFQT, race, Rosenberg and Rotter scores. For years
of education, high school graduation, and log earnings the sample is restricted to children who
are surveyed after age 25. For teen pregnancy and criminal conviction the sample is restricted to
children who are surveyed after age 20. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
Data from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.




                                                 43
                        Table A.6: Individual fixed effects: 3rd parity

 Panel A: Parental Investment

                                                       (1)                (2)                  (3)
                                                      OLS     Individual FEs       Individual FEs

 After sibling birth     HOME Inventory           -2.604**              -1.850**
                                                 (0.958)               (0.846)
 0-3 years after                                                                             -1.835**
                                                                                            (0.845)
 3+ years after                                                                              -2.985**
                                                                                            (1.153)
 N                                                13966                 13966                13966

 Panel B: Ability Measures

                                                       (1)                (2)                  (3)
                                                      OLS     Individual FEs       Individual FEs

 After sibling birth     Cognitive Ability        -0.660                -0.634
                                                 (1.004)               (0.776)
 0-3 years after                                                                             -0.658
                                                                                            (0.775)
 3+ years after                                                                              -0.245
                                                                                            (0.998)
 N                                                10374                 10374                10374

 After sibling birth    Behavioral Problems        0.229                 2.351**
                                                 (1.194)               (0.907)
 0-3 years after                                                                              2.334**
                                                                                            (0.906)
 3+ years after                                                                               2.868**
                                                                                            (1.197)
 N                                                11508                 11508                11508
Each row presents estimates for a different outcome of interest. Controls are child’s age at test and
child fixed effects. Cognitive ability is constructed by averaging a child’s PIAT math and reading
recognition test scores. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level. Data from
Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.


                                                 44
           Table A.7: HOME questions used to form subcomponent indices

Subcomponent Index         Question Text
                           “How often do you read stories to child?”
HOME,   time with child    “How often has a family member taken or arranged to take child
                           to any type of museum?”
                           “How often does child eat a meal with both mother and father?”
                           “About how many books does child have?”
                           “About how many magazines does your family get regularly?”
HOME,   resources spent    (Ages 3-5)
                           “Does your family get a daily newspaper?” (Ages 6-14)
                           “Does child have the use of a CD player, tape deck, or tape recorder,
                           or record player at home and at least 5 children’s records or tapes?”
                           (Ages 3-5)
                           “Is there a musical instrument that child can use here at home?”
                           (Ages 6-14)
                           “How many times in the past week have you shown child physical
HOME,   parental affection affection?”
                           “Mother’s voice conveyed positive feeling about child?”
                           “Mother conversed with child excluding scolding or suspicious com-
                           ments?”
                           “Child’s play environment is safe?”
                           “Interior of the home is dark or perceptually monotonous?”
HOME,   home safety
                           “All visible rooms of house/apartment are reasonably clean?”
                           “All visible rooms of house/apartment are minimally cluttered?”




                                           45
Table A.8: Comparing the pre-trend characteristics of the 12 month sampling window, 2nd
parity births

                                                            Before group     After sample    Difference
 Mothers AFQT Score (percentile)                                 44.8             44.0          0.779
 SELF ESTEEM SCORE 80                                            22.2             21.9          0.232
 Mother’s Rotter (locus-of-control) score (percentile)          8.84             8.88         -0.0341
 Age of mother at birth of child                                 24.4             24.7         -0.276
 Black                                                           0.27             0.25         0.0150
 Hispanic                                                        0.19             0.20        -0.0139
 HGC BY RS MOTHER 79                                             11.0             10.9         0.0170
 Worked last week                                                0.30            0.32         -0.0166
 Birth weight of child (oz)                                    114.9             116.1         -1.145
                                                            Before group     After sample    Difference
 HOMEP, previous wave                                           -2.08            0.018         -2.094
 COG, previous wave                                             2.40             2.11          0.292
 BPIP, previous wave                                             2.34            5.65          -3.314
                                                            Before group     After sample    Difference
 Survey Year                                                   1989.8           1989.8         0.0126
 Age                                                            3.88             3.48          0.400∗
 Difference in age between respondent and 2nd birth              8.15            6.76         1.392∗∗∗
 Female                                                          0.48             0.51        -0.0286
Panel (a) shows child characteristics for children who will be interviewed either one year before or
one year after a younger sibling’s birth and Panel (b) shows similar characteristics for two years.
Data from Children of the NLSY79 sample, 1986-2010.
∗: significant at 10% level. ∗∗: significant at 5% level. ∗ ∗ ∗: significant at 1% level.




                                                46
