NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PARADOX OF CIVILIZATION:
PRE-INSTITUTIONAL SOURCES OF SECURITY AND PROSPERITY
Ernesto Dal Bó
Pablo Hernández
Sebastián Mazzuca
Working Paper 21829
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21829

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015

We thank Demian Pouzo, Santiago Oliveros, Bob Powell, Alvaro Sandroni and David Schönholzer
for valuable discussion, as well as seminar and conference participants for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ernesto Dal Bó, Pablo Hernández, and Sebastián Mazzuca. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Paradox of Civilization: Pre-Institutional Sources of Security and Prosperity
Ernesto Dal Bó, Pablo Hernández, and Sebastián Mazzuca
NBER Working Paper No. 21829
December 2015
JEL No. D74,N4,Z1
ABSTRACT
The rise of civilizations involved the dual emergence of economies that could produce surplus (“prosperity”)
and states that could protect surplus (“security”). But the joint achievement of security and prosperity
had to escape a paradox: prosperity attracts predation, and higher insecurity discourages the investments
that create prosperity. We study the trade-offs facing a proto-state on its path to civilization through
a formal model informed by the anthropological and historical literatures on the origin of civilizations.
We emphasize pre-institutional forces, such as physical aspects of the geographical environment, that
shape productive and defense capabilities. The solution of the civilizational paradox relies on high
defense capabilities, natural or manmade. We show that higher initial productivity and investments
that yield prosperity exacerbate conflict when defense capability is fixed, but may allow for security
and prosperity when defense capability is endogenous. Some economic shocks and military innovations
deliver security and prosperity while others force societies back into a trap of conflict and stagnation.
We illustrate the model by analyzing the rise of civilization in Sumeria and Egypt, the first two historical
cases, and the civilizational collapse at the end of the Bronze Age.

Ernesto Dal Bó
University of California, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
dalbo@haas.berkeley.edu
Pablo Hernández
New York University Abu Dhabi
PO Box 903
New York City, NY 10276-0903
pablo.hernandez@nyu.edu

Sebastián Mazzuca
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Political Science
338 Mergenthaler Hall
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
smazzuca@jhu.edu

1

Introduction
Anatomically modern humans have lived in subsistence and stateless societies for roughly

97% of their 200,000-year-long history. If there is a Big Bang in human history, it occurred
as recently as 5,000 years ago, when the first civilizations emerged. Civilization meant fundamental transformations: systematic surplus production, urbanization, public architecture,
writing, and states. Although the rise of civilization is arguably more of a qualitative change
than the Industrial Revolution, modern political economy has paid much less attention to
it.
According to an influential view in archaeology, the rise of civilizations is primarily driven
by an exceptional potential for food production, both in terms of endowments and technology.
For V. Gordon Childe, the key features of Lower Mesopotamia, the “cradle of civilization,”
were an extremely fertile alluvial soil, an abundance of edible animals, and irrigation technology. Identical factors were emphasized for the rise of Egypt, the first pristine civilization
after Sumer. Both in Lower Mesopotamia and Egypt “irrigation agriculture could generate a
surplus far greater than that known to populations on rain-watered soil ” and “as productivity
grew, so too did civilization” (Mann 1986: 80, 108).
Without a substantial surplus, it was not possible to fund the tangible components of
civilizations. However, surplus production was only a necessary condition for civilization, not
a sufficient one. In fact, prosperity could be self-defeating. Primitive food producers were
surrounded by nomadic tribes for whom agricultural surpluses were a most tempting target
for looting. The resulting clash is a primordial conflict shaping the civilizational process.
According to McNeill (1979, p. 71), “Soon after cities first arose ... the relatively enormous
wealth that resulted from [their economic activity] made such cities worthwhile objects of
attack by armed outsiders.” For anthropologists, intergroup violence had been prevalent
since before civilization (Keeley 1996), but the emergence of large surpluses intensified the
potential for conflict. According to Michael Mann, “the greater the surplus generated, the
more desirable it was to preying outsiders” (1986: 48).
Since civilization entailed the joint achievement of prosperity and security, its emergence
is a fundamental paradox. Primitive societies that held production close to subsistence levels
could hope to mitigate predation, but stagnation would foreclose the civilization process.
To reach civilization, primitive societies with the capacity for surplus production had to
overcome the dangers of self-defeating prosperity without relying on the relative safety of
stagnation. A proper balance was needed between surplus production and surplus protection.

1

The contextual conditions allowing for such a balance are rare, as evidenced by the fact
that, out of thousands of primitive societies, only a handful could develop independent civilizations, starting with Sumer and Egypt. In this paper we develop a model to identify
the logical conditions for successful civilization, and examine for the first time the historical
record for the rise of Sumer and Egypt under the perspective of the civilizational paradox.
The historical cases illustrate the logic of the model, and the model allows for a richer interpretation of the cases. Sumer and Egypt provide evidence that the potential for surplus
emphasized by archaeologists and geographers was only half of the story of successful civilization. The other half was surplus protection. In addition to their historical preeminence
as cases achieving the right balance between prosperity and security, Sumer and Egypt illustrate that protection occurs in two contrasting ways—defense can be natural as in Egypt,
or man-made as in Sumer.
The rise of civilization, and its intrinsic paradox, can be usefully compared to the rise of
the modern state in the post-Westphalia context, another major turning point in history. The
rise of the modern state also involves a paradox. European rulers striving for a monopoly of
violence were able to reach unprecedented levels of power but in the process they undermined
their own ability to credibly commit to respecting private rights. Unstable property rights
in turn diminished the capacity of the underlying society to grow, and ultimately damaged
the ruler’s own power. The standard insight is that the solution for the modern state was
“institutions” understood as rules of the political game: checks and balances, as well as the
expansion of political rights, helped the ruler to solve its credibility problem either vis-à-vis
society at large or vis-à-vis competing factions within the elite (North and Weingast 1989,
Acemoglu and Robinson 2005, Lizzeri and Persico 2004).
In contrast to the solution to the paradox of the modern state, the solution to the
paradox of civilization in our approach does not involve institutions. The joint achievement
of order and prosperity in the context of pristine civilizations is a pre-institutional process,
involving tangible assets and technologies, of either economic or military nature. Pristine
civilizations emerged in areas with exceptional natural endowments for food production, and
the man-made contributions to the civilizational breakthrough were not political rules, as
institutional theories would emphasize, but productive and defense equipment. Two massive
engineering accomplishments are the mark of the Ancient Near East: irrigation infrastructure
in both Egypt and Sumer, and perimetral walls in cities throughout Mesopotamia and the
Levant. Each public good had a single, well-defined mission: surplus production and surplus
protection. The prominence of the two types of public works reflects the centrality of the
2

production-protection tension in the process of civilization building.
Our pre-institutional theory on the joint achievement of security and prosperity can help
improve our understanding of the rise of the first civilizations, and shed light on the problem
of state formation more generally. A broader goal is to generate insights for a wide class
of development trajectories in which a potentially prosperous region, being surrounded by
predatory threats, may fall in the traps of security-enhancing stagnation or self-defeating
prosperity. This class includes the interaction between a large number of proto-cities and
barbarian invaders from the steppes across the Eurasian continent throughout the Middle
Ages; the long struggle in 19th century Latin America between elites from port-cities engaged in nation-building and rural warlords, “caudillos,” dominating the periphery; as well
as contemporary state-building efforts in failed states of Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East, in which international economic aid, if not coupled with military buildup, may
have counter-productive effects by inducing voracity among neighbors. Echoing concerns
in history and anthropology about the reversibility of gains in social complexity that lead
to statehood, our theory provides an account for civilization collapse, and more generally
for economic or military reversals in societies that had achieved prosperity and security.
For illustration, we will use the model to account for the End of the Bronze Age, a muchdebated process in which dozens of civilization centers collapsed rather quickly throughout
the Eastern Mediterranean, ushering in the first “dark ages” in the historical record.

1.1

Overview of the model

In our model, a population in control of an economy with the potential to create surplus (the “incumbent”) faces potential attacks by a predatory group (the “challenger”). In
this setting, the incumbent has the opportunity to invest and grow future income, which
would lead to “prosperity.” However, the incumbent may prefer to spend resources in consumption and defense if future flows may be lost after a successful attack by the challenger.
Three parameters are fundamental in the model: initial productivity, ‘defense capability’
and ‘growth capability.’ The two capabilities are the rates at which current consumption
can be transformed into defense and future income, respectively. The three parameters regulate fundamental tradeoffs. Higher initial productivity helps finance more defense, but it
also attracts stronger predation. If sufficient defense can be financed, the challenger can
be deterred. If attacks cannot be deterred, the rate of return to economic investment may
not be high enough to justify surplus production. Moreover, productive investment, a pre-

3

condition for systematic surplus production and the construction of the durable structures
associated with civilization, may intensify predatory challenges by raising income. The result
is a tradeoff between investment-led growth and security.
Our analysis has two main parts. In the first part, the incumbent’s defense capability is
exogenous, and in the second part defense capability can be improved. Both parts help to
account for different aspects of the rise of ancient civilizational states, and more generally
the variety of development paths taken by societies that have a potential for growth but face
threats.
The analysis with exogenous defense capability begins by characterizing the unique equilibrium of the game. Since productive investment fosters attacks, it is not obvious that civilizational breakthrough is possible. Therefore, the key formal questions are whether some
combination of parameter values allows for productive investment, and whether productive
investment requires fully deterring the challenger. A key result is that the parameter space is
partitioned into four regions corresponding to the four “prosperity/security” combinations.
The relationship between security and prosperity has been a perennial concern in the
social sciences. A dominant view, inspired by Hobbesian philosophy, is that state-provided
security is a precondition for prosperity (Lane 1958; Olson 2000; Bates 2001; see Boix 2015
for a contrasting approach). But the state itself has to be explained and the Hobbesian view
provides no clear message on whether state formation requires a modicum of prosperity in
the first place. In our model, when both defense and growth capabilities are low, neither
prosperity nor security are possible, and societies remain locked in the situation of economic
stagnation and conflict characterized by Keeley (1996), which corresponds to the Hobbesian
“state of nature.” If investment returns are high relative to defense capability, prosperity
becomes possible even in the face of attacks. Although anti-Hobbesian, the possibility of
prosperity without full security is consistent with a widespread occurrence in the history
of humanity: populations that prefer to grow their economies rather than attaining full
deterrence despite threats of predation from neighboring plunderers, like the Chinese with
the Mongolians and the Saxons with the Vikings in the 10th century. Lastly, when both
defense and growth capabilities are high and “balanced,” the society can manage both to
grow and deter predators. The latter two analytic possibilities are the key to our explanation
for the emergence of civilizations. Civilizations occur in cases where high enough returns
to productive investment allow the economy to grow, and where the incumbent manages
to deter attacks by the challenger, or, if attacks occur, to repel them with reasonably high
probability (complete security is an elusive feature in the historical record).
4

The case of Egypt can be explained in terms of natural endowments for both growth
and (exogenous) defense. Growth capabilities were given by rich alluvial soils that could
be quickly improved through productive investments, and defense was provided by the surrounding deserts, which protected dwellers along the Nile from most types of attack (Bradford
2001).
The model allows us to study how shocks (natural, or policy-originated) to defense
and growth capabilities can generate transitions from one area to another in the securityprosperity outcome space. A rich picture of transitions where the effect of shocks depends on
initial conditions emerges. Such shocks can account not only for the rise of civilizations, but
also for their fall and the emergence of dark ages where security and prosperity are lost. We
exemplify this type of application with a study of the end of the Bronze Age around 1200BC.
Our model shows that enhanced defense capabilities are a necessary condition for achieving security and prosperity, but expanding growth capability, while valuable, is not strictly
necessary. Moreover, under certain conditions, an imbalanced mix may worsen outcomes.
The rise of civilization in Southern Mesopotamia poses a challenge to our model with
exogenous defense capability, however, since the Sumerian settlements, in contract to Egypt,
did not have natural protection. Rather, as widely attested in the archaeological record,
they faced challenges from various pastoralist groups. How could these first city-states ever
emerge? The picture put forward by the anthropological literature is that the settled groups
who developed pristine states exploited an agrarian “staple finance”, which, being highly
rewarding, would fund their defense (Johnson and Earle 2000, p. 305-306). These groups
had enough of a material advantage that could be turned into a military one, by relying on
walls, weaponry, and numbers, all of which could be used to deter or defeat their enemies.
This process of endogenous improvement of defense capabilities can be accounted for in our
extended model, where the incumbent can make investments not only to expand production
but also to upgrade its defense. The key result is that when the initial productivity is high
enough the incumbent can fund its way out of the region without security or prosperity into
a region with high levels of both.
While higher initial productivity always exacerbates conflict in the model with exogenous
defense capability, in the model with endogenous defense it may pave the way to security and
prosperity. That this should happen is not obvious, since improvements in defense capability
are an investment, and as such they are discouraged by the insecurity associated with higher
initial productivity. When stronger defense capability is put in place, a Hobbesian effect
is observed: the enhanced security yields a higher effective return to productive investment
5

and it fosters prosperity.

1.2

Plan for the paper

In the next section we relate our contribution to two broad literatures, one in political
economy of state formation and political sources of prosperity, and one in history and anthropology on the origin of civilizations. In section 3 we present the model with exogenous
defense capability, and use it in section 4 to analyze the rise of Egypt and the end of the
Bronze Age. In section 5 we extend the model to allow for endogenous defense capability,
and in section 6 we use the extended model to account for the rise of Sumeria. We conclude
in section 7.

2

Related Literature
Historians, archaeologists and anthropologists have emphasized a variety of factors to

explain the rise of civilizations, including natural endowments for food production and the
construction of physical defense against outsiders. Archaeologists like V. Gordon Childe
(1936), who first conceptualized the advent of the Neolithic era as an “agricultural revolution,” focused on the innovations in the means and relations of production while abstracting
from the necessary accompanying innovations in military protection. On the other hand,
several archaeologists have noted the paramount role of investments in protection, such as
fortifications, walls, and moats, in the erection of the first cities (Service 1975, 299). According to Near Eastern archaeologist Volkmar Fritz, “in the Jordan Valley, settlements were
surrounded by a wall even before it is possible to speak of the city proper ” (1997 II: 19).
Other authors, like Mann (1986) and McNeill (1979), explicitly connected food production
with protection needs, as mentioned earlier. However, we are not aware of any account that
has explicitly focused on the interplay of surplus production and surplus protection to point
out a solution to the civilizational paradox. As we will show, the interplay is subtle and
perhaps profitably analyzed through a formal model.
Our solution to the civilizational paradox highlights the interaction of growth and defense capabilities, natural or man-made. Our approach to civilization builds on, but departs
from, historical accounts that emphasize the geographic and institutional sources of economic prosperity and income differences across societies. Historical approaches emphasizing
the availability of domesticable plants and animals to explain why some regions generated

6

surpluses while others did not (e.g., Diamond 1999) contribute a necessary building block
for understanding the prosperity of the first settled societies. However, a purely geographic
approach is incomplete, for it misses the role of incentives and strategic action that is at the
core of any viable socio-political account of the origin of civilizations. Our approach incorporates both strategic actors and an environment where fundamentals can be interpreted as
reflecting geographic factors such as food production potential or features of the terrain that
afford protection against attacks.
Our approach makes progress at the cost of abstracting from other aspects that have
been considered in anthropological theories of the state. We will not review these theories
comprehensively, but comment on those featuring relevant parallels or departures from ours.1
An influential view in anthropology, which refines classic Marxist insights, is that the state
emerged as an instrument to sustain and expand economic inequality in a context of increasing social stratification (Fried 1960, 728). However, we abstract from social hierarchy and
the varieties of forms of rule: in our model the incumbent can be interpreted as an egalitarian
community, a benevolent ruler representing the population, or a perfectly despotic dictator
acting as the residual claimant. This is not because we think political stratification is unimportant, but because it helps to focus attention on the incumbent-challenger interaction. For
Carneiro (1970), early states originated in pockets of fertile land surrounded by areas less
suitable for food production. Population growth induced groups to fight for the scarce fertile
land, and losers who were unable or unwilling to flee had to accept political domination.
The ensuing political stratification is the basis of the state. The Nile valley, surrounded by
deserts, is a good example of circumscribed productive land. Our model generates a similar
empirical implication; however, it is not driven by intra-societal exploitation but by the fact
that surrounding land of very low quality can act as a barrier against challengers. Unlike
Carneiro’s theory, our model does not appeal to population pressure, an assumption that
has been challenged by some writers (see Allen 1997).
It is customary in the social sciences in general and in political sociology in particular
to view the state as the monopoly on violence. Departing from contemporary theories of
state formation, and adapting from Weber, we define the state not in binary terms but as
a matter of degrees (Weber 1978: ch. I, s. 16). In particular, state formation involves
attaining higher degrees of protection from attacks. We deliberately focus on the state as
“sovereignty,” defense of a surplus-producing society from threats by non-producers (inside
or outside the territory), and abstract from “rulership,” the creation of a political hierarchy
1

For a review of anthropological theories of early states see for example Claessen and Skalnik (1978).

7

within a society. Our definition of the state is pre-institutional in the sense that “state” in
our analysis is pure military force and abstracts from the rules that regulate the access, the
exercise or the division of its power, which even critics of the institutional approach include
in their definition (see Boix 2015: 66-77). The exclusion of both rulership and political
institutions from our model helps identify how early civilizations could resolve the securityprosperity paradox. Civilization is the intersection of surplus production and statehood seen
as sufficient surplus protection.
Our work is related to both theories of state formation (Tilly 1975, 1992, Spruyt 1996)
and theories of the political sources of prosperity (North and Weingast 1989; Olson 2000,
Bates 2001; Boix 2015). In contrast to our model, theories of state formation do not place
the state in the context of the “security-prosperity” tradeoff, and theories of the political
sources of prosperity focus on rules of the political game once the state is already in place
rather than on pre-institutional forces.
Olson (2000) and Boix (2015) are noteworthy in that they relate state formation to long
run development. According to Olson (2000) states emerged when roving bandits were replaced by stationary bandits who preferred to limit rent extraction and provide productivityenhancing public goods.2 Our focus is very different for we abstract from rulership. We share
with Boix (2015) an interest in mechanisms of state formation and economic prosperity that
extend back into prehistoric times, as well as a focus on “hard” causes like geographic factors, military and economic capabilities shaped by the physical environment. Our model
complements Boix’s in several ways. It is especially built to understand the emergence of
pristine civilizations, which is not as central to Boix’s analysis. Although Boix finds sources
of pre-institutional cooperation under conditions of anarchy (absence of state), he conceives
of state formation as the selection of either republican or monarchic institutional settings. By
contrast, we focus on the properties of state formation that allow for productive investment
before political institutions become central. If Boix’s distinct focus is on the link between
state formation and economic inequality, ours is on the link between state formation and
the civilizational paradox. Our model is explicitly focused on the trade-off between security and prosperity, which allows for a distinct partition of the parameter space capturing
biogeographic and technological features of the context.
Our work has important complementarities with the work by Mayshar, Moav and Nee2

See Sanchez de la Sierra (2014) for an investigation of how these incentives shaped decisions by armed

gangs in the Eastern Congo, who responded to the presence of taxable resources by seeking to monopolize
violence.

8

man (2013), and Mayshar, Moav, Neeman and Pascali (2015). They also combine a focus
on early states, an emphasis on geographic drivers, and the use of formal theory. For us, geography matters because it defines both productive and defense capabilities, while for them
it determines the observability of production (the former paper) or its appropriability (the
latter). Mayshar, Moav and Neeman (2013) use a principal-agent model to show how monitoring capabilities shape the extent of political centralization, and account for contrasting
trajectories in Sumeria and Egypt, where observability of the Nile allowed for a more unified
and lasting state. Our focus is not on the form of states, but on the conditions for their
emergence. This is also the focus of Mayshar, Moav, Neeman and Pascali (2015), who focus
on the appropriability of different crops instead of general productivity. The production of
cereals, which in contrast to tubers is highly appropriable, creates a demand for protection
and makes taxation feasible. They equate the state with the political hierarchy that results
from appropriability and assume it results in the full prevention of conflict. We abstract
both from appropriability differentials and from issues of internal hierarchy, but investigate
the conditions under which conflict can be reduced or eliminated.
A recent literature studies the incentives of rulers to make investments in state capacity
in situations where the ruler may lose control of the polity to a competing faction (Besley and
Persson 2011), or to a foreign power (Gennaioli and Voth 2015). Gennaioli and Voth (2015)
formalize Tilly’s (1990) argument that modern European states formed as a result of the
competitive pressures of military conflict, which created a need to centralize fiscal control.
(They also find empirical support for the idea that fiscal centralization was conducive to
successful state building.) There are some differences in terms of modeling: unlike in Besley
and Persson’s model, investments in our model can augment the virulence of challenges, and
we abstract from the competitive dynamics between states that are at the core of Gennaioli
and Voth’s analysis. There are differences in substantive focus as well. In the state capacity
literature there is a pre-existing state, while we focus in pre-state societies that move towards
statehood by attaining some degree of deterrence. Our paper is also related to the formal
study of state consolidation. Powell (2012) offers a treatment where state consolidation
happens exogenously, while Powell (2013) considers endogenous consolidation. The key
difference is that in our model consolidation is studied in relation to investment and growth.

9

3

The Basic Model

3.1

Setup

Our baseline model features the incentives to raise an army to protect wealth from
usurpers at the cost of resources for consumption or productive investment. Later on we
introduce the decision to invest in defense capability.
Players
An “incumbent” controls a productive asset that yields a nonstorable flow vt > 0 every
period. The asset can be a piece of land, a port, or any bundle of productive resources
including people. The initial level v1 tracks properties of the environment (e.g., weather,
quality of the soil, topography) that affect the quantity and value of goods that the economy can produce, i.e., productivity. A “challenger” receives an exogenous income flow from
nature that we normalize to zero, and is interested in wresting control of the productive
asset away from the incumbent. This interaction captures the large class of cases of inchoate urban centers (agricultural settlements, city-ports, markets at the crossing of interior
roads) where food-producing populations and/or trading elites face the threat of predatory
attacks by nomadic tribes or plundering warlords. Although we emphasize external threats,
the challenger can also include recalcitrant elements within the incumbent population who
undertake predatory or subversive activities.
Actions, resources and technology
There are two periods t = 1, 2. We describe actions generically although it should be kept
in mind that there is no future in period 2. In each period the incumbent can spend its flow
vt on consumption, productive investment it or mobilizing resources to defend its asset. One
dollar of productive investment it costs one dollar of consumption and it adds ρ > 1 dollars
to the yield of the productive asset in the future.3 That is, productivity evolves according to
the relation vt+1 = vt + ρit ; we abstract from depreciation and discounting for simplicity. ρ
captures anything that affects the returns to productive investments in the asset controlled
by the incumbent. For example, ρ could, like v1 , reflect climatic conditions, soil fertility, and
other features of the environment, or the price of goods sold.4
3

Given that for ρ < 1 investment is never worthwhile, failure to obtain it in equilibrium is obvious and

uninteresting. Hence our assumption ρ > 1 which makes investment at least a possibility.
4
If the value of what the incumbent produces follows a standard price × quantity formulation we can
write v1 = p.q, and v2 = v1 + ρ.p.i = p.q + ρ.p.i, where q and i are physical units. Then, changes in p will
cause changes in both v1 and ρ. Changes in the baseline physical capacity of production q will be captured
through changes in v1 exclusively, and changes in the physical returns to investment as changes in ρ only.

10

The effectiveness of the incumbent’s defense (or “army”) is denoted at and such an army
costs the challenger an amount

at
κt

where κt ≥ 0 is the value of the incumbent’s defense

capability. The higher the defense capability of the incumbent, the higher the “firepower”
at attained by a given conflict effort

at
.
κt

In this section κt is exogenous and we will derive

implications for conflict and prosperity stemming from different values of κt . The expanded
version of the model in section 5 will be devoted to endogenizing κt . Thus, in period t the
incumbent must observe a budget constraint,
vt − it −

at
≥ 0.
κt

(1)

κ1 captures anything that yields the incumbent an advantage at producing defense or
military firepower at a given expense, such as a rugged terrain or better military technology
or expertise.5
The challenger observes the choices of at and it by the incumbent and chooses its own
conflict effort bt .6 If victorious in the first period the challenger captures control of the
productive asset in the second period. Whenever the challenger attacks (bt > 0), it prevails
with probability

bt
at +bt

and it gains nothing with the complementary probability (i.e., we

adopt the typical Tullock contest success function).7 If the incumbent is defeated it obtains
an outside payoff normalized to zero; the challenger becomes the new incumbent. If the
challenger selects bt = 0 we say the incumbent has successfully deterred the challenger,
and this lack of challenge to the authority of the incumbent results in full security. As we
explain later, we associate the degree of security–be it in terms of internal order or external
sovereignty–with the degree of statehood, so full security corresponds to full statehood.
Timing
In each period the incumbent selects at and it . After observing (at , it ) the challenger
selects bt . If b1 = 0, the players retain their positions in period 2. If b1 > 0, then there is
conflict at the end of period 1. The winner becomes the incumbent in period 2.8
5

Some types of infrastructure (e.g., roads) may affect both ρ and κ1 : a road may increase the returns to

investing in a port, and it may also make the incumbent’s army more (or less, depending on circumstances)
effective.
6
Assuming that the challenger’s war expense is basically effort is equivalent to assuming that the challenger’s income is sufficient to finance the optimal war effort b∗t . Because the effects of interest are not driven
by a budget constraint on the challenger being binding, we follow the most parsimonious approach of not
making explicit a resource constraint on the challenger.
7
Generalized versions of the ratio-based contest success function exist but are less tractable. Hirshleifer
(2001) explores some of the difficulties.
8
In the two period model it makes no difference whether we assume that the new incumbent faces a new

11

Payoffs
Both challenger and incumbent are risk neutral and care linearly about income and units
of effort. The incumbent acts as a Stackelberg leader, choosing a1 and i1 to maximize the
value of the game for an incumbent Vt :
at
at
− it +
Vt+1 .
κt
at + b t
The challenger chooses bt to maximize the expression
Vt = vt −

Wt =

bt
bt
Vt+1 − ,
at + b t
κc

(2)

(3)

where Vt+1 = vt + ρit , and where κc is the military capability of the challenger. We could
also parametrize the challenger’s objective with a factor h and write the expected benefit
as

bt
hVt+1 ,
at +bt

so as to capture different levels of “hunger” by the challenger.9 Although

capturing a different substantive aspect, the parameter h would be mathematically redundant
since the challenger’s problem could be rewritten as involving a military capability of hκc
instead. Therefore we will abstract from the parameter h. To simplify notation, we will
develop the model normalizing κc = 1, and will comment later on how the solution changes
with variations in κc . An additional simplification is we do not consider here the realistic
possibility that conflict destroys part of the asset. Our results do not change qualitatively
by assuming that conflict is destructive.10
We will solve for a Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibrium by backward induction.

3.2

Solution

Second period
The rewards from conflict accrue in the next period if any, so the challenger does not fight
in the second and last period and b2 = 0. Anticipating this the incumbent chooses a2 = 0
challenger in period 2, since in that period there are not incentives to fight.
9
This parameter could also track the differential ability of the challenger at “operating” the asset. One
issue we do not take up here is the case where a challenger has a high valuation for the stream of production
(as when looting animals and food) but a low valuation for the asset due to an inability to operate it.
These are interesting variations that go into the finer issue of modes of challenge that may be costly to the
incumbent but do not pose a replacement threat. The study of these variations is left for future research.
10
The model presented here represents the limit case of a more general model where a fraction σ ∈ [0, 1]
of the asset survives the war. The solution to the expanded model is similar and continuous in σ, so the
solution we focus on remains qualitatively similar when σ dips below 1 (proof available upon request).

12

and selects i2 to maximize the value of consumption in the second period V2 = v2 − i2 ,
yielding i2 = 0 and V2 = v2 .
First period
The challenger observes the pair (a1 , i1 ) and chooses b1 to maximize W1 as given by
expression (3). Since the first order condition is

a1
v
(a1 +b1 )2 2

= 1, and v2 = v1 + ρit , the best

response function of the challenger is,

b1 (a1 , V2 ) =

p
 a1 (v1 + ρi1 ) − a1

if a1 < V2

0

otherwise

.

(4)

This expression exhibits a key trade-off of the model: productive investments i1 raise
the value of the productive asset. Thus, conditional on maintaining control of the asset,
investment is a good idea for the incumbent since ρ > 1; however, the future control of the
asset is not a forgone conclusion. Investment raises the incentives of the challenger to arm
itself since it makes it more attractive to become the incumbent. Therefore, while productive
investments increase the value of future incumbency, they may lower the chance that the current incumbent gets to reap that value. This is the civilizational paradox: future prosperity
raises insecurity, which in turn depresses incentives to invest and undermines the creation
of that future prosperity. The civilizational paradox is analytically related to Hirshleifer’s
(1991) paradox of power, according to which the poorer contender acts more aggressively.
Against this backdrop, our task is to understand whether there are any parameter values
v1 , κ1 , and ρ that map into security and prosperity. To answer this question we must study
the problem of the incumbent.
The incumbent maximizes V1 as given by (2) subject to the budget constraint (1) and
anticipating the challenger’s best response in (4). The latter indicates that if a1 ≥ v1 + ρi1
the challenger will choose not to fight, and therefore the incumbent would never choose
a1 beyond the point v1 + ρi1 , which attains deterrence. This can be incorporated into the
incumbent’s problem as an additional, deterrence constraint. The incumbent’s problem in
period 1 can then be written as,


a1
a1
max v1 −
− i1 +
(v1 + ρi1 )
a1 ,i1
κ1
a1 + b1
subject to

13

(5)

a1
− i1 ≥ 0 (BC)
κ1
v1 + ρi1 − a1 ≥ 0 (DC)
v1 −

(6)
(7)

a1 ≥ 0

(8)

i1 ≥ 0,

(9)

where (BC) is the incumbent’s budget constraint and (DC) is the deterrence constraint. The
Lagrangian, which expresses the expected utility of the incumbent, is:

a1
a1
− i1 +
(v1 + ρi1 )
κ1
a1 + b1
a1
− i1 ) + λDC (v1 + ρi1 − a1 ) + λa a1 + λi i1 ,
+λBC (v1 −
κ1

L = v1 −

(10)

where λBC , λDC , λa and λi are the Lagrange multipliers for each constraint (1)-(9). We will
characterize the solution (a1 , i1 , λBC , λDC , λa , λi ) to this problem for each parameter combination (ρ, κ1 , v1 ). The first order and complementary slackness conditions that characterize
the optimum are given by,

∂L
1
=
∂a1
2

r

1
λBC
v1 + ρi1
−
−
− λDC + λa = 0; a1 ≥ 0, λa ≥ 0, λa a1 = 0 c.s.
a1
κ1
κ1

∂L
ρ
=
∂i1
2

r

(11)

a1
− 1 − λBC + λDC ρ + λi = 0; i1 ≥ 0, λi ≥ 0, λi i1 = 0 c.s.
v1 + ρi1

(12)

a1
− i1 ) = 0 c.s., λDC (v1 + ρi1 − a1 ) = 0 c.s.
κ1

(13)

λBC (v1 −

Solving the program (10) requires checking which combinations of values for the endogenous variables (a1 , i1 , λBC , λDC , λa , λi ) constitute the optimum for different regions of the
parameter space (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ . Note from (11) that the marginal benefit of a1 goes to
infinity as a1 goes to zero (a typical feature of contests), so the optimum must feature a1 > 0
and λa = 0. Beyond this, the method for solving the problem is tedious: it requires checking
which combinations of values for the endogenous variables are consistent with the constraints
for each parametric region and also yield the highest value for the program. The following
proposition summarizes the solution, the details of which can be found in the appendix.

14

Proposition 1 Optimal behavior by the incumbent yields a partition of the parameter space
(κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ into four distinct regions:

Region 1 (R1): (κ1 ,nρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |κ1 > ρ, ρ > κ1 /(κ1 − 1) Security
o and prosperity
κ1 (1+ρ)
(κ1 −1)
κ1 (1+ρ)
In R1 the solution is: a1 = v1 κ1 +ρ , i1 = v1 (κ1 +ρ) , V1 = v1 (κ1 +ρ)

3
without
Region 2 (R2): (κ1 , ρ,
n v1 ) ∈ R+ |ρ
 > κ1, ρ > 4/κ1 Prosperity

 security
√ o
In R2 the solution is: a1 = κ12v1 1 + ρ1 , i1 = v21 1 − ρ1 , V1 = v21 1 + ρ1
ρκ1

3
Region 3 (R3): (κ1 , ρ,
nor security
n v1 ) ∈ R+ |2> κ1 , ρ < 4/κ1 Neitherprosperity
o
κ1 2
κ1
In R3 the solution is: a1 = v1 2 , i1 = 0, V1 = v1 1 + 4

3
Region 4 (R4): (κ1 , ρ,
1) Security without prosperity
n v1 ) ∈ R+ |κ1 > 2, ρ < κ1 /(κ1 −o
In R4 the solution is: a1 = v1 , i1 = 0, V1 = v1 2 − κ11
.
The following figure contains a graphical representation of the solution.

ρ
R2 (prosperity,
insecurity)

R3 (no

prosperity,
2 insecurity)

R1 (prosperity, security)
R4 (no prosperity, security)

1

κ1

2

Figure 1: Equilibrium partition of the parameter space (Proposition 1)
A convenient feature of this model is that the optimal decisions by the incumbent on
defense effort at and productive investment it are invariant in v1 . This feature greatly
simplifies the characterization of emerging “regimes” with exogenous defense capability, as
we can restrict attention to the bidimensional space (κ1 , ρ).

15

The main feature of the solution is that all four combinations of security and prosperity
can be observed depending on the values of the parameters (κ1 , ρ). For low values of both
defense capability and yield of investment, the incumbent will be stuck in a situation of
economic stagnation and conflict (R3). In R3 the prospect of conflict lowers the rate of
return to investment, preventing investment and hence growth. If defense capability κ1 is
higher but investment returns ρ are still low, the incumbent will be in region R4, where the
challenger is deterred but there is no investment. In this area growth is foreclosed not by
existing conflict but by the fact that if growth were attempted the challenger would become
more aggressive, which would raise the costs of maintaining deterrence. If returns ρ are
relatively high and defense capability κ1 relatively low–i.e., in R2–growth occurs despite the
fact that full security is not attained. If, starting from R2 or R4, defense capability κ1 were
to become sufficiently higher, the incumbent would be in R1. Relative to R2, the added
defense capability helps attain deterrence, which increases net investment returns and then
expands growth potential.11 Relative to R4, the added defense capability makes is cheaper
to attain deterrence and releases resources for growth.
Inspection of Figure 1 yields the following,
Remark 1 From a situation of no prosperity nor security (R3), a large enough increase in
defense capability κ1 is a necessary and sufficient condition for attaining both prosperity and
security; in contrast,
Remark 2 Increases in the growth capability ρ are not necessary nor sufficient for attaining
both security and prosperity.
Natural shocks could increase or decrease parameters like ρ and κ1 . An incumbent that
enjoys security and prosperity in R1 could, through a reduction in κ1 , be plunged into
stagnation and conflict in R3. A reduction in κ1 could be thought of as a negative shock to
the incumbent’s defense technology.
As said earlier, the (security, prosperity) regimes characterized in Proposition 1 are invariant in initial income v1 ; that is, whether investment i1 and arming by the challenger b1
are positive or zero does not depend on v1 . But changes in income v1 do affect the particular
values of all endogenous variables whenever positive. In particular, we have the following,
11

−1
Productive investment is higher in R1 than in R2 whenever v1 κκ11 +ρ
>

case for κ1 > ρ, a condition characterizing R1.

16

v1
2



1−

1
ρ



, which is always the

Proposition 2 Increases in initial income v1 exacerbate conflict; that is, in regimes where
(either or both) a1 and b1 are positive, they increase with v1 .
Proof: see appendix.
This result highlights one of the central forces in the prosperity-security paradox, namely
the fact that a more productive incumbent that cannot fully deter its enemies will be engulfed
in more virulent conflict.
In order to connect the model to the historical record, we now relate the regions in
Figure 1 to the event of a civilization rising. We defined stateness as a relative high degree of
security. Figure 2 displays contour plots of relevant equilibrium magnitudes. The continuous
lines within each region represent level curves, and the ligher shades of color represent higher
values of the respective magnitude. Figure 2(a) shows that the arming effort of the incumbent
increases as defense capability is higher, and this contributes to increasing security. Figure
2(b) represents security as proxied by the probability that the incumbent will prevail. This
probability is 1 in R4 and R1, and it decreases in R2 as defense capability goes down
or growth capability goes up (as this fires up the challenger). The areas in R2 that are
sufficiently close to R1 display arbitrarily high levels of security which in our approach
can be interpreted as a higher degree of stateness. In other words, we may consider the
safer parts of R2, R1 and R4 as the parameter combinations that yield statehood. But
civilization requires more than security; it also requires the creation of surplus, which in our
model amounts to growth (v2 − v1 = i1 ρ). Figure 2(c) shows how there is no growth in R3
and R4 (since there is no investment) and that there is growth in R2 and R1. Growth
increases in returns ρ and in R1 it also increases in defense capability, as a higher defense
capability lowers the costs of arming and releases resources for investment. In R2 growth is
unresponsive to defense capability because any increase in κ1 is met with a similar increase
in a1 , which keeps the resources devoted to defense

a1
κ1

and investment i1 constant.

We defined civilization as the joint attainment of growth and security. This would leave
out parts of R2 to the North-West, bordering R3, where growth can be high but security low.
This is sensible if we consider that civilization requires to consolidate growth by defending
production from attacks. A good proxy for civilization would then be the continuation value
perceived by the incumbent in period 1, which reflects both growth and security. This is the
expected future income of the incumbent resulting from investment and the probability that
the incumbent prevails. This combination of the magnitudes in panels (b) and (c) yields the
pattern in panel (d) of Figure 2. We observe that this “intersection” of growth and security
increases with both defense and growth capabilities, and indicates areas in R1 and R2 near
17

a) Army

b) Probability the incumbent prevails

c) Growth

d) Continuation value

Figure 2: Values of endogenous magnitudes in equilibrium with exogenous defense capability

18

the 45 degree line as those that best escape the security-prosperity paradox, and therefore
as good parametric candidates for explaining the rise of civilizations.

3.3

Discussion

Internal vs external conflict and social structure of incumbent polity
The modern distinction between national an international conflict is irrelevant in our
model. The process of civilization emergence precedes such distinctions. That process ended
with the incorporation of the formerly hostile populations in some cases and their exclusion
in others; but population integration is not the problem occupying us. If challengers are
internal actors (ex ante or ex post) our definition of security is about internal order and the
classic monopoly of violence. If challengers are external actors, our definision of security is
best matched with the notion of sovereignty. Second, there is no distinction between ruler
and subjects within the incumbent actor. The incumbent in our model can be taken to be
either a representative agent in the civilized center, a perfectly benevolent ruler acting on
behalf of that settled population, or a perfectly extractive ruler who is a residual claimant.
Asymmetries
We have kept as many aspects as possible symmetric between the incumbent and the
challenger, and only introduced asymmetries that we deemed necessary to analyze the type
of interaction of interest. One asymmetry is that the incumbent acts as a Stackelberg leader.
This was convenient to generate deterrence. Another asymmetry is that while defense effort
costs the incumbent resources, it does not deplete a budget for the challenger. This is for
tractability. It would be possible to include a budget constraint for the challenger, and the
advantage of a wealthier incumbent at being able to finance higher defense effort, and then
attaining deterrence, would operate in similar fashion. However, the reaction function of the
challenger would hit its constraint eventually and the analysis would become less elegant as
kinks in the reaction function have to be taken into account.

4

Historical illustrations

4.1

Egypt and the birth of a state

Among the first civilizations, Egypt is the prototype of a “pristine territorial state,”
the undisputed pioneer in attaining both security and prosperity throughout a substantial territorial expanse. Although the Neolithic Revolution occurred in Egypt later than in
19

Mesopotamia, the ensuing process of social and political development in Egypt was extraordinarily fast.12 In less than a thousand years, the outcome would be a state that not only
presided over a wealthy economy but was also able to protect its territory and the surplus
generated within it for long stretches of time. As Allen (1997: 135) put it, “the Egyptian
state lasted longer and was more stable than most Empires established elsewhere.”
Although the specific conditions underlying Egypt’s dual economic and political evolution
are disputed, a strong consensus exists around the general idea that Egypt’s geography played
a key role. Our model can be used to identify three features of the Egyptian geography—the
delta river, the potential for irrigation, and the surrounding desert—that collectively set
it apart from other civilizations, and to assess their role in explaining the emergence of a
successful state.
(1) The Nile River as a fundamental driver of the Egyptian economy. The Nile had at
least two key properties: a yearly flood that fertilized the soil with rich stilt from Ethiopia,
and a two-way navigability that facilitated exchange along the entire valley.13 “[T]he Nile was
perfectly ordered—its current carried boats downstream, the wind blew them back upstream—
and the Nile’s regular flooding renewed the fields and made farming so easy that in the Delta
men had ‘only to throw out seeds to reap a crop.’ ” (Bradford 2001: 9). Both properties,
natural fertility and easy exchange, map into a high v1 in our model, whereby initial income
is high even before investments are made.
(2) The productivity of artificial irrigation. Egyptians could vastly increase their economic output by investing in water management, which in the Nile valley took the form of
basin irrigation. Egypt developed a network of earthen banks in the agricultural fields that
would form a grid of basins to trap the floodwater and hold it for much longer than it would
naturally stay. The basins allowed the earth to become fully fertilized before planting, and a
12

During the Neolithic revolution, gathering and hunting were gradually replaced by the domestication

of plants and animals for food production. The process began in the ancient Near East (Southern Levant)
about 10,000 years ago. The Neolithic in Egypt developed much later, around 5500 BC. According to Bard
(1994, p. 267), “The beginning of the First Dynasty was only about 1000 years after the earliest farming
villages appeared on the Nile, so the Predynastic period, during the 4th millennium B.C., was one of fairly
rapid social and political evolution.”
13
Most of the flow originated from monsoons in the Ethiopian highlands, and a smaller part came from
the upper watershed of the White Nile around Lake Victoria. With impressive precision, the river began to
rise in the South in early July and the flood got to the northern end of the valley by mid September. The
Tigris and Euphrates were not only less predictable in timing, but also more irregular and less benign in
volume.

20

system of canals redirected the remaining floodwater to basins in need.14 Economic sociologists agree that in Egypt irrigation agriculture “could generate crop-to-seed yield of between
12:1 and 24:1 . . . but only at the cost of high capital investments” (Morris and Manning
2005: 141). In Michael Mann’s genealogy of social power, artificial irrigation involved one of
the earliest forms of economic investment, which in Egypt was even more productive than
in Mesopotamia. Both in Egypt and Mesopotamia, irrigation agriculture could “generate
a surplus far greater than that known to populations on rain-watered soil ” (1986: 80). In
Egypt, “the process was as in Mesopotamia, but squared,” and “as productivity grew, so too
did civilization, stratification, and the state” (1986: 108). In our model, a high value of
the parameter ρ reflects the existence of an environment in which investments yield large
increases of economic surplus in the same way that the construction of irrigation systems
resulted in major expansions of the food surplus in Egypt.
(3) Territorial isolation as natural protection. The Nile basin is surrounded by deserts,
which made invasions much less likely than in other centers of civilization. According to
Bradford (2001: 9), “The sea to the north and the deserts west and east isolated the Egyptians
from the rest of mankind, except for merchants, some infiltrators, and the occasional raid.”.
The desert provided two kinds of protection. On the one hand, the desert’s inhospitality
to human settlement discouraged the emergence of hostile neighbors nearby. On the other,
the desert was a formidable barrier against distant rivals. In terms of our model, Egypt’s
territorial isolation is a naturally high κ1 .
How do these conditions account for Egypt’s twin achievements of security and prosperity
in the context of our model? A high level of v1 has no effects in the model with exogenous
defense capability. The implication is that the Nile’s extraordinary natural fertility was not
a decisive factor per se. Highly productive soils are not unique to Egypt. But the model does
highlight that a combination of a high κ1 and a high ρ helped Egypt attain prosperity and
security. Protected by the deserts, Egypt had virtually no challengers it could not deter. This
would permit Egypt to fend off well against nomadic raiders interested in capturing Egypt’s
agricultural assets and surplus. Given the potential for productivity-enhancing irrigation
infrastructure, Egyptian rulers had incentives to encourage investments that would increase
future surplus.
14

According to a long scholarly tradition (Weber [1909] 2013, Wittfogel 1957), water management and

state formation were closely linked in ancient societies. The thesis of “hydraulic empires,” which claims that
irrigation was a public good with enormous fixed costs, and that pristine states formed precisely in order to
provide them, has been discredited by evidence showing that irrigation was not preceded by the emergence
of state administrations.

21

The resulting picture is one where Egypt is located in a favorable section of region R2, if
not directly in R1. The reason to place Egypt during the state formation period (end of the
Naqada II period, around 3200BC) in a good part of R2 is that Egypt did face occasional
attacks, and perhaps the total absence of challenges that characterizes R1 is better reserved
to the heights of Egyptian power under the new kingdom, when the Egyptian state was even
more dominant than during its formative phase. A “good” part of R2 is one near the frontier
with R1, where κ1 is so high that the cost of defense effort done by the incumbent is small
but sufficient to guarantee victory with very high probability. Thus, a society in such “good”
part of R2 would grow and enjoy a relatively secure existence, because the probability of
defeat is small, and the returns to investment are high. These conditions –high κ1 , high ρ—
continued to prevail in Egypt for a long time, perhaps explaining the remarkable stability of
the Egyptian policy alluded to earlier.

4.2

The end of the Bronze Age

Compared with the rise of the great civilizations of the Bronze Age, their demise was a
much more sudden affair: a wave of political and economic collapse swept across the Eastern Mediterranean around 1200BC, with drastic consequences in the Near East, Anatolia,
Greece, and Egypt. An irreversible legacy of the collapse was the extinction of dozens of
cities that were at the very frontier of political and technological development. Few events
in history provide such a large scale and definite proof against unilinear visions of social
progress.
For a period of almost 400 years, the Eastern Mediterranean had seen the rise of multiple
states that improved their productive capacity and were capable of defending their wealth
against “barbarian” populations. Progress on the productive dimension included advanced
irrigation and plowing techniques for expanding agricultural surplus, storage facilities especially conditioned for the preservation of cereals, and permanent bureaucracies for economic
redistribution. Military power was sustained by chariots and fortified walls. In combination,
these achievements backed a sophisticated division of labor that allowed for the emergence
of specialized ceramic and metal craft, and the development of writing, religion and the arts.
This set of thriving states included the city-ports of the Levant, the kingdoms of Anatolia,
the Egyptian empire, and the city-states of Mesopotamia and Cyprus.
“But then, the world as they had known it for more than three centuries collapsed and
essentially vanished ” as Eric Cline puts it (2014: 241). According to the assessment of

22

Drews (1993: 3), “altogether the end of the Bronze Age was arguably the worst disaster in
ancient history, even more calamitous than the collapse of the western Roman Empire.” The
proximate cause of the end of the Bronze Age was, in most areas, invasion by armed groups
coming from beyond civilization. The “Sea Peoples,” as the Egyptians called them, were
actually a diverse array of intruders with different geographic and ethnic origins (Sandars
1987), including the Deniens (either Greeks or the Dan tribe among Israelites), the Sherden
(possibly Sardinians), the Shekelesh (Sicilians), the Lukka (from the Anatolian Aegean), and
the Teresh (possible ancestors of the Etruscans).
There has been a long debate on the fundamental causes behind the end of the Bronze
Age. Since the beginning of the debate in the mid-1960s, archaeologists have hypothesized
that the collapse was set in motion by earthquakes (Schaeffer 1948), droughts and famines
(Carpenter 1968), internal rebellions (Zuckerman 2007 and Carpenter 1968), or innovations
in military technology (Drews 1993).
Our model can help think about the end of the Bronze Age in two ways, one particular
and one general. The particular application, as we will see, is to show that most of the
fundamental explanations given for the end of the Bronze Age can be analyzed, using our
model, as shocks affecting either the value to the challenger of the incumbent’s asset (the
parameter h), or the effectiveness of the challenger’s military capability (the parameter κc ).
These interpretations, in addition, are consistent with the wealth of archaeological findings
collected since the mid-1980s, which has tended to reinforce the notion that military struggle
was involved in the process at least as a proximate cause for a high proportion of cases.
The more general point resulting from our use of the model is to relate changes in deep
military and economic fundamentals to the arguments made by social theorists that the
evolution of political complexity is not unilinear, but plagued by dead ends and reversals.
According to our model, a few deep economic and military fundamentals shaped the equilibrium in the confrontation between the civilized centers and the “barbarian” periphery. A
shock to any one of those fundamentals could shift societies from one combination of levels
of security and prosperity to another combination. Importantly, those movements do not
necessarily go in the direction of greater security and prosperity. The end of the Bronze Age
involved state de-consolidation and a regression to lower income levels—a Dark Age–, as in
the region of conflict and stagnation, R3, in our model.
Debate among archeologists around the end of the Bronze Age has made empirical and
theoretical progress. Only two hypothesized causes are incompatible with the notion that the
end of the Bronze Age involved a major military defeat of the civilized world: earthquakes
23

and internal rebellions. Both explanations face challenges. The hypothesis of earthquakes
has been discredited in the face of new archaeological evidence showing that most urban
destruction was caused not by natural forces but by an enemy attack, which in the case
of the key city of Ugarit left numerous arrow-heads throughout the ruins (Yon 1992: 117;
Singer 1999: 730; Kanievski et al 2011). Attacks not only occurred but were endemic, even
if un-coordinated: from opposite ends of the Bronze Age world, Hittite and Egyptian rulers
left unequivocal testimonies about the menace and calamities of the incursions by the Sea
Peoples, both in pictorial and written form.
The hypothesis of internal rebellions relies on the least plausible premise given the geographical scope and speed of the collapse: an extraordinary level of simultaneity among the
rebels across the different sites of Anatolia, Greece, Northern Mesopotamia and the Levant.
One potential driver of the simultaneity could be a common climatic shock.15 But a more
serious challenge to a pure internal rebellion story is posed by the fact that there is evidence
of large migration movements across Late Bronze Age civilizations. This evidence is more
compatible with invasions and exoduses than with simultaneous infighting.
The theoretical problem with the invasions is, of course, what caused them in the first
place. Two hypotheses consistent with available evidence are:
(1) A severe change in climate, which caused draught and famines, and compelled the
populations living beyond the gates of civilization to invade in search for food. Cities that
were storehouses of grain fell victim to “a final resort to violence by a drought sicken people”
(Carpenter 1968: 69).
(2) A revolution in the means of war, including the introduction of the javelin, which
tipped the military balance in favor of nomadic intruders from economically less developed
regions. Thus, according to Drews (1998: 33), “the Catastrophe was the result of a new
style of warfare that appeared toward the end of the thirteen century BC, [which] opened up
new and frightening possibilities for various uncivilized populations that until that time had
been no cause of concern to the cities and kingdoms of the eastern Mediterranean”. What
were the changes introduced by the “uncivilized populations”? Chrissantos (2008: 11)
summarizes them: “these tribes developed better and lighter body armor, [. . . ] lighter and
smaller round shields, [and] revolutionary longer, stronger swords [. . . ] They also invented
15

A recent paleobotany study based on samples of pollen throughout the Bronze and Iron Ages confirms

the existence of a substantial climate change around the time of the collapse, which caused a reduction
in precipitation and resulted in the shrinkage of the Mediterranean forest (Langgut, Finkelstein, and Litt
2013). In the interpretation of these authors, climate change and the ensuing famine may have caused
internal rebellions rather than foreign invasions.

24

a new weapon, the javelin, which could be used as a missile to hurl at an enemy. They
[managed to] overcome the civilizations’ chariot advantage [...] Once these tribes mastered
sea travel, no shore was too far for an attack. The failure of the chariot in the face of this
new warfare marks the beginning of the Bronze Age world’s collapse”.
At the theoretical level, of course, climate change and military innovation are not mutually incompatible causes and can be combined under the form of a “Perfect Storm” (Cline
2014: Chapter 5). Another recent theoretical development for combining ineliminable causes
builds on the idea of “System Collapse.” The point of departure is the fact that Late Bronze
Age societies—kingdoms, villages, cities and empires—were all connected through frequent
commercial, production, and diplomatic relations. The assumption is that such relations had
reached such a level of intensity, specialization and complementarity that if the economy in
one of them were to come to a halt, for whatever reason, the whole Eastern Mediterranean
would collapse under “domino” and “multiplier” effects. This allows for the theoretical possibility that weather- and technology-induced invasions had devastated a critical number of
nodes in the workings of the global Eastern Mediterranean, which eventually provoked its
general collapse.
Our incumbent-challenger model is compatible with all surviving interpretations for the
collapse of the Bronze Age, taken individually or in any of their combinations (general
wave of invasions, invasions in critical sites, invasions prompted by climate-induced famines,
invasions caused by changes in the art of war). More importantly, however, the definition of
the challenger’s valuation of the incumbent’s asset hv, and the effectiveness of the challenger’s
military effort κ c , helps distinguish between two separate forces at play in the invasions that
put an end to the civilized Eastern Mediterranean: the motivation behind invasion versus
the effectiveness of the means to invade. The historical debate has sometimes conflated
both issues and other times considered motivation and effectiveness as factors driving rival
explanations. While changes in h and κc capture substantively different forces, as discussed
in Section 3 they are mathematically equivalent in that both affect the aggressiveness of the
challenger in the margin. Therefore, studying the comparative statics of κc can illuminate
the role of both changes in motivation and aggressiveness of barbarians.
The parameter κc was assumed equal to 1 in the baseline model. We now consider a move
to κc > 1, under the maintained assumption that κ1 ≥ κc . This will allow us to compare
the extent to which the incumbent can attain security and prosperity in a world where the
challenger is tougher. In other words, we study how shifts in κc affect the partition of the
parameter space derived in Proposition 1. The following proposition shows such changes.
25

Proposition 3 Optimal behavior by the incumbent yields a division of the parameter space
(κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ for a given κ1 > κc into four distinct regions:

Region 1 (R1): (κ1 , n
ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |ρ < κ1 /κc , ρ > κ1 /(κ1 − κc ) Security
o and prosperity
κ1 κc (1+ρ)
(κ1 −κc )
κ1 (1+ρ)
In R1 the solution is: a1 = v1 (κ1 +κc ρ) , i1 = v1 (κ1 +κc ρ) , V1 = v1 (κ1 +κc ρ)

Region 2 (R2): (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |ρ > κ1 /κc , ρ > 4κc /κ1 and ρ > 1 Prosperity without
security
n






o
κ1 v1
v1
v1
1
1
1 √
In R2 the solution is: a1 = 2 1 + ρ , i1 = 2 1 − ρ , V1 = 2 1 + ρ
ρκ1

3
Region 3 (R3): (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R+ |2κc > κ1 and ρ < 4κc /κ1 Neither prosperity nor security
n

o

κ1 2
κ1
In R3 the solution is: a1 = v1 2 , i1 = 0, V1 = v1 1 + 4κc

Region 4 (R4): (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |κ1 > 2κc , ρ < κ1 /(κ1 − κc ) Security without prosperity
In R4 the solution is:

n

a1 = κc v1 , i1 = 0, V1 = v1 2 −

κc
κ1

o

.

Proof: See appendix.
The comparison of the solutions in Propositions 1 (with κc = 1) and 3 (with κc > 1)
is best appreciated in Figure 3 where the dashed lines show the partition of the parameter
space with κc = 1 and the solid lines show the partition with κc > 1, reflecting a more
aggressive challenger.
The comparative statics of κc are intuitive; a higher military capacity by the challenger
worsens outcomes in the following general sense. For any point in the (κ, ρ) space where either
security or prosperity (or both) were enjoyed, a higher κc implies that security, prosperity or
both may be lost. In other words, a higher κc expands the footprint of all regions against R1
where both security and prosperity obtain. In addition, R3 which combined insecurity and
stagnation, grows at the expense of all others. This means a world with a more aggressive
challenger is tougher on the incumbent.
Specifically, the historical victory of the “Sea Peoples” over the cities and kingdoms of
the Ancient Near East involved a shift from the security-prosperity quadrant of our map
(R1, or good parts of R2) to the conflict-stagnation quadrant (R3), as a result of positive
shocks to the value of the economic output to the challengers (an increase in h, in turn an
effect of a climatic change) or to the technology of attack (an increase in κc ).
We can use the model to delve deeper into the diverging fates of the different regions that
suffered the attacks of the Sea Peoples at the end of the Bronze Age. The extremes of that
contrast are Egypt, which managed to repel the invasion, and cities near the Mediterranean
coast of the Levant, like Ugarit, for which invasion resulted in irreversible destruction.
26

ρ

R2 (prosperity,
insecurity)

R1 (prosperity,
security)

A

R3 (no

2

prosperity,
insecurity)

B

C

1

R4 (no prosperity,
security)
κ1

2

Figure 3: Equilibrium partition of the parameter space with more aggressive challenger
Ugarit is a model case of Bronze Age collapse because, in addition to its political complexity and economic prosperity before the invasion, the archeological excavation found clay
tablets that survived the destruction to provide the most dramatic textual evidence on the
threat of the Sea Peoples as well as on the efforts to prepare against them, which eventually
proved futile. In the tablets, the king of Ugarit makes desperate requests to his Anatolian
overlord, who was using Ugarit’s maritime fleet to defend other sections of the Hittite empire. The tablets reveal that the attack was formidable and Ugarit was almost defenseless.16
Hence, the eventual destruction. In terms of our model, Ugarit’s vulnerability at the time
of the invasions can be interpreted as either an initial location within R1 that was close to
the vertex, and thereby not too far away from R3, or within a narrow strip along the R2/R3
border on the side of R2. When the shocks that prompted the invasion occurred—which,
16

Ammurapi, the King of Ugarit, makes a desperate plea to the Hittite overloard, whom he addresses as

his “father:” “My father, behold, the enemy’s ships came (here); my cities(?) were burned, and they did evil
things in my country. Does not my father know that all my troops and chariots(?) are in the Land of Hatti,
and all my ships are in the Land of Lukka?...Thus, the country is abandoned to itself. May my father know
it: the seven ships of the enemy that came here inflicted much damage upon us”. Letter RS 18.147 in Jean
Nougaryol et al. 1968. Ugaritica V, 24: 87–90.

27

as already seen, involved a redrawing of the borders of the regions—the effect was to push
Ugarit deep into R3. In the new location, Ugarit faced the prospects of attacks that were
too strong for the city to resist. In the model, a deep position in R3 (closer to the ρ axis)
entails a lower probability that the incumbent will prevail. In fact, for Ugarit, foreign attack
resulted in extinction.
Egypt was also a victim of barbarian attacks, and repeatedly so, but the outcome was very
different as Egypt managed to resist and survive. Since the end of the Second Intermediate
Period, Egypt had developed a military force of genuinely imperial strength, including a
highly professional army and a formidable fleet of ships with the most advanced equipment
at the time. Before the shock, Egypt was located deep in R1 so that the worst effect of
the shock could have been to relocate Egypt in a relatively safe neighborhood of R2. Egypt
became susceptible to challenges, but it could prevail in the battlefield with high probability.
Pictorial inscriptions on the walls of the Karnak Temple attest to the threats posed by the
Sea Peoples at roughly the same time they invaded the Levant. But, in contrast to Ugarit’s
tablets, the Egyptian inscriptions actually honor king Merneptah’s success in subduing the
invaders. The contrasting cases of Ugarit and Egypt correspond to the points A and B in
Figure 3.

5

Endogenous defense capability and the transition to
security and prosperity

5.1

Setup

We will now allow the incumbent to spend resources in one period to increase its defense
effectiveness in the next period. Let us now introduce a period zero, before the periods 1
and 2 that we have analyzed so far. Since the challenger will never fight in period 2, the
incumbent will never spend in expanding defense capability in period 1. Thus, the decision
to augment defense capability will be relevant only in period 0. We postulate that in period
0 the incumbent has a defense capability κ0 , and can spend an amount m0 that will take
defense capability in the next period to κ1 = κ0 + γm0 , where γ captures the purchasing
power of income in terms of defense means. We assume γ ∈ (0, 16/(4 + κ0 )) where the upper
bound is a technical assumption to guarantee the possibility of partial regime transitions.
To make things interesting, we assume κ0 , ρ are such that if things were left unchanged, in
period 1 the incumbent would find himself in region R3, which means he can expect disorder
28

and stagnation. In particular, we impose the following,
Assumption 1 ρκ0 < 4 and κ0 < 2.
All other aspects of the interaction between challenger and incumbent remain as before,
and for simplicity we return to the case where κc = 1.
Timing
In period 0, the incumbent starts by selecting m0 . Then, in each period t = 0, 1, 2 the
incumbent selects at and it .17 After observing (at , it ) the challenger selects bt . If bt = 0, the
players retain their positions in the next period. If bt > 0, then there is a war at the end of
period t. The winner of the war becomes the incumbent in the next period, and faces a new
challenger then.
Payoffs
The fact that there is a new type of expenditure changes the incumbent’s budget constraint to v0 − m0 − κa00 − i0 ≥ 0. And the fact that there is an extra period now implies that
a zero arming decision by the challenger in period 1 could open the challenger to vulnerability. So in this three-period model an additional assumption is that the challenger cannot
be eliminated.18 This matches the historical cases of settlers dealing with nomadic raiders,
who have vast steppes on which to run away from the forces of the civilized, settled, center.
As before, we solve the model through backward induction. The solution for periods 1
and 2 is given by our analysis in the previous section. That analysis tells us the expected
payoff for being an incumbent in period 1 is given by,


(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)


κ0 +γm0 +ρ


q


 (κ0 +γm0 ) (1+ρ)
ρ
2
V1 (i0 , m0 ) = (v0 + ρi0 ) ×

κ0 +γm0


1+ 4







 2− 1
κ0 +γm0
17

(κ0 + γm0 , ρ) ∈ R1
(κ0 + γm0 , ρ) ∈ R2

≡ (v0 + ρi0 )S(m0 )

(κ0 + γm0 , ρ) ∈ R3
(κ0 + γm0 , ρ) ∈ R4

The assumption that m0 is decided before a0 and i0 is just to simplify the exposition. It is equivalent

to assume that the incumbent selects all three variables simultaneously since the challenger does not move
until the incumbent has selected all of his actions. What is of course important is that the incumbent makes
his choices before the challenger.
18
An alternative assumption with the same effect is that if eliminated, the challenger is replaced with
another, identical, one. If the challenger can be definitively eliminated when selecting zero arming, then
it would not be an equilibrium for the challenger to desist from arming itself and deterrence would be
impossible.

29

Given this continuation value, we can solve for decisions in period 0. After the incumbent
has selected m0 , a0 and i0 , the challenger decides whether to arm himself. Using the same
logic as in the previous section, we see that the challenger’s best response function is given
by,

b0 (a0 , m0 , i0 ) =

p
 a0 V1 (i0 , m0 ) − a0

if a0 < V1 (i0 , m0 )

0

if a0 ≥ V1 (i0 , m0 )

This notation embeds the four regions over which V1 (i0 , m0 ) is defined into the calculus of
the challenger. Given this best response function, the incumbent has to choose a0 , i0 after it
chose m0 such that she maximizes her expected utility.
The incumbent maximizes,
max v0 − m0 −

a0 ,i0 ≥0

a0
a0
− i0 +
V1 (i0 , m0 )
κ0
a0 + b0 (a0 , i0 , m0 )

subject to

a0
− i0 ≥ 0 (BC)
κ0
(v0 + ρi0 )S(m0 ) − a0 ≥ 0 (DC)
v0 − m0 −

a0 ≥ 0
i0 ≥ 0
Notice this problem in period 1 is similar to the one with two periods in the previous
section, except now the continuation value depends explicitly on m0 (which is fixed at this
stage, given the convention that it was selected before a0 and i0 ) through S(m0 ). The
objective function is differentiable in a0 and i0 . As before, the first order and complementary
slackness conditions that characterize the optimum are given by
1
a0 :
2
ρ
i0 :
2

λBC (v0 − m0 −

r

s

(v0 + ρi0 ) S(m0 )
1
λBC
−
−
− λN D + λa = 0
a0
κ0
κ0

(14)

a0
− 1 − λBC + λN D ρS(m0 ) + λi = 0
(v0 + ρi0 ) S(m0 )

(15)

a0
− i0 ) = 0, λN D ((v0 + ρi0 )S(m0 ) − a0 ) = 0, λa a0 = 0, λi i0 = 0
κ0
30

(16)

As before, λBC , λN D are the Lagrange multipliers for the budget constraint and deterrence
constraints, and λa , λi are the multipliers for the non-negativity constraints for the control
variables. Again the infinite marginal utility of a0 at zero implies a0 > 0 and λa = 0, so
there are in principle eight possible cases depending on whether the remaining three Lagrange
multipliers are positive or zero. The following Lemma shows that, given our Assumption 1
there are only two feasible cases in period 0.
Lemma 1 If Assumption 1 holds, then in period 0 the incumbent chooses:
i) i0 = 0 and a0 =

κ20
v S(m0 )
4 0

v0 S(m0 )
< κ40 ; or
(v0 −m0 )
v0 S(m0 )
when (v
≥ κ40 .
0 −m0 )

when

ii) i0 = 0 and a0 = κ0 (v0 − m0 )
Proof: See Appendix.

Lemma 1 reveals that no productive investment occurs in period 0 and that the arming
effort depends on the value of m0 through its impact on the continuation payoff. With
this result, we are now equipped to study the incentives of the incumbent to make changes
in defense capability. We can trace how those changes will affect period 0 army decisions
for both incumbent and challenger, victory probabilities, and subsequent future investment,
army sizes, and security and prosperity outcomes.

5.2

Solution

Lemma 1 enables us to compute the incumbent’s present expected utility for any value of
m0 . The effect of m0 on the incumbent’s utility depends on the initial conditions in period
0. If the maximum utility is attained for extremely low m0 , then the incumbent will remain
stuck with insecurity and no prosperity (R3) in period 1. On the contrary, if the optimal
m0 is sufficiently high, security and prosperity will obtain in period 1. Notice, however,
that the path to prosperity (via investments in m0 ) depends on ρ–the return on productive
investment. In particular, when ρ < 2, the path to security and prosperity requires going
from R3 to R1 through R4, and when ρ ≥ 2, it requires going from R3 to R1 through R2
(see Figure 1). We analyze these cases in the following,
Proposition 4 (a)Under Assumption 1 and provided that ρ < 2, there exist cutoffs τL , τM
and τH , τL < τM < τH such that
1. If γv0 < τL , the polity stays in R3 (stagnation without security);
2. If τH < γv0 , the polity moves to R1 (attains security and prosperity); and
3. If τM < γv0 < τH , the polity moves to R4 (attains security without prosperity)
31

(b) Under Assumption 1 and provided that ρ ≥ 2, there exist cutoffs σL , σM 1 , σM 2 and
σH , σL < σM 1 < σH and σL < σM 2 < σH such that
1. If γv0 < σL , the polity stays in R3 (stagnation and conflict);
2. If σH < γv0 , the polity moves to R1 (attains security and prosperity); and
3. If σM 1 < γv0 < σM 2 , the polity moves to R2 (attains prosperity without security)
Proof: See Appendix.
The expression γv0 captures the extent to which initial income can be used to improve
defense capability. This proposition tells us that, given the initial military capacity κ0 and
the productivity of investment ρ, the transitions followed by the polity will be very different
depending on the initial income γv0 in terms of defense capability purchasing power. If γv0
is very low, the polity will remain trapped without security or prosperity. If γv0 lies in an
intermediate region, the polity can move into a region of partial achievement. If ρ < 2, the
transition is to R4 where it will attain peace but will not grow. The reason is that even
though it attains a higher defense capability κ1 in the next period, which gives the incumbent
the ability to fend off attacks at a lower cost, the benefit from consumption will still be higher
than the present value from investing. If ρ > 2, the “hybrid” transition is to R2 where it will
grow without attaining full security (this transition requires some restrictions on (κ0 , ρ)). If
γv0 is very high, however, the subsequent military capacity κ1 will allow the incumbent to
free resources for both a deterrent army and a large-scale investment at R1.
To summarize, while large enough initial income (or cheap enough defense capability)
guarantees security and prosperity through sufficient accumulation of defense capability,
intermediate levels may only allow to attain either security or prosperity. The Hobbesian
argument that security is a precondition for prosperity is qualified in this model. Baseline
prosperity can buy defense capability, and only then can the ensuing security promote more
prosperity.

6

Historical Illustration: Sumeria and the origin of civilization
The Fertile Crescent in Southwest Asia was the source of the first substantial economic

surplus in human evolution, in turn the result of a major innovation: domestication of plants
and animals for food production. The Fertile Crescent was a political pioneer as well. The

32

rudiments of large-scale political organization emerged in Southern Mesopotamia to form
the pristine city-states of Sumer and ultimately shape the first major civilization.
Like in Egypt, in Mesopotamia it was a fertile riverine valley, exceptionally endowed
for alluvial agriculture, that was the key for economic prosperity. The twin rivers Tigris
and Euphrates flooded the land and replenished nutrients by spreading silt. Also like in
Egypt, the natural advantages required systematic human effort to produce economic results.
Southern Mesopotamians made massive investments in the creation of the proper irrigation
infrastructure. The investments were made because of extraordinary returns. According to
Mann (1986: 78), “If [the alluvium] can be diverted onto a broad area of existing land, then
much higher crop yields can be expected. This is the significance of irrigation in the ancient
world: the spreading of water and silt over the land. Rain-watered soils gave lower yields”.
Liverani (2005, p. 5) offers an idea of the increase in yields that could be obtained through
judicious investments: “The agricultural production of barley underwent a notable, possibly
tenfold, increase thanks to the construction of water reservoirs and irrigation canals, of long
fields adjacent to the canals watered by them, and thanks to the use of the plow, of animal
power, of carts, of threshing sledges, of clay sickles, and of improved storage facilities”.
These high returns to productive investment help place Sumeria in the parameter space
of our model as a case of high ρ. But what about the other parameter, the effectiveness of
defense effort κ1 ?
In contrast to Egypt, geography did not afford the Sumerians natural protection against
attacks from outsiders. On the contrary, the natural landscape exposed Sumeria to numerous threats. As Bradford (1993: 4) puts it, “Their neighbors to the west, the Amorites,
nomads of the desert, infiltrated Mesopotamia... The neighbors to the east, who dwelled in
the mountains, were the Gutians and the Elamites. The Gutians and, to a lesser extent, the
Elamites considered Sumer and Akkad a treasurehouse to be raided ”. Finer (1997: 102) also
emphasized the porousness of the Sumerian frontiers.
In terms of our model, the vulnerability of Sumeria to invaders means that the effectiveness of defensive effort was low (low κ1 ). Given a low κ1 , Sumeria’s trajectory must
have begun in the conflict-stagnation region, R3. But if output was so insecure, how could
the first human civilization emerge at all? That is, how did Sumerians solve the problem
of protecting surpluses from nomadic raiders and encouraging investments in productive
infrastructure?
The extended model featuring endogenous defense capability provides an answer. Our
proposition 4 states that a polity that is initially in R3 due to a low military capability κ0 ,
33

may invest in defense capability in order to attain sufficient security against the challenger.
The key condition for this investment to be undertaken is for the polity to have enough
initial income v0 . The archaeological record suggests Sumeria was well placed to meet that
requirement. The availability of alluvial agriculture combined with an unparalleled initial
endowment of plant and animal domesticates furnished the entire Fertile Crescent with
exceptional advantages in food production. It is well known that due to altitude and climatic
variation, the Fertile Crescent hosted a wide variety of plants with high potential for food
production. The region had a wild flora with high yields of edible content, a high proportion
of hermaphroditic plants that were more amenable to experimentation and selection based
on yield, and a number of crops with high protein content. Diamond (1997: Ch. 8) highlights
that all eight founder crops in the Neolithic were present in the area (the wild ancestors of
einkorn, emmer wheat, flax, lentil, chick pea, pea, bitter vetch and barley). In addition, out
of the five most important domesticated animals, four were available in the Fertile Crescent,
namely pigs, cows, sheep and goats.19 Given the natural advantages, Diamond (1997: 135)
claims that “any attempt to understand the origins of the modern world must come to grips
with the question why the Fertile Crescent’s domesticate plants and animals gave it such a
potent head start”. In terms of our model, this combination of initial advantages can be
captured by a high v0 .
What is delicate about the role of the Fertile Crescent’s initial advantages is that a
high v0 can encourage predation by outside challengers. However, a high v0 could also help
finance the investments in defense that were needed to escape the conflict-stagnation trap
characterizing R3. It is by no means obvious that the “defense-financing” force should
dominate the predation force. This is a key tension investigated by our model, and the
model makes an unambiguous prediction: for v0 low enough, no escape from R3 is possible.
For v0 high enough, the incentive to finance defensive capabilities dominates. Under such
conditions, the investments in defense are made, and they bring enough security so as to
incentivize productive investments and economic progress. Figure 4 shows the comparison
of the cases of Egypt and Sumeria in terms of our parameter space (ρ, κ1 ): Egypt started
in a good region with relatively high levels of both parameters. Sumeria started with a low
19

According to Trigger (2003: 281), the productive advantage of domesticated animals was important, and

may help explain why Sumeria and Egypt were the first areas in the world to develop civilization: “Egypt
and Mesopotamia were the only early civilizations in our sample that supplemented human agricultural labour
with that of domestic animals. Oxen[and donkey-drawn ploughs were present form an early period. Draft
animals are estimated to have resulted in a 50 percent reduction in the human labour needed to grow grain,
and this permitted small groups of men to work large, monocropped fields.”

34

level of κ0 and it was through investments that it raised its defense capability to a higher κ1
that could deliver sufficient security.

ρ

R2 (prosperity,
insecurity)

Egypt

Sumeria

R1 (prosperity, security)

R3 (no

2 prosperity,

insecurity)

1

R4 (no prosperity, security)
κ1

2

Figure 4: The different parameters of Egypt and Sumeria
What is the evidence of defense capabilities that grew endogenously in Sumeria? The archaeological record offers evidence of large and generalized investments to improve defense in
the form of protective perimeter walls, which made Sumerian cities large-scale fortifications.
Figure 5 includes illustrations of a number of Sumerian cities. All of them had walls. In
fact, virtually every city in ancient history had walls. Walls were the endogenous, artificial
substitute for the missing natural protection that was present in Egypt where cities did not
have walls.
According to van de Mieroop’s (1997) study of Mesopotamian cities, “The inner cities
were also clearly distinguished by their defensive walls. Perhaps the presence of walls was
the main characteristic of a city in the eyes of an ancient Mesopotamian: all representations
of cities prominently display walls, many kings boast of their building or repairing city walls,
and even literary works sing their praise. A city without a wall might thus not have been
conceivable.”
The archaeological record substantiates not only the generalized presence of military
35

Ur

Eridu

Source: Hawkes, J. (1974, p. 171).

Uruk

The new general plan of Ur (drawn up by F. Ghio): 1: City
Wall. Source: Di Giacomo and Scardozzi (2012).

Nippur

Source: Gibson, McGuire (1993).

Source: J. Jordan (1931).

Figure 5: Plans of Sumerian cities

36

investments in rising city-states, but also their costliness, which would have been prohibitive
to societies with low initial productive capacity. Both walls and the often complementary
moats have been estimated to have required large investments of labor. The cost estimate
for the moat in the Babylonian city of Dur-Jakin is ten thousand men working for three and
a half months (Van de Mieroop, p. 76).

7

Conclusion
We present a model to investigate the dynamics of productive and defense capabilities

in a society where an incumbent seeks to consolidate power and grow the economy. The
components of the model are chosen by reference to the anthropological literature in order
to capture both relevant environmental parameters as well as the minimalistic strategic
environment facing proto-states at the point in in time where civilizations first arose. The
central tension facing societies attempting the civilizational transition is captured in the
notion of the civilizational paradox. A more prosperous society was worthy of attack, and
the resulting insecurity would weaken incentives to create prosperity in the first place. In
addition, states and civilizations arose together, and therefore stateness, defined as a high
degree of security, had to emerge in association with the prosperity that tended to undermine
it.
We construct a model to analyze the interplay between productive and defense capabilities
to account for the rise of civilizations that combine prosperity and stateness. The model
also helps evaluate claims about the relative role of security and prosperity that are central
to classic theories of state formation. We show that all four combinations for the presence
or absence of security and prosperity are possible, preventing simple characterizations of
security or prosperity being necessary or sufficient conditions for one another. These regimes
match various historical experiences of societies that attained neither, one, or both objectives.
In that basic model, higher initial income does not affect the resulting regime the society
is in, but tends to exacerbate conflict. In addition, the basic model helps consider how
exogenous shocks to productive and defense capabilities might affect the ability of a society
to attain security and prosperity. The key implication is that a balance between productive
and defense capabilities is important in order to prevent a security breakdown. History offers
examples of how naturally occurring high levels of productivity and defense, as in Egypt,
enabled the emergence of civilization. But it also offers examples of negative shocks that
destroyed civilizations, as in the end of the Bronze Age.
37

What the basic model cannot explain however is why Sumeria, together with Egypt the
other early center of civilization, could develop when it did not enjoy a high level of natural
defense. An answer is offered by the extension of the model to consider endogenous defense
capability. A naturally occurring high initial productivity, which exacerbated conflict in the
basic model, can now enable the transition into security with prosperity and resolve the
civilizational paradox. The key is that initial productivity be high in terms of its purchasing power over improvements in defense capability. The possibility of accumulating means
of defense helps create the conditions where productive investments can be made without
triggering predatory challenges. This result may also help rationalize historical experiences
where a temporary economic boom allows the state to consolidate its power and usher in a
phase of more sustained growth. Isolating formally the pivotal role of defense capability to
the civilizational process contributes to the demanding enterprise of discerning how economic
shocks can hinder or help state formation and political stability more generally.

8

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1: This is a particular case of the model with κc 6= 1, which is

studied in Proposition 3.
Proof of Proposition 2: That a1 increases in v1 in all regimes follows directly from
inspection of the solution for a1 in each regime in Proposition 1. To see that whenever
positive b1 also increases in v1 , take the value of b1 from the best response expression (4),
and substitute in the values of i1 , a1 in regions R2 and R3. This yields respectively,
(s 



)
κ1
1
κ1 − 1
κ1
1
b1,R2 = v1
1+
1+ρ
−
1+
2
ρ
κ1 + ρ
2
ρ
o
κ  n
κ1
1
b1,R3 = v1
1−
2
2
which are both positive and increasing in v1 .
Proof of Proposition 3: The problem is to maximize,
a1
a1
− i1 +
(v1 + ρi1 )
κ1
a1 + b 1
a1
+λBC (v1 −
− i1 ) + λDC (κc v1 − a1 + κc ρi1 ) + λa a1 + λi i1 .
κ1

= v1 −

(17)

We will characterize the solution (a1 , i1 , λBC , λDC , λa , λi ) to this problem for each parameter
combination (ρ, κ1 , κc , v1 ) given κ1 > κc .
38

The first order and complementary slackness conditions that characterize the optimum
are given by,

∂
1
= √
∂a1
2 κc

r

∂
ρ
= √
∂i1
2 κc

r

v1 + ρi1
1
λBC
−
−
− λDC + λa = 0; a1 ≥ 0, λa ≥ 0, λa a1 = 0 c.s.
a1
κ1
κ1

(18)

a1
− 1 − λBC + λDC κc ρ + λi = 0; i1 ≥ 0, λi ≥ 0, λi i1 = 0 c.s.
v1 + ρi1

(19)

a1
− i1 ) = 0 c.s., λDC (κc v1 − a1 + κc ρi1 ) = 0 c.s.
(20)
κ1
Given that λa = 0, we have eight possible cases given by whether the three remaining
λBC (v1 −

Lagrange multipliers λBC , λDC , and λi are zero or positive. We analyze each one of them.
The general approach will be to assume in each case that the conditions defining it hold,
and then determine which part if any of the parameter space {(κ1 , κc , ρ, v1 )|κ1 , κc , ρ, v1 ≥ 0}
can support a solution given the case’s conditions. When the case implies conditions for
the parameters that are mutually exclusive, the case will be deemed infeasible. When the
case implies that the solution can be supported for combinations of the parameter values
with measure zero we consider the case to be non-generic and also drop it from further
consideration. The four regions detailed in the proposition hold for parametric areas with
positive measure.
1. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC > 0 (DC binds, consolidation), and λi = 0
(i1 > 0)
Since a1 is always positive, and in this case i1 is also positive, the FOCs in (18), (12)
must hold with equality. Because this case involves binding BC and DC constraints, they
also hold with equality. This is,
a1 :
i1 :
DC :
BC :

r
1
1
1
λBC
−
−
− λDC = 0
√
2 κc κc κ1
κ1
ρ √
κc − 1 − λBC + λDC ρκc = 0
√
2 κc
κc v1 − a1 + κc ρi1 = 0
a1
− i1 = 0,
v1 −
κ1

implying that investment and army are,

39

(κ1 − κc )
(κ1 + κc ρ)
κ1 κc (1 + ρ)
= v1
(κ1 + κc ρ)

i1 = v1

(21)

a1

(22)

As a result λi = 0 (or i1 > 0) is supported by κ1 > κc . After some algebra (using the
FOCs) we find that λDC > 0 ⇔ κ1 > ρκc and λBC > 0 ⇔ ρ > κ1 /(κ1 − κc ). Therefore the
parameter set supporting this solution to the incumbent’s problem in period 1 is given by,

R1 = (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |ρ < κ1 /κc , ρ > κ1 /(κ1 − κc ), κ1 > κc ,
and in this area there is investment and deterrence. The expected utility in period 1 is
computed by substituting the solutions into the Lagrangian. In this first case expected
utility is,
V1 = v1

κ1 (1 + ρ)
.
(κ1 + κc ρ)

2. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC = 0 (DC does not bind, conflict),and λi = 0
(i > 0)
Again we check the first order and complementary slackness conditions to see for which
parameter set this case contains the solution. The relevant conditions are,

r
1
1
λBC
v1 + ρi1
a1 : √
−
−
=0
2 κc
a1
κ1
κ1
r
ρ
a1
i1 : √
− 1 − λBC = 0
2 κc v1 + ρi1
a1
BC : v1 −
− i1 = 0
κ1
Investment and army solutions are respectively given by,


1
v1
1−
i1 =
2
ρ


κ1 v1
1
a1 =
1+
.
2
ρ
This solution is respectively consistent with λDC = 0 (DC holds with strict inequality) and
λi = 0 ⇔ ρ >

κ1
κc

and ρ > 1. The solution is consistent with λBC > 0 ⇔ ρ ≥

40

4κc
κ1

(this

comes from checking the conditions such that λBC > 0 in the two FOCs). As a result, the
parameter set supporting this second case is,

R2 = (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |ρ > κ1 /κc , ρ > 4κc /κ1 .
Expected utility for the incumbent in this case is,
v1
V1 =
2



1 √
1+
ρκ1
ρ

3. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind), λDC = 0 (DC does not bind, conflict),
and λi = 0 (i1 > 0)
Non-generic, since it is consistent for subset of the space (ρ, κ1 , v1 ) that has measure zero.
This follows from (18) and (12), so when λBC , λDC , λi = 0
r
1
1
v1 + ρi1
a1 : √
−
=0
2 κc
a1
κ1
r
ρ
a1
i1 : √
− 1 = 0.
2 κc v1 + ρi1
q
√
2 κc
v1 +ρi1
The first FOC implies
=
and substituting into the second FOC, we get
a1
κ1
ρ
κ1
√
√
2 κc 2 κc

= 1 or

ρκ1
4κc

= 1, which implies this holds for a non-generic parameter set.

4. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind), λDC > 0 (DC binds, consolidation), and
λi = 0 (i1 > 0)
The FOCs are,
a1
i1

r
1
v1 + ρi1
1
: √
−
− λDC = 0
2 κc
a1
κ1
r
a1
ρ
: √
− 1 + κc ρλDC = 0,
2 κc v1 + ρi1

where a1 = κc (v1 + ρi1 ) indicating that λDC must simultaneously equal
which forces the equality ρ =

κ1
,
κc

1
2κc

− κ11 and

( ρ2 −1)
κc ρ

,

which is non-generic.

5. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC > 0 (DC binds, deterrence), and λi > 0
(i1 = 0)
Because i1 = 0, BC binding implies that a1 = κ1 v1 , but DC binding implies that a1 =
κc v1 , so κ1 = κc which is non-generic given the assumption κ1 ≥ κc .
6. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC = 0 (DC does not bind, conflict), and λi > 0
(i1 = 0)
41

The BC binding and i1 = 0 yield a1 = v1 κ1 . The DC not binding implies v1 κc − v1 κ1 >
0 ⇔ κc > κ1 which violates the assumption κ1 > κc , making this case infeasible.
7. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind), λDC = 0 (DC does not bind, conflict),
and λi > 0 (i1 = 0)
In this case a1 = v1 κ21 /(4κc ) and i1 = 0. This solution is consistent with λBC = 0 and
λDC = 0 ⇔ κ1 < 2κc . Also for λi > 0 we need 1− ρκ1 /(4κc ) > 0 (from the FOC of i1 ). Thus,
this holds for any triple (ρ, κ1 , v1 ) ∈ R3+ such that κ1 < 2κc and ρ < 4κc /κ1 . In other words,
the parameter set for which this region contains the solution to the incumbent’s problem is

R3 = (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |2κc ≥ κ1 , ρ < 4κc /κ1 .
Expected utility in this case is given by,

V1 = v1

κ1
1+
4κc


.

8. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind), λDC > 0 (DC binds, consolidation),and
λi > 0 (i1 = 0)
In this case the system of conditions is given by,

1
1
−
− λDC = 0
2κc κ1
ρ
− 1 + λDC ρκc + λi = 0
i1 :
2
BC : κc v1 − a1 = 0.
a1 :

Since i1 = 0, the DC yields a1 = κc v1 . For this to be consistent with λDC > 0, we
must have from the first equation that κ1 > 2κc , and to be consistent with λi > 0 we need
ρ < κ1 /(κ1 − κc ), yielding,

R4 = (κ1 , ρ, v1 ) ∈ R3+ |κ1 > 2κc , ρ < κ1 /(κ1 − κc ) .
The expected utility in this case is,


κc
V1 = v1 2 −
.
κ1

Proof of Lemma 1:

42

There are two cases that constitute a solution out of eight possible ones. We will show
that the assumption 1 implies that the first case holds when
holds when

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

>

4
.
κ0

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

<

4
κ0

and the second case

The remaining six cases can be shown to be either inconsistent

with any set of parameter values or consistent only with a non-generic set.
1. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind), λN D = 0 (DC does not bind, conflict),
and λi > 0 (i0 = 0)
The FOCs are,
1
a0 :
2
ρ
i0 :
2

s

r

v0 S(m0 )
1
−
=0
a0
κ0

(23)

a0
− 1 + λi = 0
v0 S(m0 )

(24)

This implies,
a0 =

κ20
v0 S(m0 )
4

ρκ0
4
The necessary and sufficient conditions for this case to hold are,
λi = 1 −

v0 S(m0 )
4
<
(from the BC not binding)
v0 − m0
κ0
κ2
= 0 ⇔ 1 > 0 ⇔ κ0 < 2 (from the DC not binding)
4
ρκ0
4
> 0⇔1−
>0⇔ρ<
(from the FOC for i0 )
4
κ0

λBC = 0 ⇔
λDC
λi

The first inequality holds for values of m0 low enough given κ0 < 2, and the second and
third hold by assumption 1.
2. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC = 0 (DC does not bind, conflict), and λi > 0
(i0 = 0)
The FOCs are,
1
a0 :
2
ρ
i0 =
2

s

r

v0 S(m0 )
1
λBC
−
−
=0
a0
κ0
κ0

(25)

a0
− 1 − λBC + λi = 0
v0 S(m0 )

(26)

43

λBC > 0 implies κ0 (v0 − m0 ) = a0 .
From the FOCs, we obtain,

λBC =
κ0
λi =
2

s

κ0
2

s

v0 S(m0 )
−1
a0

v0 S(m0 ) ρ
−
a0
2

r

a0
.
v0 S(m0 )

The parameter conditions for this to be a solution are,
s
κ0 v0 S(m0 )
v0 S(m0 )
4
λBC =
−1>0⇔
>
2
a0
v0 − m0
κ0
v0 S(m0 )
>1
λDC = 0 ⇔
κ0 (v0 − m0 )
s
s
κ0
v0 S(m0 )
ρ κ0 (v0 − m0 )
v0 S(m0 )
λi =
−
>0⇔
> 1.
2 κ0 (v0 − m0 ) 2
v0 S(m0 )
ρ(v0 − m0 )
The inequalities
v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

>

v0 S(m0 )
κ0 (v0 −m0 )

> 1 and

v0 S(m0 )
ρ(v0 −m0 )

> 1 are both implied by the condition

4
.
κ0

We now cover the cases that are inconsistent with any set of parameter values or consistent
with only a non-generic set.
3. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC > 0 (DC binds), and λi = 0
If λDC > 0 then
(v0 + ρi0 )S(m0 ) = a0 ,
FOC
κ0
− 1 − λBC − λDC κ0 = 0
2

(27)

ρ
− 1 − λBC + λDC ρS(m0 ) = 0
2

(28)

If λBC > 0 then
a0
− i0 = 0
κ0
We have four equations and four unknowns. Therefore
v0 − m0 −

44

λDC

ρ
=
2

λBC

i0 =

a0 =

1
=
2




κ0 − ρ
κ0 + ρS(m0 )

κ0 + κ0 S(m0 )
κ0 + ρS(m0 )




−1

v0 κ0 − m0 κ0 − v0 S(m0 )
κ0 + ρS(m0 )

v0 κ0 (1 + ρ) − ρm0 κ0
κ0 + ρS(m0 )


S(m0 )

We need to establish the conditions on the parameters and m0 such that those parameters
support this equilibrium.
λDC

λBC

ρκ0
=
2



1
=
2



κ0 − ρ
κ0 + ρS(m0 )

1 + S(m0 )
κ0 + ρS(m0 )


> 0 ⇐⇒ κ0 > ρ


− 1 > 0 ⇐⇒ ρ >

⇐⇒ S(m0 )

2κ0
κ0 (1 + S(m0 )) − 2S(m0 )

 κ
κ0
0
−1 >
− .
2
ρ
2

κ

0

The LHS of this inequality is positive since from above λDC > 0 ⇐⇒ κ0 > ρ and by
assumption κ0 < 2. This last assumption also implies the RHS is negative, so the inequality
can never hold and this case can never occur.
4. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC = 0 (DC does not bind, conflict), and λi = 0
(i0 > 0)
FOC
κ0
2
ρ
2

s

r

(v0 + ρi0 ) S(m0 )
− 1 − λBC = 0
a0

a0
− 1 − λBC = 0
(v0 + ρi0 ) S(m0 )

If λBC > 0 then
v0 − m0 −

45

a0
= i0
κ0

κ0
(v0 + ρi0 ) S(m0 )

 ρ
S(m )
v0 1− ρ 0 −m0

Equating the two FOCs after solving for λBC yields

= a0 , and using

which then yields a0 =
this into the investment equation above we get i0 =
1+S(m0 )


v
+ρ(v
−m
)
κ0
0
0
0
S(m0 ) > 0.Using these expressions for a0 and i0 we can write,
ρ
1+S(m0 )

λBC

v



u
S(m )
v0 1− ρ 0 −m0
u
S(m0 )
u v0 + ρ
1+S(m0 )
κ0 u
1√


= t
−1=
κ0 ρ − 1.
v0 +ρ(v0 −m0 )
κ0
2
2
S(m )
ρ

Since λBC > 0, it follows that

0

1+S(m0 )

√
κ0 ρ > 2, or κ0 ρ > 4, which violates the assumption placing

the polity in R3.
5. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind), λDC = 0 (DC does not bind), and λi = 0
(i0 > 0)
The FOCs are,
κ0
a0 :
2
ρ
i0 :
2
The first FOC yields

q

s

r

(v0 +ρi0 )S(m0 )
a0

(v0 + ρi0 ) S(m0 )
−1=0
a0

(29)

a0
− 1 = 0.
(v0 + ρi0 ) S(m0 )

(30)

=

2
,
κ0

and substituting into the second FOC we get
ρκ0 = 4

which violates the assumption ρκ0 < 4, making this an infeasible case.
6. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind, λDC > 0 (DC binds, deterrence), and
λi = 0 (i0 > 0)
The FOCs are,
1
1
−
− λDC = 0
2 κ0
ρ
:
− 1 + λDC ρS(m0 ) = 0.
2

a0 :
i0
From the first FOC, λDC =

1
2

−

1
κ0

and substituting into the second FOC we get,

S(m0 ) =

1
− 21
ρ
1
− κ10
2

.

Now we show this cannot hold. S(m0 ) is increasing in m0 . The lowest it can be is when
staying in R3, yielding S(m0 ) = 1 +

κ0
.
4

We show that
46

1
− 12
ρ
1
− κ1
2
0

< 1+

κ0
,
4

implying the

equality S(m0 ) =
3κ0
4

−1 <

κ0
.
ρ

If

3κ0
4

equality S(m0 ) =

1
− 12
ρ
1
− κ1
2
0

can never hold. This will require

− 1 < 0, then the inequality

1
− 12
ρ
1
− κ1
2
0

3κ0
4

impossible. If

3κ0
4

−1 <

1
− 12
ρ
1
− κ1
2
0
κ0

ρ



= κ0 1 − ρ1 < 1 +

κ0
,
4

or

must always hold, making the

− 1 > 0, then we need ρ <

κ0
3κ0
−1
4

. The RHS of this

last inequality is decreasing in κ0 , hence it attains its lowest value at the highest permissible
value of κ0 keeping
ρ<

κ0
3κ0
−1
4

3κ0
4

we get,ρ <

− 1 > 0. This value is 2. Substituting that value into the RHS of
2

3
−1
2

= 4. Now because in this case κ0 = 2 and by assumption ρκ0 < 4,

then ρ < 2, guaranteeing that ρ < 4 and the equality S(m0 ) =
this case infeasible.

1
− 12
ρ
1
− κ1
2
0

is impossible, randering

7. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λDC > 0 (DC binds, deterrence), and λi > 0
(i0 = 0)
The FOCs are,
1
1
λBC
−
−
− λDC = 0
2 κ0
κ0

(31)

ρ
− 1 − λBC + λDC ρS(m0 ) = 0
2

(32)

a0 :

i0 :

a0
= 0, v0 S(m0 ) − a0 = 0.
κ0

v0 − m0 −

(33)


Using λDC =

ρ
−1+λDC ρS(m0 ),
2

1
− κ10 − λκBC
2
0

For λBC > 0 we need

ρ
2

into λBC =
we obtain λBC =


− 1 + 21 − κ10 ρS(m0 ) > 0 or,
1
− ρ1
2
1
− 12
κ0

1
− 12
ρ
1
− κ1
2
0

=

1
− ρ1
2
1
− 12
κ0



1
− κ1 ρS(m0 )
2
0
1+ κ1 ρS(m0 )
0

.

> S(m0 ),

which can never happen. We established that S(m0 ) >
case, and since

ρ
−1+
2

1
− 12
ρ
1
− κ1
2
0

when analyzing the previous

, the inequality can never hold.

8. Case λBC = 0 (BC does not bind), λDC > 0 (DC binds, deterrence), and
λi > 0 (i0 = 0)
1
1
−
− λDC = 0
2 κ0

(34)

ρ
− 1 + λDC ρS(m0 ) + λi = 0
2

(35)

a0
> 0, v0 S(m0 ) = a0
κ0

(36)

a0 :

i0 :

v0 − m0 −

47

From the first FOC,
1
1
−
>0
2 κ0
which cannot happen because it requires κ0 > 2, which violates the assumption κ0 < 2.
λDC =


Proof of Proposition 4: The way to analyze whether the incumbent is interested in
raising m0 to exit R3 is to analyze the expected utility of doing so. This requires utilizing
the function S (m0 ) that corresponds to the parametric region where the polity will land
in period 1. However, matters are complicated by the presence of two potential cases in
period 0 as per Lemma 1, depending on whether

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

<

4
,
κ0

or

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

>

4
.
κ0

These

inequalities show that which case should be considered to be in play in period 0–which will
affect incentives to raise m0 –depends on S (m0 ), which depends on what parametric region
the polity will land on in period 1, which in turn depends on whether the incentives are
present to make the necessary investments in the first place. Therefore this proof proceeds
by checking which combinations of cases in period 0 can obtain for the different possible
plans to expand military capacity and land in each of the possible alternative parametric
regions in period 1.
The first step to this analysis is to compute the expected utility in period t = 0 for each
m0 fixing all the other parameters for the two cases highlighted in Lemma 1:
1. Case λBC = 0 (BC not binding), λN D = 0 (DC not binding, conflict), and
λi > 0 (i0 = 0)
The proof to Lemma 1 showed that in this case the Lagrange multiplier conditions defining
the case respectively imply

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

<

4
,
κ0

κ0 < 2, and ρ <

4
,
κ0

and expected utility is,

κ0
v0 S(m0 ).
4
= 0 (DC not binding, conflict) and λi > 0

EU = v0 − m0 +
2. Case λBC > 0 (BC binds), λN D
(i0 = 0)
The Lagrange multiplier conditions imply,

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

>

4
0)
, vv00S(m
κ0
−m0

> κ0 ,

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

> ρ, and

expected utility is,
EU =

p
κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 S(m0 ).

The second step is to note that there are critical values of investment in military capacity
that shift the regimes the polity is in both in period 0 and period 1. Denote with m̄ the
48

value of m0 that satisfies

v0 S(m̄)
v0 −m̄

=

4
κ0

and which makes the polity switch from case 1 to case

2 in Lemma 1 in period 0.
Part (a) (ρ < 2):
Denote with mR3|R4 and mR4|R1 the values of m0 such that regimes changein period1
ρ
0
from R3 to R4 and from R4 to R1 respectively: mR3|R4 = 2−κ
and mR4|R1 = γ1 ρ−1
− κ0 ,
γ
mR3|R4 < mR4|R1 . Because m̄ is an implicit function of S(.), we need to compute the
conditions on the parameters when m̄ lies below and above mR3|R4 and above mR4|R1 . The
reason it is important to know where m̄ lies relative to mR3|R4 and mR4|R1 is that it will
indicate which expected utility expression to use to evaluate choices of m0 . If, for example,
m̄ > mR4|R1 then we know the payoff from choosing an m0 that keeps the polity in R3, moves
it to R4 or an early part of R1 can be evaluated with a single expected utility expression,
namely that in case 1 from Lemma 1.
Before proving part (a) of Proposition 4 we need a technical result. The following lemma
establishes the conditions of the parameters that determine the value of m̄ relative to mR3|R4
and mR4|R1 .
Lemma 2 Under assumption 1,
i) If 0 < γv0 <
ii) If
ii) If

8(2−κ0 )
8−3κ0

< γv0 <

ρ
−κ0
ρ−1
(1+ρ)
4
−
κ0
ρ

4
κ0

8(2−κ0 )
,
8−3κ0

(

then m̄ < mR3|R4 .
ρ
−κ0 )
( ρ−1
(1+ρ) , then mR3|R4 < m̄ < mR4|R1
4

4
κ0

κ0

)

−

ρ

< γv0 , then mR4|R1 < m̄

Proof. To determine whether m̄ lies within [0, mR3|R4 ], [mR3|R4 , mR4|R1 ] or [mR4|R1 , ∞]
first notice that

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

is increasing in m0 . Therefore, the conditions on the parameters for

each of these cases to hold are:
For m̄ < mR3|R4

This is the case if

For mR3|R4 < m̄ < mR4|R1

v0 S(mR3|R4 )
v0 −mR3|R4

>

4
κ0

⇐⇒ v0 γ <

κ0

−

8(2−κ0 )
<
8−3κ0
v0 S(mR4|R1 )
4
> κ0 ,
v0 −mR4|R1

From above mR3|R4 < m̄ ⇐⇒

to find the condition for m̄ < mR4|R1 . This requires
4
( ρ −κ0 )
v0 γ < κ0 4 ρ−1(1+ρ) . Therefore, this case occurs when
ρ

8(2 − κ0 )
< v0 γ <
8 − 3κ0

49

4
κ0

8(2−κ0 )
.
8−3κ0



ρ
ρ−1

4
κ0

−

− κ0
(1+ρ)
ρ



v0 γ. Now we need
and this follows iff

For mR4|R1 < m̄ It follows directly from before
4
κ0



ρ
ρ−1

4
κ0

−

− κ0


< v0 γ

(1+ρ)
ρ


Due to this lemma, we know how to write expected utility depending on the value of γv0 ,
given all other parameters.
Part (a)1: We only need to find a cutoff in the space of possible values for γv0 such that
the incumbent prefers to stay in R3. We propose τL ≡
In this case, v0 γ <

8(2−κ0 )
8−3κ0

8(2−κ0 )
.
8−3κ0

is equivalent to a regime described by m̄ < mR3|R4 , which

means whe have to use two different EU expressions depending on whether m0 < m̄, or
m0 > m̄. Let us analyze the expected utility in each of these situations. A useful fact will be
that

8(2−κ0 )
8−3κ0

In this case

is strictly decreasing in κ0 so its maximum value is at κ0 = 1 (since κ0 > κc = 1).
8(2−1)
8−3×1

=

8
5

< 2.

Segment [0, m̄] Expected utility in period t = 0 is
EU = v0 − m0 +

v0 γ
m0 κ016
−1

κ0
v S(m0 )
4 0

Since m̄ < mR3|R4
v0 γ =

8(2−κ0 )
8−3κ0

in

κ0 v0 γ
16

so

⇐⇒
κ0 v0 γ
16

= v0 − m0 +

v0 γ <
=

κ0



8(2−κ0 )
8−3κ
0


8(2−κ0 )
8−3κ0

16

≤

κ0
v
4 0

1+

then

κ0 v0 γ
16

κ0 85
16

κ0 +γm0
4



= v0 (1 +

κ0
4

+


κ0 2
)
4

+

− 1 < 0. To see why, replace

< 1. This implies EU is decreasing in m0

and the optimal choice is m0 = 0.
Segment [m̄, mR3|R4 ] Expected utility
q in period t = 0 is
p
EU = κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 S(m0 ) = κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 1 +
to decrease in m0 . Note,

dEU
1
=
κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 1 +
dm
2
dEU
dm

< 0 ⇐⇒

γ
κ
4 0

κ0 +γm0
4

κ0 +γm0
4



, and we now show this

− 12

(v0 − m0 ) v0 < κ0 v0

 γ

0
−κ0 v0 1 + κ0 +γm
+
κ
(v
−
m
)
v
and,
0
0
0
0
4
4

κ0 +γm0
1+ 4
, or, iff γv0 < 4 + κ0 + 2γm0 .

0)
If 4 + κ0 + 2γm0 is higher than 8(2−κ
, our condition to be in this scenario m̄ <
8−3κ0


0)
mR3|R4 ⇐⇒ v0 γ < 8(2−κ
is a suficient condition for EU in this segment to be de8−3κ0

creasing. So, it is sufficient to show that 4 + κ0 + 2γm0 >

8(2−κ0 )
.
8−3κ0

Because the right

hand side is decreasing in κ0 , it attains a maximum at κ0 = 1 and it is equal to 8/5
which is smaller than any feasible value of the expression in the left hand side, which
is at least 4. Therefore, in this segment utility is maximized at m0 = m̄, and equals
p
p
EU = κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 S(m0 ) = 4(v0 − m̄)2 = 2 (v0 − m̄).
50

Segment [mR3|R4 , mR4|R1 ] Since now m0 can only be larger
expected
r than m̄, we know


p
1
utility is κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 S (m0 ). In R4, we have EU = κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 2 − κ0 +γm
.
0
Computing the first derivative with respect to m0 , we get,
dEU
=
dm0




κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0

1
2−
κ0 + γm0

− 12 


−κ0 v0 2 −

1
κ0 + γm0



κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 γ
+
(κ0 + γm0 )2



0 )γ
, or, 2 (κ0 + γm0 )2 − κ0 > v0 γ. Note
which is negative whenever 2 (κ0 + γm0 ) − 1 > (vκ00−m
+γm0
2
0)
2 κ0 + γmR3|R4 − κ0 = 8 − κ0 . Now note 8 − κ0 > 8(2−κ
≡ τL , since the LHS is at least
8−3κ0

6 and the RHS is at most 85 . Thus,

dEU
dm0

< 0 and utility would be maximized at mR3|R4 in

this segment.
q
0 )(1+ρ)
and
Segment [mR4|R1 , ∞] Here, EU = κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 (κ0κ+γm
0 +γm0 +ρ
!
(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)
− 21

−κ
v
0 0 κ0 +γm0 +ρ
dEU
0 )(1+ρ)
= κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0 (κ0κ+γm
.
γ(1+ρ)(κ0 +γm0 +ρ)−(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)γ
dm0
0 +γm0 +ρ
+κ0 (v0 − m0 ) v0
2
(κ +γm +ρ)
0

Note

dEU
dm0

< 0 whenever γv0 <

(κ0 +γm0 +ρ)(κ0 +γm0 )
ρ

0

+ γm0 . The right hand side of this

expression is increasing in m0 , so the minimum is attained at m0 = mR4|R1 and it equals
ρ
(ρ−1)2

ρ
+ 2 (ρ−1)
− κ0 . The highest possible value of γv0 , τL =

in turn, is always smaller than

ρ
(ρ−1)2

8(2−κ0 )
8−3κ0

is smaller than

8
5

which,

ρ
+ 2 (ρ−1)
− κ0 given that ρ < 2. Therefore the maximum

of EU in this segment is attained at m0 = mR4|R1 .
Considering all of the segments together, we now show that the global maximum in
this case is m0 = 0. This follows from the just demonstrated fact that the maximum
within each segment of the support is at the minimum value, and from the fact that EU
is continuous. S(.) is continuous for all m0 and EU in period t = 0 is also continuous at
m̄. In t = 0, in segment [0, m̄] EU evaluated at m̄ is 2(v0 − m̄) which is equal to the EU in
segment [m̄, mR3|R4 ] evaluated at m̄. This can be shown noticing that

κ0 v0 S(m̄)
4

= v0 − m̄,

and reeplacing in EU in segment [0, m̄]. Thus, the polity will stay at R3 in period 1.
Part (a)(2-3) For these parts of Proposition 4 (the existence of cutoffs such that the polity
4
( ρ −κ0 )
will move away from R3 in period 1), we consider the case in which κ0 4 ρ−1(1+ρ) < v0 γ (as we
κ0

−

ρ

only need to focus on a sufficient condition for the polity to exit R3 and move respectively
into R4 or R1). In this case mR4|R1 < m̄ by Lemma 2. We proceed by analyzing the
optimal decision of m0 under the different segments of the domain of m0 :
Segment [0, mR3|R4 ] Expected utility in period t = 0 is

51



κ0
κ0 2
0
EU = v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 S(m0 ) = v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 1 + κ0 +γm
=
v
(1
+
)+
+
0
4
4
4
ρ
4

−κ
(
)
0
v0 γ
m0 κ016
− 1 . In this case, κ0 4 ρ−1(1+ρ) > κ160 does not always hold under Assumption 1, so
κ0

−

ρ

marginal utility is not necessarily positive. Therefore,
 4 ρ a sufficient
 condition for the polity to
−κ
(
)
0
exit R3 is that γv0 be higher than τM ≡ max κ0 4 ρ−1(1+ρ) , κ160 . Next, we show that it may
κ0

−

ρ

either stay in R4 or move to R1.
Segment [mR3|R4 , mR4|R1 ] Expected utility in period t = 0 is EU = v0 −m0 + κ40 v0 S(m0 ) =


4
( ρ −κ0 )
κ0
1
v0 − m0 + 4 v0 2 − κ0 +γm0 (recall that since κ0 4 ρ−1(1+ρ) < v0 γ, m̄ > mR4|R1 , so in the
κ0

−

ρ

interval [mR3|R4 , mR4|R1 ] we are considering m0 < m̄).
γ
The marginal utility of m0 is: −1 + κ04v0 (κ0 +γm
2 . The value of m0 that maximizes EU
0)

p κ0 v0 γ
1
is m0 = γ
− κ0 . For the optimum to fall in the segment [mR3|R4 , mR4|R1 ] we need,
4

in addition to γv0 > τM , that,
mR3|R4

The first inequality requires

1
<
γ

2
0)
4 (2−κ
κ0

r

κ0 v0 γ
− κ0
4


< mR4|R1 ,


< v0 γ. Since τM ≡ max

2

4
κ0

ρ
−κ0 )
( ρ−1

(1+ρ)
4
− ρ
κ0

,

16
κ0


and

16
κ0

>

0)
4 (2−κ
, a sufficient condition for the first inequality is that v0 γ > τM . The second inequality
κ0
 2
 2
ρ
ρ
. Note that κ40 ρ−1
> τM (because simple algebra shows that
requires v0 γ < κ40 ρ−1
 2
 2
 2
ρ
4
−κ0 )
κ0 ( ρ−1
ρ
ρ
ρ
4
16
4
4
>
>
).
Defining
τ
≡
,
and
, we conclude that
H
(1+ρ)
4
κ0
ρ−1
κ0
κ0
ρ−1
ρ−1
κ0
κ0

−

ρ

whenever τM < γv0 < τH the polity reaches R4. If τH < γv0 then the polity must reach
R1. Now we explore if it is possible to move into the interior of R1.
Segment [mR4|R1 , m̄] Expected utility is EU = v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 S(m0 ) = v0 − m0 +
!
p κ0 v0 γ


ρ(1
+
ρ)
(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)
κ0
4
v
. This is a concave function with a maximum at m0 = γ1
.
4 0
κ0 +γm0 +ρ
−κ0 − ρ
 2
ρ
4
Note if γv0 > τH = ρ−1
then that maximum is an interior optimum and larger than
κ0
p κ0 v0 γ
R4|R1. To see this, rewrite the inequality m0 > R4|R1 as
ρ(1 + ρ) − κ0 − ρ >
4
ρ
ρ−1

− κ0 then plug τH into the LHSto obtain 1 + ρ > ρ, which always holds. Therefore for

γv0 > τH the polity will be in the interior of R1 in period 1.
Part (b) (ρ ≥ 2): As in the proof of part (a), m̄ satisfies the equation:

v0 S(m̄)
v0 −m̄

=

4
,
κ0

and

represents the value of m0 at which the polity switches from case 1 to case 2 from Lemma 1
in period 0.

52

Let us call mR3|R2 =

1
γ



4
ρ

− κ0



and mR2|R1 =

1
γ

(ρ − κ0 ) the values in which regimes

change in period 1. The following lemma shows the conditions on the parameters such that
for any given m0 we can fully describe the EU in period 0.
Lemma 3 Under assumption 1,
i) If 0 < γv0 <
ii) If
ii) If

16−4κ0 ρ
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0

then m̄ < mR3|R2

8(ρ−κ0 )
16−4κ0 ρ
< γv0 < 8−(1+ρ)κ
then mR3|R2
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0
0
8(ρ−κ0 )
< γv0 then mR2|R1 < m̄
8−(1+ρ)κ0

Proof.

< m̄ < mR2|R1

It follows from replacing the definitions of m̄, mR3|R2 , mR2|R1 and following

steps analogous to Lemma 2, as follows. To determine whether m̄ lies within [0, mR3|R2 ],
[mR3|R2 , mR2|R1 ] or [mR2|R1 , ∞] recall that

v0 S(m0 )
v0 −m0

is increasing in m0 . Therefore, the con-

ditions on the parameters for each of these cases to hold are:
For m̄ < mR3|R2

This is the case when

For mR3|R2 < m̄ < mR2|R1

v0 S(mR3|R2 )
v0 −mR3|R2

>

4
κ0

8(ρ−κ0 )
.
8−(1+ρ)κ0

16−4κ0 ρ
.
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0

16−4κ0 ρ
< v0 γ. Now we
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0
v0 S(mR2|R1 )
> κ40 , or equivalently
v0 −mR2|R1

From above mR3|R2 < m̄ ⇐⇒

need to find the condition for m̄ < mR2|R1 . This requires
v0 γ <

⇐⇒ v0 γ <

Therefore, this case occurs when
16 − 4κ0 ρ
8(ρ − κ0 )
< v0 γ <
4ρ − (1 + ρ)κ0
8 − (1 + ρ)κ0

(37)

For mR2|R1 < m̄ It follows directly from before
8(ρ − κ0 )
< v0 γ.
8 − (1 + ρ)κ0

Due to this lemma, we know how to write expected utility depending on the value of γv0 ,
given all other parameters.
Part (b)1 We need to find a cutoff such that the polity stays in R3. We propose σL ≡
16−4κ0 ρ
.
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0

In this case, v0 γ < σL is equivalent to a regime in which m̄ < mR3|R2 which means

we have to use two different EU expressions depending on whether m0 < m̄ or m0 > m̄.
Let us analyze the expected utility in each of these situations. A useful fact will be that
σL =

16−4κ0 ρ
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0

is decreasing in both ρ and κ0 . Thus, its maximum value is at ρ = 2 and

κ0 = 1. Then σL =

16−4×1×2
4×2−(1+2)×1

= 85 .
53

Segment [0, m̄] Expected utility in period 0 is
EU = v0 − m0 +

v0 γ
m0 κ016
−1 .

κ0
v S(m0 )
4 0

= v0 − m0 +

κ0
v
4 0

1+

κ0 +γm0
4

Since m̄ < mR3|R2 ⇐⇒ v0 γ < σL then it follows that
κ0 σL
16

< 1, it must follow that

that

κ0 σL
16

κ0 v0 γ
16



= v0 (1 +

κ0 σL
16

>

κ0 v0 γ
.
16

κ0
4

+


κ0 2
)
4

+

Therefore, if

− 1 < 0, implying the optimal choice is m0 = 0. To see

< 1, note that σL is at at most

8
5

and κ0 < 2.

Segment q
[m̄, mR3|R2 ] Expected utility in period 0 is

0
EU = κ0 v0 (v0 − m0 ) 1 + κ0 +γm
. To show this payoff is decreasing in m0 note that,
4
− 21
 γ

κ0 +γm0
dEU
0
=
κ
v
(v
−
m
)
1
+
−κ0 v0 1 + κ0 +γm
+ 4 κ0 v0 (v0 − m0 ) , which
0
0
0
0
dm0
4
4
must be negative because

γ
4

(v0 − m0 ) < 1 +

κ0 +γm0
4

⇔ γv0 < 4 + κ0 + 2γm0 which must

hold since γv0 < σL < 4. As a result, the maximum is attained at m0 = 0 in the interval
[0, mR3|R2 ].
Segment r
[mR3|R2 , mR2|R1 ] Expected utility in period 0 is,

q
κ0 +γm0 (1+ρ)
. Marginal expected utility is,
EU = κ0 v0 (v0 − m0 )
ρ
2

q


κ0 +γm0 (1+ρ)

q
− 12
−
√
ρ
2
κ v
κ0 +γm0 (1+ρ)
dEU


− 12  and
= 20 0 (v0 − m0 )
dm0
ρ
2
γ
κ0 +γm0
+ (v0 − m0 ) (1+ρ)
4
ρ
ρ

− 12
q
γ
0
0
this is negative whenever (v0 − m0 ) 12 κ0 +γm
< κ0 +γm
, or, γv0 < 2κ0 + 3γm0 . The
ρ
ρ
ρ
RHS of this expression is higher than 58 , and since γv0 < σL ≤ 85 , we must conclude that
dEU
dm0

< 0. In this segment EU would be maximized at m0 = mR3|R2 .

Segment q
[mR2|R1 , ∞] Expected utility in period 0 is,

0 )(1+ρ)
κ0 v0 (v0 − m0 ) (κ0κ+γm
. Marginal expected utility is,
0 +γm0 +ρ
!
(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)

− 12
√
−
κ0 v0
κ0 +γm0 +ρ
dEU
0 )(1+ρ)
=
(v0 − m0 ) (κ0κ+γm
. This is
dm0
2
ρ
0 +γm0 +ρ
+ (v0 − m0 ) (1 + ρ) (κ +γm
2
0
0 +ρ)
ρ
negative whenever (v0 − m0 ) κ0 +γm
< (κ0 + γm0 ), or whenever,
0 +ρ

EU =

1
(κ0 + γm0 )2 + (κ0 + γm0 ) + γm0 .
ρ
The right hand side of this expression is increasing in m0 , so the minimum of this expression
v0 γ <

is attained at m0 = mR2|R1 and it equals 3ρ − κ0 . Since γv0<
In sum, the global maximum when m̄ < mR3|R2

8
5

< 3ρ − κ0 the result follows.


⇐⇒ v0 γ <

16−4κ0 ρ
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0

= σL

is

m0 = 0. This follows from the just demonstrated fact that the maximum within each
54

segment of the support is at the minimum point, and from the fact that EU is continuous.
S(.) is continuous for all m0 and hence EU in period 0 is also continuous at m̄. In period 0 in
segment [0, m̄], EU evaluated at m̄ is 2(v0 − m̄) which is equal to EU in segment [m̄, mR3|R2 ]
evaluated at m̄. This can be shown noticing that

κ0 v0 S(m̄)
4

= v0 − m̄, and substituting into the

expression for EU in segment [0, m̄]. Thus, the polity will stay at R3 in period 1 whenever
γv0 < σL . Next, we show that there exist σH = 16/κ0 > σM 2 , such that the polity moves to
R1.
Part (b)(2) To prove the existence of values for γv0 high enough that the polity will move
away from R3 into R1, consider the case in which

16
κ0

< γv0 . Note that

8(ρ−κ0 )
8−(1+ρ)κ0

<

16
,
κ0

so

mR2|R1 < m̄. We proceed by analyzing the optimal m0 in each segment in what follows.
Segment [0, mR3|R2 ] Expected utility in period t = 0 is,

2
0
EU = v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 S(m0 ) = v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 1 + κ0 +γm
= v0 (1 + κ40 + κ40 ) +
4

v0 γ
m0 κ016
− 1 . Marginal utility is positive iff γv0 > κ160 , so the polity moves to R2, or
advances to R1.
Segment [mR3|R2 , mR2|R1 ] The (concave) expected utility is, EU =
1
The marginal utility of m0 is: −1 + κ0 v0 (1+ρ)
8
2

q

ρ
γ
.
κ0 +γm0 ρ

v0 −m0 + κ0 v0 (1+ρ)
8

q

κ0 +γm0
.
ρ

This marginal utility may be either

negative, zero or positive in [mR3|R2 , mR2|R1 ]. Given concavity, it is negative iff the value at


which the marginal utility is zero, m0 =

m0 =
⇐⇒ v0 γ <

 
16
κ0

2
.
1+ρ

κ0 v0 γ 1+ρ
√
16
ρ

2

κ0 v0 γ 1+ρ
√
16
ρ

< mR3|R2 =

( ρ4 − κ0 )
γ

In this case, the maximum EU in this segment is at m0 = mR3|R2 .

− κ0 )
γ

16 2
κ0 1+ρ

, is smaller than mR3|R2 :

− κ0

γ

The solution is interior in R2 if m0 =

⇐⇒

−κ0

γ



( ρ4

2

< v0 γ <


= mR3|R2 <
16 ρ
.
κ0 1+ρ

κ0 v0 γ (1+ρ)
√
16
ρ

−κ0

γ

κ0 v0 γ (1+ρ)
√
16
ρ

But since

2

2

− κ0
< mR2|R1 =

γ
16 ρ
κ0 1+ρ

is in between mR3|R2 and mR2|R1 :

<

16
,
κ0

then v0 γ >

(ρ − κ0 )
γ

16 ρ
κ0 1+ρ

and the incumbent

moves to R1. The following analysis shows the incumbent moves to the interior of R1 in
this case.

55

Segment [mR2|R1 , m̄] Expected utility is EU = v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 S(m0 ) = v0 − m0 +


(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)
κ0 v0
0 +γm0 )γ(1+ρ)
, and marginal utility is dEU
= κ04v0 (κ0 +γm0 +ρ)γ(1+ρ)−(κ
=
4
κ0 +γm0 +ρ
dm0
(κ +γm +ρ)2
0

0

γρ(1+ρ)
κ0 v0
− 1, so the interior optimum is
4 (κ0 +γm0 +ρ)2

p
κ0 v0 γ
m0 = γ1
ρ(1 + ρ) − κ0 − ρ . It is straightforward (using arguments analogous
4
ρ
to the case in segment [mR3|R2 , mR2|R1 ]) to show that if κ160 (1+ρ)
< γv0 then we also have

p κ0 v0 γ
1
m0 = γ
ρ(1 + ρ) − κ0 − ρ > mR2|R1 . This implies that for γv0 > κ160 = σH the
4

polity must move to the interior of R1 in period 1.
In sum, whenever σH < γv0 the polity moves to R1. In what follows, we show that there
exist
r 
2
4
κ0

4
κ0

(1+ρ)2
ρ

−3×
−
16 − 4κ0 ρ
,

(1+ρ)2 κ0
3

4ρ − (1 + ρ)κ0
2
×
×

ρ
16
4

r 

2
2

4
4

+
− 3 × (1+ρ)
 8(ρ − κ )
κ0
κ0
ρ
0
= min
,

(1+ρ)2 κ0
3

8 − (1 + ρ)κ0
2
×
×

ρ
16
4


σM 1 = max

σM 2






with σL < σM 1 < σH

κ0
4









κ0
4


, 3ρ − κ0






,





and σL < σM 2 < σH , such that the polity moves to R2 whenever

σM 1 < γv0 < σM 2 .
Part (b)(3) To prove the existence of values of γv0 such that the polity will move into
R2, consider the case in which (37) holds, so mR3|R2 < m̄ < mR2|R1 . We characterize the
set of parameters (κ0 , ρ) such that the optimal point lies in R2.
Segment [0, mR3|R2 ] Expected utility in period t = 0 is, EU = v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 S(m0 ) =

2

v0 γ
0
v0 − m0 + κ40 v0 1 + κ0 +γm
= v0 (1 + κ40 + κ40 ) + m0 κ016
− 1 . Marginal utility is
4
16
κ0
8(ρ−κ0 )
8−(1+ρ)κ0

positive iff γv0 >
16−4κ0 ρ
4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0

<

and negative iff γv0 <
<

16
.
κ0

Algebra shows that under Assumption 1

16
.
κ0

Thus, m0 = 0 is optimal in [0, mR3|R2 ] and the polity will stay
2
in R3. EU evaluated at m0 = 0 is v0 (1 + κ40 + κ40 ), and we later show that this value is
lower than EU at the optimum in R2 whenever σM 1 < γv0 < σM 2 .
Segment [mR3|R2 , m̄] There are two possibilities for an optimum in R2. It could lie in
[mR3|R2 , m̄] or in [m̄, mR2|R1 ]. We only need to show the result for one of the two cases so
we focus on the first. The (concave) expected utility is,

56

EU = v0 −m0 + κ0 v0 (1+ρ)
8

q

κ0 +γm0
.
ρ

1
The marginal utility of m0 is: −1+ κ0 v0 (1+ρ)
8
2


Hence, the optimum point is given by mIntR2 =
and only if

v0 S(mIntR2 )
v0 −mIntR2

4
κ0

−

<

r 
2
4
κ0

2×

4
,
κ0

Then EU (mIntR2 ) is

1
γ



2

−κ0

γ

ρ
γ
.
κ0 +γm0 ρ

. This point is less than m̄ if

which is equivalent to,

−3×

(1+ρ)2
ρ

κ0 v0 γ 1+ρ
√
16
ρ

q

κ0
16

(1+ρ)2
ρ

×

3
4



κ0
4


< γv0 <

4
κ0

+

r 
2
4
κ0

2×

−3×

(1+ρ)2
ρ

κ0
16

(1+ρ)2
ρ
3
4

×



κ0
4


.

(38)




2 
κ0 (1+ρ)
γv0 1 + v0 γ 16 √ρ
+ κ0 . Hence, the optimal value lies in

[mR3|R2 , m̄] if EU (mIntR2 ) > EU (m0 = 0). This inequality implies (after some algebra)

 κ   16 √ρ 2
κ0
κ0
that 4 1 + 4 − γ0
< v0 γ. Note the LHS of this expression is negative as
κ0 (1+ρ)
long as γ < 16/(4 + κ0 ), the technical assumption introduced in the text.
Our strategy for this part of the proof is to find the combinations of (κ0 , ρ) for which
EU (mIntR2 ) > EU (m0 = 0). This is a sufficient condition for the optimal point to lie in R2
as long as EU is decreasing in m0 over R1.

Segment [mR2|R1 , ∞] Expected utility
qis
p
0 )(1+ρ)
EU =
. Marginal utility is,
κ0 v0 (v0 − m0 ) S(m0 ) =
κ0 v0 (v0 − m0 ) (κ0κ+γm
0 +γm0 +ρ


q
− 12

p
√
− 12
(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)
(κ0 +γm0 )(1+ρ)
γρ(1+ρ)
dEU
1
= κ0 v0 2 − (v0 − m0 )
+ (v0 − m0 )
.
dm0
κ0 +γm0 +ρ
κ0 +γm0 +ρ
(κ +γm +ρ)2
0

Note

dEU
dm0

0

< 0 iff −(κ0 + γm0 )(κ0 + γm0 + ρ) + γρ (v0 − m0 ) < 0. The LHS of this expression
ρ−κ0
such LHS
γ
ρ−κ0
mR2|R1 = γ yields,

is decreasing in m0 so if evaluated at mR2|R1 =
decreasing in m0 within R1. Evaluating at

is negative, then EU is

γv0 < 3ρ − κ0 .



r

4
−
κ0


( )

)

2
(1+ρ)2
4
−3× ρ
κ0
(1+ρ)2 κ0
2× ρ
× 34
16

κ0
4

16−4κ0 ρ
,
 4ρ−(1+ρ)κ0
(


r 
2
(1+ρ)2 κ


4
4
+
−3× ρ ( 40 )
κ
κ0
8(ρ−κ0 )
0
= min 8−(1+ρ)κ0 ,
,
3ρ
−
κ
0 . As a result, if σM 1 < γv0 <
(1+ρ)2 κ
2× ρ ( 160 × 34 )



Combining (37), (38), and (39), we define σM 1 = max

and σM 2

(39)

σM 2 then the polity moves to R2. Note the set over the real line bounded by σM 1 and σM 2
is non-empty for a measurable set of (κ0 , ρ). For example, fix ρ = 4 κ0q= 1. In this case, the
2
5
5 2
5
− ( 16
) −4( 16×2
)
<0<
conditions (37), (38), and (39) become respectively 0 < γv0 < 8, 16
5 2
2( 32
)
57

γv0 <

32
5

and γv0 < 11.Hence, σM 1 = 0 and σM 2 = 32/5 and for 0 < γv0 < 32/5 the polity

moves to R2. As these inequalities are strict, pairs (ρ, κ0 ) in a neighborhood of (4, 1) also
yield a transition to R2 for a measurable set of γv0 .
In sum, there exist σL , σM 1 , σM 2 and σH defined above, σL < σM 1 < σH

and σL <

σM 2 < σH , (simple algebra shows that σM 1 < σH and σM 2 < σH ) such that if γv0 < σL the
polity stays in R3; if σM 1 < γv0 < σM 2 the polity moves from R3 to R2; and if γv0 > σH
the polity moves from R3 to R1.

58

References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson. Institutions as a fundamental cause of long-run
growth. Handbook of economic growth 1 (2005): 385-472.
Allen, R. C. (1997), Agriculture and the Origins of the State in Ancient Egypt. Explorations
in Economic History 34, 135-54.
Bard, K. (1994), “The Egyptian Predynastic: A Review of the Evidence,” Journal of Field
Archaeology 21, 265–288.
Bates, R. (2001), Prosperity and violence: the political economy of development. New
York: WW Norton.
Besley, T. and T. Persson (2011), Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics of Development Clusters: The Political Economics of Development Clusters. Princeton University
Press.
Boix, C. (2015), Political order and inequality: Their foundations and their consequences
for human welfare. Cambridge University Press.
Bradford, A. (2001), With Arrow, Sword, and Spear. A History of Warfare in the Ancient
World. Westport, Connecticut and London: Praeger.
Carneiro, R. (1970). A Theory of the Origin of the State. Science 169 (3947): 733–738.
Carpenter, R. (1968), Discontinuity in Greek Civilization. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Childe, V. G. (1936), Man Makes Himself. London: Watts Publishers.
Chrissanthos, S. (2008), Warfare un the Ancient World. From the Bronze Age to the Fall
of Rome. Westport, Connecticut and London: Praeger.
Claessen, H. and P. Skalnik (1978), The Early State. The Hague: Mouton Publishers.
Cline, E. (2014), 1177 BC - The Year Civilization Collapsed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Collier P. and A. Hoeffler (1998), On Economic Causes of Civil War, Oxford Economic
Papers 50, 563-73.

59

Diamond, J. (1999), Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. WW Norton
& Company.
Di Giacomo, G. and G. Scardozzi (2012), Multitemporal High-Resolution Satellite Images
for the Study and Monitoring of an Ancient Mesopotamian City and its Surrounding
Landscape: The Case of Ur. International Journal of Geophysics,, Vol. 2012, Article
ID 716296.
Drews, R. (1993), The End of the Bronze Age. Changes in Warfare and the Catastrophe
ca. 1200BC. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dube, O. and J.F. Vargas (2006), Are All Resources Cursed? Coffee, Oil and Armed
Conflict in Colombia, mimeo Harvard University.
Fried, M. (1960), On the evolution of social stratificiation and the state. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill.
Fritz, V. (1997), Cities: Cities of the Bronze and Iron Age, in Eric M. Meyers (ed.), The
Oxford Encyclopedia of Archeology in the Near East, Vol. II, Oxford and New York,
Oxford University Press, 19-25.
Garfinkle, S. (2013), “Ancient Near Eastern City-States”. In Peter F. Bang and Walter
Scheidel (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the State in the Ancient Near East and
Mediterranean. New York, Oxford University Press: 94-119.
Gennaioli, N. and H-J. Voth (2015), State capacity and military conflict. The Review of
Economic Studies
Gibson, McG. (1993), Nippur – Sacred City of Enlil, Al-Rafidan: Journal of Western Asiatic
Studies vol. XIV.
Hawkes, J. (1974), Eridu, Iraq. Sumerian city circa 5000 B.C. Atlas of Ancient Archaeology.
New York. McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Hirshleifer, J. (1991), The Paradox of Power. Economics & Politics 3(3), 177-200.
Hirshleifer, J. (2001). The dark side of the force: economic foundations of conflict theory.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

60

Johnson, A. and T. Earle (2000),. The evolution of human societies: from foraging group
to agrarian state. Stanford University Press.
Jordan, J. (1931), Abhandlungen der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophischhistorische Klasse, Jahrgang 1930, Nr. 4.
Kaniewski D,, Van Campo E, Van Lerberghe K, Boiy T, Vansteenhuyse K, et al. (2011),
The Sea Peoples, from Cuneiform Tablets to Carbon Dating. PLoS ONE 6(6): e20232.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020232.
Keeley, L. (1996), War before civilization: The myth of the peaceful savage. Oxford University Press.
Langutt, D., I. Finkelstein, and T. Litt. 2013. Climate and the Late Bronze Collapse: New
Evidence from the Southern Levant, Tel Aviv, Vol. 40, 2013, 149–175.
Mann, M. (1986), The Sources of Social Power Vol. I: A history of power from the beginning
to A.D. 1760. Cambridge University Press.
Mayshar, J., O. Moav, and Z. Neeman (2013). Geography, transparency and institutions.
Mimeo University of Warwick.
Mayshar, J., O. Moav, Z. Neeman and L. Pascali (2015). Cereals, Appropriability and
Hierarchy. CEPR Discussion Paper 10742.
McNeill, W. (1982), The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since
A.D. 1000. University of Chicago Press.
Morris, I. and J. Manning (2005), “The economic sociology of the ancient world,” The
Handbook of Economic Sociology, 2d. ed. Eds. Neil Smelser & Richard Swedberg.,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 131-159.
North, D., and B. Weingast (1989). Constitutions and commitment: the evolution of
institutions governing public choice in seventeenth-century England. The Journal of
Economic History 49(4), 803-832.
Olson, M. (2000). Power And Prosperity: Outgrowing Communist And Capitalist Dictatorships. Basic Books.

61

Powell, R. (2012), Persistent Fighting and Shifting Power, American Journal of Political
Science (2012) 56(3), 620-37.
Powell, R. (2013), Monopolizing Violence and Consolidating Power, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 128 (2), 807-859
Ross, M. (2003), The Natural Resource Curse: How Wealth Can Make You Poor, in Collier,
P. and I. Bannon (eds.) Natural Resources and Violent Conflict. The World Bank.
Sánchez de la Sierra, R. (2014), On the Origin of States: Stationary Bandits and Taxation
in Eastern Congo. Mimeo UC Berkeley.
Sandars, N.K. (1987), The Sea Peoples: Warriors of the ancient Mediterranean, Revised
Edition. London: Thames and Hudson.
Schaeffer, C.F.A. (1948), Stratigraphie comparée et chronologie de l’Asie occidentale. London: Oxford University Press.
Singer, I. (1999), A Political History of Ugarit. In Handbook of Ugaritic Studies, W.G.E.
Watson and N. Wyatt (eds.), 603–733. Leiden: Brill.
Spruyt, H. (1996). The sovereign state and its competitors: an analysis of systems change.
Princeton University Press.
Tilly, Ch. (1975), The formation of national states in Western Europe. Vol. 8. Princeton
Univ Press.
Tilly, Ch. (1992), Coercion, capital, and European states, AD 990-1992. Oxford: Blackwell.
Trigger, B. (2003), Understanding early civilizations. Cambridge University Press.
Van de Mieroop, M. (1997), The ancient Mesopotamian city. Oxford University Press.
Weber, M. (1978), Economy and society. Berkeley, CA: California University Press.
Weber, M. (2013) [1909], The agrarian sociology of ancient civilizations. London: Verso
Books.
Wittfogel, K. A. (1957). Oriental Despotism. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.

62

Yon, M. (1992), The End of the Kingdom of Ugarit, in Ward, W., and M. Joukowsky (eds.),
The Crisis years: the 12th century BC: from beyond the Danube to the Tigris. Kendall
Hunt Pub Co.
Zuckerman, S. (2007), Anatomy of a Destruction: Crisis Architecture, Termination Rituals
and the Fall of Canaanite Hazor. Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology 20, 1: 3–32.

63

