                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOUSEHOLD LOCATION DECISIONS AND THE VALUE OF CLIMATE AMENITIES

                                     Paramita Sinha
                                    Maureen L. Cropper
                                     Martha Caulkins

                                     Working Paper 21826
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21826


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2015




We thank the US Environmental Protection Agency, RTI International, and Resources for the
Future for funding. This paper would not have been possible without the excellent research
assistance of Martha Caulkins and GIS support from RTI. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Paramita Sinha, Maureen L. Cropper, and Martha Caulkins. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Location Decisions and the Value of Climate Amenities
Paramita Sinha, Maureen L. Cropper, and Martha Caulkins
NBER Working Paper No. 21826
December 2015, Revised January 2017
JEL No. Q5,Q51

                                         ABSTRACT

We value climate amenities by estimating a discrete location choice model for US households.
The utility of each metropolitan statistical area (MSA) depends on location-specific amenities,
earnings opportunities, housing costs, and the cost of moving to the MSA from the household
head’s birthplace. We use the estimated trade-off among wages, housing costs, and climate
amenities to value changes in mean winter and summer temperatures. We find that households
sort among MSAs as a result of heterogeneous tastes for winter and summer temperatures.
Preferences for winter and summer temperatures are negatively correlated: households that prefer
milder winters, on average, prefer cooler summers, and households that prefer colder winters
prefer warmer summers. Households in the Midwest region, on average, have lower marginal
willingness to pay to increase winter and reduce summer temperatures than households in the
Pacific and South Atlantic census divisions. We use our results to value changes in winter and
summer temperatures for the period 2020 to 2050 under the B1 (climate-friendly) and A2 (more
extreme) climate scenarios. On average, households are willing to pay 1 percent of income to
avoid the B1 scenario and 2.4 percent of income to avoid the A2 scenario.

Paramita Sinha                                 Martha Caulkins
Research Triangle Institute                    University of Maryland
701 13th Street, NW                            caulkins@econ.umd.edu
Suite 750
Washington, DC 20005-3967
psinha@rti.org

Maureen L. Cropper
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
cropper@econ.umd.edu
  Household Location Decisions and the Value of Climate Amenities
                 Paramita Sinha, Martha L. Caulkins and Maureen L. Cropper*


    1. Introduction

         The amenity value of climate—what people are willing to pay to experience warmer
winters or avoid hotter summers—is an important component of the benefits of greenhouse gas
mitigation policies. Yet, with the exception of Albouy et al. (2016), the recent literature contains
few estimates of the value of climate amenities for the United States. Estimating these values
poses an econometric challenge: climate, by definition, changes slowly, so researchers must rely
on cross-sectional variation in climate to measure its impact on household location decisions.
This paper helps fill this gap by estimating a discrete location choice model in which a
household’s choice of the city in which to live depends on climate amenities as well as earnings,
housing costs, and other location-specific amenities. We use the model to estimate household
willingness to pay (WTP) for changes in mean winter and summer temperatures and use these
values to assess the welfare effects of temperature changes in cities throughout the United States.

         Traditionally, economists have used hedonic wage and property value functions to value
climate amenities (Cragg and Kahn 1999; Gyourko and Tracy 1991; Blomquist et al. 1988;
Smith 1983). In a world in which households can migrate costlessly across cities, location-
specific amenities should be capitalized into wages and property values. In equilibrium, each
household will select a city (i.e., a vector of amenities) so that the marginal cost of obtaining
each amenity, measured in terms of wages and housing costs, just equals the value it places on
the amenity (Roback 1982). 1 This approach has been followed most recently by Albouy et al.
(2016), who regress a quality of life (QOL) index—a weighted sum of wage and price indices—
for each public-use microdata area (PUMA) on a vector of location-specific amenities, including
climate amenities.



* Paramita Sinha, RTI International, psinha@rti.org; Martha L. Cau lkins, Un iversity of Maryland,
caulkins@econ.umd.edu; Maureen Cropper, Un iversity of Maryland and Resources for the Future, cropper@rff.o rg.
We thank the US Environ mental Protection Agency, RTI Intern ational, and Resources for the Future for funding.
This paper would not have been possible without GIS support from RTI.
1 Formally, marginal WTP for an amen ity equals the sum of the slope of the hedonic wage function with respect to
the amenity plus the slope of the hedonic property value function, weighted by the share of inco me spent on
housing, evaluated at the chosen amenity vector (Roback 1982).




                                                          1
       An alternate approach to valuing amenities that vary by location is to estimate a discrete
choice model of household location decisions (Bayer et al. 2004; Bayer and Timmins 2007;
Bayer et al. 2009; Cragg and Kahn 1997; Klaiber and Phaneuf 2010). Households choose among
locations based on the utility they receive from each location, which depends on wages, housing
costs, and location-specific amenities. Variations in wages, housing costs, and amenities across
locations permit identification of the parameters of the household’s utility function.

        The discrete choice approach, which we follow here, offers several advantages over the
traditional hedonic approach. Most important, it allows the researcher to more easily incorporate
                                                                                 2
market frictions, including the psychological and informational costs of moving. The hedonic
approach assumes that consumers are perfectly mobile and hence that the weighted sum of wage
and housing price gradients will equal the consumer’s marginal willingness to pay (MWTP) for
an amenity. Bayer et al. (2009) demonstrate that this equality fails to hold in the presence of
moving costs, and they incorporate the psychological and informational costs of leaving one’s
birthplace into an equilibrium model of household location choice. We also incorporate moving
costs from birthplace in our model of location choice and demonstrate that their omission
significantly understates the value consumers place on temperature and precipitation.

        The discrete choice approach allows us to obtain exact welfare measures for changes in
temperature throughout the United States based on two climate scenarios. These welfare
measures incorporate both taste sorting based on climate and the opportunity for households to
move in response to changes in temperature.

Our Approach
        In this paper, we value climate amenities by estimating a model of residential location
choice among metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) for US households in 2000. We model the
choice among MSAs based on potential earnings, housing costs, moving costs, climate
amenities, and other location-specific amenities. The model is estimated as a mixed logit model,
which allows the coefficients on climate amenities to vary among households. We compute the
means of these coefficients for each household, conditional on choice of MSA, and then examine




2 Barriers to mobility prevent the sum of wage and housing price gradients fro m equaling marg inal willingness to
pay, and they imp ly that the assumption of national labor and housing markets, which underlies the hedonic
approach, may not accurately capture wage and housing costs in different cit ies.




                                                        2
how the average conditional mean MWTP for climate amenities varies across MSAs to describe
taste sorting.

         We value future changes in temperature in two ways. We use the conditional mean
MWTPs to compute the value of changes in temperature assuming that each household does not
move. This is analogous to the value of temperature changes computed by Albouy et al. (2016)
based on local linear estimates of the hedonic price function. We also compute exact welfare
measures (i.e., expected compensating variation) using each household’s conditional distribution
of taste coefficients. These measures implicitly allow households to move in response to
temperature changes.

         Our paper builds on the work of Cragg and Kahn (1997), who were the first to use a
discrete choice approach to value climate amenities. 3 We extend their work, following Bayer et
al. (2009), by including moving costs and modeling choices across MSAs. Unlike Bayer et al.,
however, we cannot use multiple cross sections to difference out unobserved amenities within
cities. Historical data indicate that climate changes slowly, forcing us to rely on a single cross
section of data rather than data over consecutive decades. 4 We attempt to allay concerns about
omitted variable bias by controlling for a wide variety of location-specific amenities other than
temperature, especially those that are correlated with temperature.

Our Findings
         Our results indicate that households are willing to pay to avoid cold winter temperatures
and hot summer temperatures; however, these values vary significantly by residential location.
We find a strong positive correlation between MWTP for winter temperature and the temperature
of the city in which the household lives: households with the highest MWTP for warmer winters
live in Florida, while those with the lowest MWTP live in the Midwest. Preferences for summer
temperature and winter temperature are, however, negatively correlated (ρ = –0.83). This implies
that households that prefer milder winters, on average, also prefer milder summers, while
households that prefer colder winters have a lower MWTP to reduce summer temperatures.
MWTP to avoid hotter summers is, on average, higher for households who live in the South
Atlantic and Pacific regions than in the Midwest. At the level of census regions, households who


3 Cragg and Kahn (1997) value climate amenit ies by estimating a model of the choice of state in which to live for
households that moved between 1985 and 1990.
4 This is also true of the literature that examines the impact of climate on agriculture (Schlen ker and Rob erts 2009).




                                                           3
live in the Midwest and Northeast have lower MWTPs to increase winter and reduce summer
temperatures than households who live in the South and West.

         We use these estimates to value changes in mean summer and winter temperatures over
the period 2020 to 2050 for 284 US cities that contained over 80 percent of the US population in
2000. The Hadley model projects that, under the B1 climate scenario from the Special Report on
Emissions Scenarios (SRES), 5 mean summer temperature (population weighted) will increase, on
average, by 3.3°F in these cities and mean winter temperature by 3.4°F. Cities in the New
England and Middle Atlantic states will experience larger increases in winter temperature than in
summer temperature, although the reverse is true for the East South Central and West South
Central census divisions, and also the Pacific and Mountain states. Ignoring sorting overstates
the WTP of households in the New England and Middle Atlantic states for the B1 scenario and
greatly understates the value of avoiding the B1 scenario to households in the Midwest. On net,
allowing for taste sorting increases the average household WTP to avoid the B1 scenario by 29
percent compared with a world in which sorting is ignored.

       Allowing for sorting actually decreases the average household WTP to avoid the more
severe A2 scenario. The A2 scenario results in very large increases in summer temperature in the
East and West South Central divisions and the Midwest region. Ignoring sorting overstates the
disamenity of the A2 scenario in the Midwest and South census regions.

      Taking sorting into account, the mean household WTP to avoid the B1 scenario in the
2020–2050 timeframe is about 1 percent of income; it is about 2.4 percent of income for
avoiding the A2 scenario. We note that the latter value is within the range reported by Albouy et
al. (2016) for a much more drastic climate scenario in the period 2090–2099. 6 One possible
reason for the difference in estimates is that we base our estimates on all households, whereas
Albouy et al. (2016) focus on prime-aged households. Our results suggest that the value attached
to climate amenities varies with the age of the household head: on average, households with
heads over the age of 55 have a MWTP for higher winter temperature and a MWTP to avoid



5 To represent a range of driv ing forces for emissions, such as demographic development, socioeconomic
development, and technological change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) developed a s et of
emissions scenarios. In the SRES, IPCC (2000) describes these scenarios in more detail. We use projections fro m a
climate-friendly scenario (B1) and a more extreme scenario (A2).
6 Albouy et al. (2016) focus on the A2 scenario in the period 2090– 2099, when it is expected to raise mean
temperature in the United States by 8.3˚F co mpared with the 1970–2000 period.




                                                         4
increased summer temperature that is about twice as high as households with heads between 25
and 55 years old. For policy purposes, we focus on results based on all households.

         The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the household’s location decision
and the econometric models we estimate. Section 3 describes the data used in our analysis.
Estimation results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 uses these results to evaluate the value of
temperature changes projected by the B1 and A2 SRES scenarios. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Household Residential Location Model

        We model household location in 2000 assuming that each household selected its
preferred MSA from the set of MSAs in the United States in 2000. 7 Household utility depends on
income minus the cost of housing, location-specific amenities, and moving costs from the
birthplace of the household head. Specifically, we assume that the utility that household i
receives from city j is given by
                                                                                                            (1)

where Yij is household i’s income and Pij its housing expenditure in city j. MCij represents the
costs—psychological and other—of moving from the head of household’s birthplace to city j.
Going forward, we refer to these as “moving costs.” Aj is a vector of location-specific amenities.
Equation (1) assumes that household utility is linear in the Hicksian bundle (i.e., Yij  Pij). We
relax this assumption below; however, linearity in the Hicksian bundle simp lifies the
computation of welfare measures.

      Household income is the sum of the wages of all workers in the household, Wij, plus
nonwage income, which is assumed not to vary by residential location. To predict the earnings of
household workers in locations not chosen, we estimate hedonic wage and housing price
equations for each MSA, as described below.




7 Because we focus on the choice of MSA, we are estimating the climate preferences of people who live in urban
areas.




                                                        5
       We allow the coefficients on temperature amenities to vary across households. 8 We
hypothesize that households vary in their tastes for climate, and sort across MSAs based on taste
differences. In our base case, summer and winter temperature enter the utility function linearly:
we assume a constant marginal utility of temperature, and estimate a household’s willingness to
pay for small changes in temperature at their chosen location. As a sensitivity analysis, we allow
marginal utility to vary non- linearly with temperature.

         Moving costs capture the psychological, search, and out-of-pocket costs of leaving a
household’s place of origin. Seventy-three percent of households in our sample (see Table 1, full
sample) live in the census region in which the head was born; 67 percent live in the same census
division. Although households have been moving to warmer weather since the Second World
War (Rappaport 2007), family ties and informational constraints may have prevented this from
occurring more completely. As shown below, failure to account for these costs significantly
alters the value attached to winter and summer temperatures.

         In our base case, following Bayer et al. (2009), we represent moving costs as a series of
dummy variables that reflect whether city j is outside of the state, census division, or census
region in which household i’s head was born. Formally,
                                                                                                               (2)


where dijState denotes a dummy variable that equals one if j is in a state that is different from the
one in which household head i was born, dijDivision equals 1 if location j is outside of the census
division in which the household head was born, and dij Region equals 1 if location j lies outside of
the census region in which the household head was born.

      We also allow for two alternate specifications of moving costs. In one specification, we
replace the dummy variables in equation (2) by the log of the distance from the population-
weighted centroid of the household head’s birthplace state to the population-weighted centroid of
the state, division, and region where the household resides. In the other specification, we allow
moving costs to vary with the presence of children (following Hamilton and Phaneuf 2015) and



8 We choose to estimate a random coefficients model rather than using household characteristics to explain
heterogeneous preferences across households. Estimating a rando m coefficients model allows us to compute the
distribution of marginal utility of summer and winter temperature (and, hence, marginal willingness to pay),
conditional on a household’s chosen location. We believe that this is more relevant for evaluating climate policy
than computing marg inal willingness to pay as a function of ho usehold characteristics.




                                                          6
marital status. This controls for the idea that different households may have different moving
costs; for example, married households may be constrained by finding a city that can
accommodate two workers, and households with children may be resistant to relocate their
children while school-aged. Specifically, we interact the geographic dummies in equation (2)
with variables indicating whether the household contains any children and whether the household
head is married.

Estimation of the Model
         Estimating the location choice model requires information on the wages that a household
would earn and the cost of housing in all MSAs. Because wages are observed only in the
household’s chosen location, we estimate a hedonic wage equation for each MSA and use it to
predict Wij. The hedonic wage equation for MSA j regresses the logarithm of the hourly wage
rate for worker m in MSA j on variables (    ) measuring the demographic characteristics—
education, experience, and industry and occupation—of worker m:


                                                                                                                (3)

Equation (3) is estimated using data on full- time workers in the public use microdata sample
(PUMS). 9 The coefficients of equation (3) are used to calculate the earnings of each worker in
the sample used to estimate the discrete choice model, under the assumption that individuals
work the same number of hours and weeks in all locations. Summing earnings over all
individuals in each household, we obtain predicted household wages for household i in location j
( Ŵij ). Predicted income in city j, equals predicted wage income plus non-wage income of
household i, which is assumed not to vary by MSA.

9 The equation is estimated using data on all persons working at least 40 weeks per year and between 30 and 60
hours per week. Persons who are self-employed, in the military, or in farming, fishing, or forestry are excluded fro m
the sample. We have also estimated equation (3) allo wing for non -random sorting (Dahl 2002). Specifically, we
compute the probability of mov ing fro m each birthplace to current location (in terms of census divisions)
conditional on each education group listed in Table 1 by taking the appropriate cell counts in our sample of workers
(close to 3 million ind ividuals). Including this probability correction term (in quadratic form) in equation (3) has
minimal impact on our wage regression results, possibly due to the inclusion of industry and occupation indicators
in the equation. The Dahl correction terms are significantly d ifferent fro m zero in only 26 percent of the 284 MSA
wage regressions. Further, very few coefficients are affected by the inclusion of the co rrection terms—the most
affected coffecients are “High School” and “So me Co llege” but these change only by 5–6 percent on average.
Because the correction terms are rarely significant and have little qualitative impact, we elect to use equation (3)
without Dahl corrections to predict wages for our discrete choice model.




                                                          7
       The cost of housing in each location is estimated based on hedonic property value
equations for each MSA,
                                                                                                                (4)

    is the annual cost of owning house i in city j, computed as the sum of the imputed monthly
mortgage payment or rent and the cost of utilities, property taxes, and property insurance. 10
contains a dummy variable indicating whether the house was owned or rented, as well as a vector
of dwelling characteristics. Utility costs are added both to the costs of owning a home and to
rents because heating and cooling requirements vary with climate. We wish to separate these
costs from climate amenities. Equation (4) is estimated separately for each MSA in our dataset.
         We predict housing expenditures for household i in city j (               ) assuming that the
household purchases the same bundle of housing characteristics in city j as it purchases in its
chosen city. This is clearly a strong assumption. To test its validity, we examine the mean value
of key housing characteristics (number of bedrooms and number of rooms) and their standard
deviation across MSAs, for different household groups, characterized by income group and
household size. The coefficient of variation for number of bedrooms and number of rooms
within income and household size groups averages only 0.07–0.08, suggesting that households of
similar size and income tend to live in dwellings of similar characteristics, thus supporting our
methodology for predicting housing expenditures. 11

         The results of estimating the individual MSA hedonic wage and housing market
equations for our base case are summarized in Appendix Tables A-1 and A-2. We find, as do
Cragg and Kahn (1997), that the coefficients in both sets of hedonic equations vary significantly
across MSAs, suggesting that the assumption of national labor and housing markets made in
hedonic studies is inappropriate.




10 The monthly mortgage payment for each house represents the opportunity cost of owning the house. It is imputed,
based on the owner-assessed value of the house and average mortgage interest rates in 2000. It does not represent
the actual payment made by the owner of the house.
11 As a sensitivity analysis we estimate a location choice model that uses a housing price index, following Bayer et
al. (2009), rather than predicting housing expenditures in each MSA. In Bayer et al. (2009), utility is assumed to be
of the Cobb Douglas form, imp ly ing that indirect utility is a function of a housing price index that varies across
cities, not households. The housing price index for each MSA is the estimated MSA fixed effect in a national
hedonic housing price equation. (See Appendix B fo r further details.)




                                                          8
        We estimate the discrete location choice model in two stages. The first is a mixed logit
model in which the indirect utility function incorporates unobserved heterogeneity in preferences
for winter and summer temperature, and MSA fixed effects ( ):


                                                                                                                (5)


We assume that the temperature coefficients (β WT and βST) are jointly normally distributed, with
mean vector       and variance-covariance matrix Σ. The elements of Σ are estimated in the first
stage. However, since the MSA fixed effects encompass all local attributes that do not vary
across households, the mean vector is contained in , and thus, is estimated in the second
stage. The error term in the household’s utility function εij combines the error in predicting
household i’s wages and housing expenditures in city j with household i’s unmeasured
preferences for city j. Assuming that the idiosyncratic errors are independently and identically
distributed Type I extreme value, the probability of household i selecting city j is given by the
mixed logit model. The parameters of equation (5) are estimated via simulated maximum
likelihood techniques, using a choice set equal to the household’s chosen alternative and a
random sample of 59 alternatives from the set of 284 MSAs. 12

          In the second stage, city-specific fixed effects are regressed on the vector of amenities to
estimate the means of the temperature coefficients and the coefficients on other amenities :
                                                                                                                (6)


3. Data

       The data used to estimate our location model, hedonic wage equations, and hedonic
housing equations come from the 5 percent PUMS of the 2000 US census as well as other
publicly available data sources.




12 The valid ity of the McFadden sampling procedure (McFadden 1978) h inges on the independence of irrelevant
alternatives, which does not hold in the mixed logit model. We do, however, face co mputational trade -offs in
estimating the mixed logit model using all 284 elements of the universal choice set and a sample large enough to
estimate 284 fixed effects with precision. Experiments with the size of the choice set indicated that increasing the
size of the choice set beyond 60 MSAs did not significantly alter parameter estimates. In estimat ing equation (5) the
means of βW T and βST are constrained to be zero.




                                                          9
Sample Households
      To select the sample used to estimate our location choice models, we focus on
households residing in one of the 284 MSAs for which we have complete amenity data. These
MSAs contained 80 percent of the total US population in 2000. To be included, a household
must be headed by a person 16 years of age or older who was born in the continental United
States. We exclude households with heads in the military or in certain occupations (e.g., logging,
mining) that would restrict locational choices. We also eliminate households with members who
are self-employed, due to difficulty in predicting their wages, and households with negative
Hicksian bundles at their chosen locations. 13

         Table 1 describes the characteristics of our sample households and of subsets of these
households. We estimate the discrete choice model for the full sample of households and also for
the two subsamples described in Table 1: households with prime-aged heads (i.e., heads between
25 and 55) and households with heads over age 55. Amenity values presented in this paper focus
on the full sample. Estimates in the hedonics literature, which use wage and housing cost
differentials to value amenities, are usually based on prime-aged adults. The reason for this is
clear: 98 percent of households with prime-aged heads have some labor income, and on average,
93 percent of the income of these households comes from wages. Forty-seven percent of older
households have no wage income.

       A striking fact in Table 1 is that a large percentage of households continue to live in the
area where the household head was born. Fifty-seven percent of all households live in the state
where the head was born, 66 percent in the same census division, and 73 percent in the same
census region. This foreshadows the importance of moving costs (birthplace location) in
explaining residential location choice.

Climate Variables

         The climate variables in our model are summarized in Table 2. All variables are climate
normals: the arithmetic mean of a climate variable computed for a 30-year period. 14




13 Households with negative Hicksian bundles may have substantial accu mulated wealth (e.g., in real property) that
we cannot measure. There are 2,162,570 households in the PUMS that satisfy our criteria for sample inclusion.
14 The temperature and summer precipitation data are for the period 1970 to 2000. Ju ly relative hu midity, annual
snowfall, and percentage possible sunshine are measured for the period 1960 to 1990.




                                                         10
     We focus on mean temperature, measured for the winter (December–February) and
summer (June–August) seasons. Previous studies of climate amenities have used primarily mean
winter and summer temperatures or annual heating and cooling degree days. 15 In studying the
impact of climate on agriculture, health, and electricity usage, temperature has been measured by
the number of days in various temperature bins (Schlenker and Roberts 2009 ; Deschenes and
Greenstone 2011; Albouy et al. 2016). The advantage of mean winter and summer temperatures
is that they capture seasonality, which annual heating and cooling degree days and temperature
bins do not. At the same time, correlation between winter and summer temperatures and
temperatures during other seasons of the year means that winter and summer temperatures will
pick up other temperature impacts: the correlation between mean winter temperature and mean
March temperature is 0.97, as is the correlation between mean winter temperature and mean
November temperature. Collinearity among mean winter, summer, fall, and spring temperatures,
however, makes it impossible to include all four measures in our models.

         The precision with which the impact of temperature on location decisions can be
estimated depends on temperature variation. Mean winter temperature across the 284 MSAs in
our data averages 37°F, with a standard deviation (s.d.) of 12°; summer temperature averages
73°, with an s.d. of 6°. Winter and summer temperatures are highly correlated (r = 0.76).

        The models presented in the next section include annual snowfall, mean summer
precipitation, and July relative humidity. Mean winter precipitation, which averages 9.4 inches
(s.d. = 5 inches), is highest in the Pacific Northwest and the Southeast, where winter
precipitation comes in the form of rain. In preliminary analyses, winter precipitation appeared to
be a disamenity, but this effect was statistically significant only at low levels of precipitation.
This suggested that snowfall should replace winter precipitatio n: cities with significant snowfall
have lower levels of winter precipitation (the correlation between annual snowfall and winter
precipitation is −0.36), and snow is likely to be more of a disamenity than rain.

         Summer precipitation, which averages 11 inches (s.d. = 5 inches), is heaviest in the
Southeast United State. Surprisingly, the correlation between summer precipitation and winter


15 Heating and cooling degree days are computed by the National Climat ic Data Center using the average of the
high and low temperatures for a day. If this is greater than 65°F, it results in (average temperatu re − 65) cooling
degree days. If the average temperature is less than 65°, it results in (65 − average temperature) heating degree days.
Graves and Mueser (1993) and Kahn (2009) use mean January and mean July temperatures; Cragg and Kahn (1997,
1999) use mean February and mean Ju ly temperatures. Roback (1982), Blo mquist et al. (1988), and Gyourko and
Tracy (1991) use annual heating and cooling degree days, as do Albouy et al. (2016).




                                                          11
precipitation is very low (r = 0.03), as is the correlation between summer precipitation and
annual snow (r = −0.02). Mean July relative humidity is 69 percent (s.d. = 7 percent) and is not
highly correlated with either winter temperature (r = 0.06) or summer temperature (r = 0.14).

       Following the literature, we also include the percentage of possible sunshine, defined as
the total time that sunshine reaches the surface of the earth, expressed as a percentage of the
maximum amount possible from sunrise to sunset.

Nonclimate Amenities
     The nonclimate amenity variables used in the second stage of the model are also
summarized in Table 2. These include amenity measures typically used in quality-of-life studies,
as well as variables that are likely to be correlated with climate, such as elevation, visibility, and
measures of parks and recreation opportunities. Our desire is to be as inclusive as possible.
Because climate changes slowly, we cannot use panel data to value climate amenities. We
therefore strive to avoid problems of omitted variable bias by including a variety of location-
specific amenities in our models.

       Many quality-of- life studies include population density as an amenity variable (Roback
1982; Albouy 2012) or city population (Gyourko and Tracy 1991). Population should be used
with caution in a discrete choice model, since the model is constructed to predict the share of
population in each city (i.e., summing the predicted probability of moving to city j across
households yields the predicted share of population in city j). We therefore do not include
population as an amenity, but we do include population density, which may proxy amenities the
higher population density supports that are not adequately captured by other amenities (better
public transportation, restaurants, and live sporting events). We also estimate models with
population density omitted.

       Cragg and Kahn (1997) in estimating a model of choice of state to live in include the
number of cities within each state as a measure of the number of location choices available to
residents. We follow their lead by including the number of counties in each MSA. We also
estimate models in which population density is replaced by land area, after Bartik (1985), who
uses land area as a proxy for abundance of location choices. Other amenities and disamenities for
which we control include air pollution (fine particulate matter [PM2.5]), an index of violent
crime, visibility (percentage of hours with visibility greater than 10 miles), square miles of parks
within the MSA, elevation measured at the population-weighted centroid of the MSA, and
distance from the population-weighted centroid of each MSA to the nearest coast. We also
include indices from the Places Rated Almanac (Savageau and D’Agostino 2000) that measure


                                                  12
how well each city functions in terms of transportation, education, health, and recreation
opportunities.

4. Estimation Results

Discrete Location Choice Models

         Table 3 describes our base model (Model 1) results for all households, prime-aged
households, households with heads older than 55, and movers. The base model is a mixed logit
model that allows the coefficients on winter and summer temperatures to be jointly normally
distributed and controls for the first 18 attributes in Table 2, as well as the Hicksian bundle and
the moving costs as specified in equation (2). Coefficients on the climate variables have been
converted to MWTP by dividing by the coefficient on the Hicksian bundle. For winter and
summer temperatures, we report the mean and standard deviation of the distribution of MWTP,
as well as the correlation coefficient between the winter and summer temperature coefficients. 16

       The most striking result in the table is that the mean MWTP for winter and summer
temperatures differ significantly across samples. While all groups, on average, view higher
winter temperature as an amenity and higher summer temperature a s a disamenity, the absolute
magnitudes of MWTP are much greater for older households than for prime-aged households.
Mean MWTP for a 1° increase in winter temperature is about twice as high for older households
as for prime-aged households ($1,035 vs. $518). 17 At the same time, older households are, on
average, willing to pay much more to decrease summer temperature than prime-aged households
($1,424 vs. $627). Mean MWTP to increase winter or decrease summer temperature by 1° is
about 40 percent higher using the full sample than prime-aged households. These results
underscore the importance of considering all households when evaluating climate impacts for
policy purposes.

         The models for all three age cohorts indicate considerable variation in tastes for winter
and summer temperatures. The standard deviations of the coefficients for winter and summer
temperatures are large. For the all- household and older-household samples, there is greater


16 Tables 3 through 5 report MWTP only for climate variables. MWTPs for all base model coefficients are reported
in Appendix Table A-3. Although we focus on the impacts of summer and winter temperatures, we note that all
other amenit ies except particulate matter and sunshine have expected signs and are statistically significant.
17 In interpret ing MWTP, it should be remembered that this represents the value of a 1° increase in temperature each
day over three winter months and also captures milder temperatures in adjacent months.




                                                         13
variation in the coefficient on winter than the coefficient on summer temperature. The
temperature coefficients in all cases are negatively correlated: most households that prefer milder
winters also prefer milder summers, while those that favor colder winters like hotter summers. 18

         The last model in Table 3 is estimated using households that moved between 1995 and
2000. Cragg and Kahn (1997) focus on recent movers to value climate change using the 1990
PUMS. In previous work, we have also focused on recent movers (Sinha and Cropper 2013).
Table 3 confirms that movers indeed have different preferences for climate amenities than
households in the full sample, which includes households that stayed in the same location. The
mean MWTP of movers for winter temperature is, on average, 39 percent higher than the mean
MWTP of households in the full sample and 90 percent higher than prime-aged households, who
more closely resemble movers in terms of demographic characteristics. 19

        Calculating the benefits of policies to avoid climate change should be based on the
location decisions of all households. We therefore focus on the full sample of households for the
remainder of the paper.

         Table 4 shows the sensitivity of results for the full sample to the specification of moving
costs. It is variation in moving costs across households (as well as variation in wages and
housing expenditures) that allows us to identify the parameters of our model; hence, it is
important to see how our results vary with changes in moving costs. In Model 2, where moving
costs are modeled as the log of distance between birthplace and residence locations, MWTP is
qualitatively the same, though there are some small differences in magnitude. For example,
weighting moving costs by log(distance) increases the amenity value of winter temperature from
$709 to $790 and lowers the amenity value of summer precipitation from $376 to $254.
Interacting the moving cost terms with dummy variables for the presence of children and marital
status (Model 3) has little impact on results—MWTPs for climate amenities change by less than
$10.




18 The negative correlation implies that there are some people who are very sensitive to outdoor temperature --if
someone values warmer winters more than the average person then they also value milder summers more than the
average person--and those people who are not very sensitive: they are willing to pay less for warm winters and also
don't mind hotter summers.
19 The MWTP of movers for a 1° decrease in summer temperature is 27 percent higher than in the full samp le and
77 percent higher than in the prime -aged sample.




                                                        14
       We note that if moving costs are removed from the model entirely (Model 4), the
marginal value of climate amenities falls and households no longer appear to differ in their
preferences for winter temperature, that is, the standard deviation on winter temperature becomes
statistically insignificant. Omitting moving costs also reduces (in absolute value) MWTP for
winter and, especially, for summer temperatures, as well as precipitation, snowfall, and humidity.
These results support Bayer et al.’s (2009) assertion that ignoring moving costs may significantly
alter WTP for location-specific amenities. The results also suggest that moving costs may have
prevented households from moving to warmer weather. Table 4 thus confirms the importance of
including moving costs in the discrete choice model.

        Table 5 shows the impact on the coefficients of winter and summer temperatures of
alternate specifications of amenities for the full sample: dropping population density (Model 5);
replacing population density with land area (Model 6); adding the number of counties in the
MSA to the model (Model 7), and removing other climate variables (Model 8). 20 As noted in
Section 3, MSA population is not included as an amenity because the discrete choice model is a
share model—aggregating the probability that city j is chosen across all households yields the
share of population predicted to live in that city. Population density is included as a proxy for
amenities that are made possible by higher population density but not captured by the Places
Rated Almanac. Nonetheless, population density is correlated with population. Dropping
population density leaves the mean MWTP for a 1° change in winter and summer temperatures
virtually unchanged. They are $709 and –$873 in Model 1 and $748 and –$849 in Model 5.
Similarly, replacing population density with land area has little impact on the base model:
MWTP for winter temperature and summer temperature are $725 and -$890, respectively, in
Model 6. Adding the number of counties to the base specification affects MWTP estimates a bit
more, but results remain qualitatively the same. Specifically, MWTP for winter temperature
increases to $815 while summer temperature falls to –$848. Model 8 shows the importance of
controlling for other climate variables when valuing temperature. When July humidity, summer
precipitation, sunshine, and snowfall are omitted, mean MWTP for winter temperature rises by
over 70 percent (to $1,237), while mean MWTP for summer temperature falls slightly (to –




20 We also estimated a model in which we included squared temperature terms in the second stage estimat ion. The
summer temperature coefficients were insignificant, and the implied MWTP estimates were similar to those from
our base case. These results are available upon request.




                                                       15
$820). Further sensitivity analyses suggest that when snowfall is omitted, winter temperature
picks up its effects, whereas summer temperature is sensitive to July humidity. 21

         Appendix Table A-4 shows the impact of alternate specifications of the Hicksian bundle.
In Model 9, we include a quadratic term for the Hicksian bundle in the first stage of the model.
When evaluated at the mean Hicksian bundle MWTPs for all climate amenities fall in absolute
value, by about 15 percent for winter and summer temperature and by about 20 percent for the
other climate variables. In contrast, we obtain larger MWTP estimates in Model 10, where we
follow the Bayer et. al. (2009) housing price index approach (described in detail in Appendix B).
Here, the log of total income replaces the Hicksian bundle in the first stage, while the second
stage dependent variable is now the MSA fixed effect from the first stage adjusted by the city-
level housing price index. MWTPs for all climate variables are higher in this sensitivity
analysis—about 20 percent higher for the temperature terms and approximately 50 percent
higher for the other climate variables. Specifically, MWTP for winter temperature rises from
$709 in the base case to $885 in Model 10, while the MWTP for avoiding summer temperature
increases in magnitude from –$873 to –$1,004.

Taste-Based Sorting
     To examine how households sort across locations in relation to their taste for winter and
summer temperature, we use Model 1 to calculate the joint distributions of the coefficients of
winter and summer temperature for each household, conditional on the household’s choice of
location. The means of these conditional distributions are averaged across all sample households
in each MSA, divided by the coefficient on the Hicksian bundle, and plotted against MSA
temperature in Figures 1 and 2. 22

         To compute conditional household- level parameters, we follow the procedure of Revelt
and Train (1999), who uses Bayes’ Rule to derive the conditional distribution of the temperature
coefficients (i.e., conditional on chosen location,     ; observable household attributes, ,
which include the Hicksian bundle and moving costs; and the overall distribution of temperature
parameters,                ):

21 These sensitivity analyses are available upon request from the authors.

22 When preferences for winter and summer temperatures are forced to be uncorrelated, there is a strong association
between MSA mean MWTP for h igher temperature and temperature itself—the correlation is 0.96 between MSA
mean MWTP for winter temperature and 0.97 between MSA mean MWTP for summer temperature. It appears
(incorrect ly) that households in warmer cit ies place higher values on both summer and winter temperatures.




                                                         16
                                                                                              (7)


Taking the expectation of this conditional distribution reveals an expression for household- level
parameters, or the mean taste parameters, , of households of type , such that

                                                                                              (8)


These household- level parameters are estimated via simulation. Taking the average over all
households in each MSA and dividing by the coefficient on the Hicksian bundle yields average
MWTP for all households in a given MSA. Formally, the MWTP for winter temperature in MSA
j is

                                                                                              (9)


where      is the number of households in MSA j.

        As seen in Figure 1, there is a strong correlation between MWTP for warmer winters and
MSA temperature (the correlation coefficient between MSA winter temperature and mean
MWTP is 0.93), indicating that, other things equal, households sort across cities based on
preferences for milder winters. Specifically, households with higher than average MWTP for
winter temperature have located in warmer cities and households with lower than average
MWTP for winter temperature have located in colder cities. 23 The median WTP for a 1° increase
in winter temperature in the coldest 142 cities (those with mean winter temperature below 35°) is
$223; in the warmest 142 cities, it is $1,184. The city with the lowest MWTP for warmer winters
is Fargo, North Dakota; Palm Beach and Naples, Florida, have the highest MWTP.

       There is, however, some variation in mean MWTP across cities holding temperature
constant. For example, at a mean winter temperature of 40°, households in Oregon and
Washington states have a willingness to pay for a warmer winter that is over four times as high
as the MWTP of households in Texas. At a mean winter temperature of 50°, households in San
Francisco and San Jose, California, are willing to pay approximately $700 more for a 1° increase
in warmer winter temperature than households in Charleston, South Carolina.



23 Recall that MWTP for winter temperature is assumed constant.




                                                      17
       Preferences for warmer winters vary, on average, by census division, as indicated in
Figure 1 and Panel B of Figure 3, and confirmed by Table 6, which shows mean MWTP
averaged across the MSAs in each census division, weighted by MSA population. 24 MWTP for
warmer winters is, on average, negative in the West North Central division; it is also below the
mean for the country in the East North Central division and the Middle Atlantic and New
England states. MWTP for warmer winters is highest in the Pacific and South Atlantic census
divisions. There is, however, considerable variation within divisions. MWTP is higher in
California (especially in San Francisco, San Jose, Santa Barbara, and Orange County) than in
Oregon and Washington states. It is much higher in Florida, especially in southern Florida, than
in the other South Atlantic states; for example, MWTP in Savannah, Georgia, is half that of
Miami.

         The relationship between MWTP for a 1° increase in summer temperature (Figure 2) and
summer temperature is an inverted U. While MWTP for an increase in summer temperature is
negative in all cities except Fargo, North Dakota, households in the Pacific and South Atlantic
divisions have the greatest MWTP to reduce mean summer temperature by 1°. 25 The disamenity
value of a 1° increase in mean summer temperature is greatest in absolute value in Palm Beach
and Naples, Florida (–$2,194) and somewhat lower in San Francisco (–$1,825) and San Jose,
California (–$1,884). 26 There is also considerable variation in MWTP at a given temperature. At
a temperature of 70°, households on the Pacific coast find warmer summers a disamenity;
however, this is less so for people in the West North Central division (e.g., the Dakotas). This is
also true at mean summer temperatures above 80°F: households in the South Atlantic division
find warmer summers a disamenity, but residents of Texas are willing to pay less to avoid hotter
summers than residents of Florida.

24 The average MWTP for winter temperature and summer temperature in Table 6 ($819 for winter and –$940 for
summer temperature), conditional on location, differ fro m the un conditional values in Table 3 ($709 for winter and –
$873 fo r summer temperature) because the former are weighted by MSA population. There is a positive correlation
between MWTP for winter temperature and city population (0.11) and between MWTP for lower s ummer
temperature and city population (0.10). Weighting by city population thus raises average MWTP. When conditional
mean MWTP for winter temperature and summer temperature are averaged across all sample households rather than
by city population, the results are $703 and –$875, respectively, which are very close to the unconditional values
reported in Table 3.
25 The correlation between mean summer temperature and MWTP for summer temperature in Figure 2 is –0.38. If
we restrict preferences over winter and summer temperatures to be uncorrelated, we find a strong positive
correlation between MWTP for summer temperature and the temperature of the city in wh ich the household lives —
see footnote 21.
26 We emphasize that these calculations assume a constant MWTP for temperature as a function of temperature.




                                                         18
    Figures 1 through 3 and Panel A of Table 6 suggest that, holding temperature constant,
MWTP for winter and summer temperatures varies by geographic region: households in the East
North Central census division appear to find hotter summers less of a disamenity tha n
households on the Pacific coast. Households in the Mountain states appear to favor colder
winters than households in the Pacific division. Some of this might appear to reflect differences
in other climate variables besides temperature, such as summer humidity, precipitation, and
snowfall. Our base model, however, controls for summer humidity, precipitation, snowfall, and
sunshine. Indeed, Model 8 indicates the importance of controlling for other climate variables:
when they are omitted from the model, the mean of the coefficient distribution on winter
temperature increases by 75 percent.

      In summary, although there is considerable variation within census regions, households
who have located in the Midwest and the Northeast appear less sensitive to changes in
temperature than households who live in the South and West. This suggests that when valuing
changes in climate, ignoring taste sorting may cause warmer winters in the Northeast and
Midwest to be overvalued and the value of lowering summer temperature in the South and West
to be underestimated.

5. Willingness to Pay for Future Projected Temperature Changes

        We use the results of the location choice model to estimate what households would pay
for temperature changes that are projected to occur over the period 2020 to 2050 under two
SRES climate scenarios. Specifically, we use the results of the Hadley III model to p roject mean
winter and summer temperatures over the 2020 to 2050 period in our 284 MSAs under the B1
and A2 SRES scenarios. 27 We estimate WTP for these temperature changes, compared with
climate averages over the period 1970 to 2000. We first compute WTP by multiplying the
conditional mean MWTP for summer and winter temperatures in each MSA by the size of the
temperature change. This assumes that households do not move in response to changes in
temperature and provides valuations comparable with those produced by hedonic models. We
also compute expected compensating variation for temperature changes using distribution of
(βWT, βST) for each household, conditional on its location choice.




27 Data fro m the Had ley III model were generously provided by Wolfram Sch lenker.




                                                       19
The B1 and A2 SRES Scenarios
      The B1 SRES scenario, a more climate- friendly scenario than A2, leads to an
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2 ) concentration of 550 parts per million (ppm) in the year 2100,
whereas the A2 scenario results in an atmospheric CO 2 concentration of 850 ppm by 2100 (Karl
et al. 2009). Over the period 2020 to 2050, however, the temperature projections for the United
States do not differ dramatically between the two scenarios. 28 Both scenarios project warmer
winters and warmer summers; however, the B1 scenario projects, on average, warmer winters
than the A2 scenario for the 284 MSAs—an average increase in winter temperature of 3.4°F
under B1 and 2.1°F under A2. 29 Projections of increases in summer temperature are slightly
higher under the A2 scenario (on average, 3.6°F) than under the B2 scenario (3.3°F).

        The variation in temperature changes across regions is, however, considerable. Figure 4
and Panel B of Table 6 show the population-weighted average winter and summer temperature
changes for each scenario by census division. Panel B of Table 7 shows temperature changes by
census region. The Northeast and Midwest regions and the South Atlantic division experience
larger increases in winter temperature than increases in summer temperature under the B1
scenario. Cities in the New England and Middle Atlantic states experience the largest increases
in winter temperature (4.5°F and 5.1°F, respectively), followed by the Midwest region (East
North Central, 3.7°F; West North Central, 3.6°F). The South Atlantic states experience winter
temperature increases of about 3.1°F.

        The remainder of the South (the West South Central [WSC] and East South Central
[ESC] divisions) and the Mountain and Pacific divisions are hurt by the B1 scenario: households
in these areas, on average, experience larger increases in summer than in winter temperature. The
ESC and WSC divisions (which include Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama) suffer the
greatest increases in summer temperature (an average of 5.5°F in the WSC), followed by states
in the Mountain and Pacific census divisions. Summer temperatures increase by an average of
3.7°F in the Mountain and 3.1°F in the Pacific census divisions.



28 Other authors have focused on the damages associated with climate change at the end of this century, rather than
midcentury (Albouy et al. 2016; Deschenes and Greenstone 2011). We focus on smaller, midcentury temperature
changes for two reasons. First, changes of the magnitude examined by Albouy et al. (2016) would call fo r general
equilibriu m responses that we cannot model. They would result in major changes in wages and housing prices across
cities. Second, our model is designed to value marg inal temperature changes, rather than nonmarginal changes.
29 These are population-weighted average temperature changes.




                                                        20
       All census divisions experience greater increases in summer than in winter temperature
under the A2 scenario; however, the areas that suffer the least are the Northeast and the South
Atlantic states. Increases in winter temperature under A2, which average 2.1°F, are fairly
uniform geographically. Summer temperature increases are below the national average of 3.6°F
in the Northeast and South Atlantic states, approximately equal to the average in the West and
Midwest, and highest in the ESC and WSC states.

WTP Conditional on Current Location
       Table 6 and Figure 5 display household WTP for each SRES scenario, conditional on the
household’s current location. For each scenario, we multiply the summer and winter temperature
changes in each MSA by the average conditional mean MWTP for that MSA (i.e., by the values
shown in Figures 1 and 2). WTP is averaged across MSAs within each census division (weighted
by MSA population) and is also computed (population-weighted) for all 284 MSAs. Table 7
displays the corresponding averages, by census region. Positive values indicate a positive WTP
for the climate scenario, while negative values, indicating WTP to avoid the climate scenario,
appear in parentheses. To see how taste sorting affects WTP for temperature changes, we also
compute WTP using average household MWTP for summer and winter temperatures (displayed
in the last column of Panel A of the table). These values are labeled WTP ignoring sorting.

       Averaged across all MSAs, household WTP for the B1 scenario is negative and equal to
about 1 percent of average household income; under the A2 scenario, it is also negative and is
equal to about 2.4 percent of income; however, the distribution of WTP differs greatly across
regions. Households in the Middle Atlantic and South Atlantic states are willing to pay a positive
amount for the B1 scenario; households in the New England division have the smallest negative
WTP for this scenario. This reflects the magnitude of increases in winter temperature in these
areas, relative to increases in summer temperature. On the other hand, households in other parts
of the South (the West South Central census division) have the highest negative WTP to avoid
the B1 scenario, reflecting the much higher average increases in summer than in winter
temperature in these states. Households in the East and West South Central divisions also have
the highest WTP to avoid the A2 scenario—about 60 percent more than the MSA average. In
general, WTP to avoid the A2 scenario differs less across regions than under the B1 scenario;
however, households in the South Atlantic have a WTP to avoid A2 that is less than half the
MSA average.

       How would estimates of the value of climate change be altered if sorting were ignored
and WTP imputed based on mean MWTP for summer and winter temperatures? Sorting, which


                                                21
implies that MWTP for winter and summer temperatures differ by region, has the biggest impact
on the aggregate WTP for climate amenities when temperature changes are unevenly dis tributed
across geographic regions, and areas experiencing extreme temperature changes value them very
differently from the mean household. Aggregate climate damages will be understated if
temperature changes are negatively correlated with MWTP to increase winter temperature or
reduce summer temperature. This is indeed the case in the B1 scenario: the New England,
Middle Atlantic, and East North Central divisions are all expected to experience above-average
increases in winter temperature, but households in these regions value these changes much less
than the mean household. Because the benefits of warmer winters are overstated when sorting is
ignored, the resulting aggregate WTP to avoid the B1 scenario is understated—by about 30
percent. 30

         The impact of sorting on aggregate WTP is less pronounced under the A2 scenario
because winter temperature changes are more evenly distributed geographically, and households
in the areas that are expected to experience the biggest increases in summer te mperatures (the
East South Central and West South Central divisions) value these temperature changes about the
same as the mean household. Ignoring sorting when valuing the A2 scenario overstates aggregate
damages only slightly (by 7 percent) primarily because ignoring sorting overstates the damages
of the A2 scenario in the South Atlantic states.

Exact Welfare Calculations
         The WTP estimates in Tables 6 and 7 and Figure 5 assume that households must remain
in their current MSA when temperatures change. This should, on average, overstate the amount
households would pay to avoid the two climate scenarios, given that households can move in
response to changes in temperature. We would not, a priori, expect these adjustments to be large,
given that we are evaluating small temperature changes and given the importance of moving
costs in the discrete choice model. We do, however, calculate exact welfare measures, which
allow for the possibility of migration.

        A household’s compensating variation for a change in summer and winter temperatures
(CVi) is implicitly defined by the amount that can be taken away from the household when ST
and WT change, as shown in the following equation:


30 This is due prima rily to impacts on winter temperature. The areas of the country that experience the greatest
increases in summer temperature value them at a rate close to mean MWTP.




                                                          22
                                                                                                          (10)



We compute the expected value of CVi conditional on the household’s choice of MSA—that is,
using the distributions of (β WT, βST) and {εij} that are conditional on the household’s observed
choice of MSA:
                                                                                                          (11)

(von Haefen 2003). We simulate E(CVi) following von Haefen (2003) by taking a draw from the
conditional distributions of random coefficients and the vector of error terms εij and computing
CVi using equation (10) for each draw. We average these values across 100 draws to compute the
household’s expected compensating variation.
         Table 8 and Figure 6 display E(CVi) for the B1 and A2 scenarios by census division. As
in Table 6, average E(CVi) is averaged over all households in each MSA; MSA values are then
weighted by population to yield census division averages. WTP estimates from Table 6, which
are computed assuming that each household cannot change location, are presented for
comparison. In all cases, E(CV) is less than WTP:31 households, on average, require less
compensation to endure an adverse climate scenario or—in the case of households in the South
Atlantic and Middle Atlantic states under B1—are willing to pay more for a climate scenario that
they view as an improvement when they can change locations to adjust to the scenario.

         The difference between expected compensating variation and WTP conditional on
location is, however, small: allowing households to change location lowers the value of avoiding
the B1 scenario by about 16 percent and the value of avoiding the A2 scenario by about 3 percent
compared with Table 6. Averaged across all households, the value of avoiding the climate
scenarios using exact welfare measures is $574 for the B1 scenario (0.91 percent of average
household income) and $1,492 for the A2 scenario (2.36 percent of average household income).




31 McFadden (1999) proves that this result must hold in random utility models employing the generalized extreme
value distribution.




                                                       23
WTP Comparison with the Literature
       As do Cragg and Kahn (1997) and Sinha and Cropper (2013), we find that households
value warmer winters, cooler summers, more rainfall, and less humidity. Cragg and Kahn (1997)
model the choice of state in which to reside, while Sinha and Cropper (2013) model location
choice at the MSA level. In agreement with Cragg and Kahn (1997), we find that MWTP for
warmer winters and cooler summers increases with age. Overall, the results of our models agree
qualitatively with previous studies using the discrete choice approach to valuing climate
amenities.

        In contrast, our estimates of the welfare losses associated with climate change are larger
than those reported by Albouy et al. (2016) using a hedonic approach. Albouy et al. (2016)
regress a weighted average of wages (net of taxes) and housing prices on local amenities using
data from the 2000 PUMS. They find that households are willing to pay more to reduce cooling
degree days than heating degree days and that the marginal disutility to reduce severe heat is not
statistically different from the marginal disutility to reduce moderate heat. When these results are
used to value temperature changes associated with the A2 scenario in 2090 to 2099—changes
that average 8.3°F—welfare losses are 2.24 percent of household income assuming
homogeneous preferences and 2.87 percent allowing for heterogeneous preferences. We find
comparable values for much milder temperature changes, on the order of 4°F.

       There are several possible reasons for the difference in magnitude of our results. The
hedonic approach uses the capitalization of amenities into wages and housing prices to value
amenities. This may be appropriate for prime-aged households that receive most of their income
from wages, but it needs to be applied with caution in the case of older households that do not.
The discrete choice approach allows for the fact that income may not vary much across MSAs
for retirees, who may nevertheless sort across MSAs in response to differences in climate. It is
the number of households that have located in each MSA, holding MSA characteristics constant,
which identifies the parameters of household utility functions in the discrete choice approach.
Our results indicate that it is important to take the preferences of older households (those with
heads over 55 years of age) into account when evaluating temperature changes. If we were to
base our estimates of the value of avoiding the B1 and A2 scenarios solely on prime-aged
households, our estimates would fall by over 37 percent in the case of the B1 scenario and 34
percent in the case of the A2 scenario.

        A second reason for the difference between the two sets of estimates derives from
differences in assumptions about household mobility. Bayer et al. (2009) note that adding
moving costs to a hedonic model destroys the equivalence between a household’s MWTP for a


                                                 24
local amenity and the capitalization of that amenity into wages and housing prices. Whether the
capitalization of an amenity into wages and housing prices over- or understates MWTP is an
empirical question. We note that removing moving costs from our location choice model causes
the absolute value of MWTP for climate amenities to fall, suggesting that moving costs may
have prevented climate amenities from being fully capitalized into wages and housing costs.
Removing moving costs from our model causes the value of reducing summer temperature to fall
by almost 50 percent.

6. Conclusions

       The discrete location choice model that we have estimated indicates that climate
amenities play an important role in household location decisions in the United States. The rate of
substitution between household income net of housing costs and winter and summer
temperatures is statistically significant, holding constant summer precipitation, snowfall, and
July humidity. But there is considerable variation in MWTP for winter and summer temperatures
across households. In general, households with a higher MWTP for warmer winters have located
in MSAs with higher mean winter temperatures, such as MSAs in Florida or California, while
those with the lowest MWTP live in the Midwest. Preferences for summer temperature and
winter temperature are, however, negatively correlated (ρ = –0.83). This implies that households
that prefer milder winters, on average, also prefer milder summers, while households that prefer
colder winters have a lower MWTP to reduce summer temperatures. MWTP to avoid hotter
summers is, on average, higher in the South Atlantic and Pacific regions than in the Midwest. At
the level of census regions, households in the Midwest and Northeast have lower MWTPs to
increase winter and reduce summer temperatures than households in the South and West.

       These sorting patterns have important implications for valuing avoided climate change.
Under future warming scenarios, winter temperature is likely to increase the most at northern
latitudes, specifically in the Midwest and Northeast. Since these regions have lower-than-average
MWTP for warmer winters when allowing for sorting, using average MWTP for warmer winters
for the entire United States is likely to overstate the value of warmer winters under most climate
scenarios. At the same time, households’ WTP to avoid hotter summers is greatest in the areas
that are expected to experience about average increases in summer temperature—the South and
parts of Southern California. Thus using average MWTP for cooler summers will understate the
value of avoiding hotter summers implied by the A2 and B1 scenarios. Together these results
suggest that ignoring taste sorting could understate the value of avoiding climate change.




                                                25
        Taking sorting into account, we estimate the value of avoiding two climate scenarios in
the near term (2020–2050). We find that, aggregated over the entire United States, WTP to avoid
the more climate-friendly B1 scenario is approximately 1 percent of household income, while it
is approximately 2.4 percent of household income for the A2 scenario. The A2 scenario we
consider would result in an average increase of 3.6°F in summer temperature and of 2.1°F in
winter temperature. Estimates for the United States of market-based damages associated with
climate change have typically been in the range of 1 percent of gross domestic product for an
increase in mean temperature of 2°C (NRC 2010). Our results suggest that the amenity value of
climate could significantly increase estimates of climate damages, even for moderate temperature
increases.

References
Albouy, D. Y. 2012. Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across
      Metropolitan Areas. NBER Working Paper 14472. Original 2008, revised May 29, 2012.
      Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Albouy, D., W. Graf, R. Kellogg, and H. Wolff. 2016. Climate Amenities, Climate Change and
      American Quality of Life. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
      Economists 3(1): 205-246.
Bartik, T. 1985. Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates of the Effects of
        Unionization, Taxes, and Other Characteristics of States. Journal of Business and
        Economic Statistics 3(1): 14-22.
Bayer, P., N. Keohane, and C. Timmins. 2009. Migration and Hedonic Valuation: The Case of
       Air Quality. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 58: 1–14.
Bayer, P., R. McMillan, and K. Reuben. 2004. An Equilibrium Model of Sorting in an Urban
       Housing Market. NBER Working Paper 10865. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research.
Bayer, P., and C. Timmins. 2007. Estimating Equilibrium Models of Sorting across Locations.
       Economic Journal 117 (518): 353–74.
Blomquist, G. C., M. C. Berger, and J. P. Hoehn. 1988. New Estimates of Quality of Life in
      Urban Areas. American Economic Review 78 (1): 89–107.
Cragg, M., and M. Kahn. 1997. New Estimates of Climate Demand: Evidence from Location
       Choice. Journal of Urban Economics 42: 261–84.
———. 1999. Climate Consumption and Climate Pricing from 1940 to 1990. Regional Science
   and Urban Economics 29: 519–39.


                                               26
Dahl, G. 2002. Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple
       Markets. Econometrica 70 (6): 2367-3420.
Deschenes, O., and M. Greenstone. 2011. Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence
      from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US. American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics 3 (4): 152–85.
Graves, P., and P. Mueser. 1993. The Role of Equilibrium and Disequilibrium in Modeling
       Regional Growth and Decline: A Critical Reassessment. Journal of Regional Science 33
       (1): 69–84.
Gyourko, J., and J. Tracy. 1991. The Structure of Local Public Finance and the Quality of Life.
      Journal of Political Economy 99 (4): 774–806.
Hamilton, T and D. Phaneuf. 2015. An integrated model of regional and local residential sorting
       with application to air quality. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
       74: 71-93.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2000. Special Report: Emissions
       Scenarios: Summary for Policymakers. A Special Report of IPCC Working Group III.
       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kahn, M. 2009. Urban Growth and Climate Change. Annual Review of Resource Economics 1:
      333–50.
Karl, T. R., J. M. Melillo, and T. C. Peterson, eds. 2009. Global Climate Change Impacts in the
        United States. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Klaiber, H. A., and D. J. Phaneuf. 2010. Valuing Open Space in a Residential Sorting Model of
       the Twin Cities. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 60 (2): 57–77.
McFadden, D. 1978. Modeling the Choice of Residential Location. In Spatial Interaction Theory
     and Planning Models, edited by A. Karlqvist, L. Lundquist, F. Snickars, and J. Weibull.
     Amsterdam: North Holland.
———. 1999. Computing Willingness-to-Pay in Random Utility Models. In Trade, Theory and
   Econometrics. Essay in Honor of John S. Chipman, edited by J. Melvin, J. Moore, and R.
   Riezman. London: Routledge.
NRC (National Research Council). 2010. Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of
      Energy Production and Use. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Rappaport, J. 2007. Moving to Nice Weather. Regional Science and Urban Economics 47 (3):
      375–98.
Roback, J. 1982. Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. Journal of Political Economy 90 (6):
      1257–78.


                                               27
Savageau, D., and R. D’Agostino. 2000. Places Rated Almanac: Millennium Edition. New York:
      Hungry Minds.
Schlenker, W., and M. Roberts. 2009. Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages
       to US Crop Yields under Climate Change. Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences 106 (37): 15594–98.
Sinha, P., and M. Cropper. 2013. The Value of Climate Amenities: Evidence from U.S.
        Migration Decisions. NBER Working Paper 18756. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Smith, V. K. 1983. The Role of Site and Job Characteristics in Hedonic Wage Models. Journal
       of Urban Economics 13 (3): 296–321.
von Haefen, R. H. 2003. Incorporating Observed Choice into the Construction of Welfare
      Measures from Random Utility Models. Journal of Environmental Economics and
      Management 45: 145–65.




                                             28
Figures and Tables
     Figure 1. Taste-Sorting for Winter Temperature by Metropolitan Area (Base Discrete Choice Model: Model 1)




                                                        29
Figure 2. Taste-Sorting for Summer Temperature by Metropolitan Area (Base Discrete Choice Model: Model 1)




                                                   30
Figure 3. Marginal Willingness to Pay Conditional on Current Location, by Census
                                     Division

                                    Panel A




                                    Panel B




                                      31
Figure 4. Projected Temperature Changes by Census Division, for SRES Scenarios (2020
                                      to 2050)

                                      Panel A




                                      Panel B




                                        32
Figure 5. Willingness to Pay Conditional on Current Location by Census Division, for
Scenarios A2 and B1

                                        Panel A




                                        Panel B




                                           33
Figure 6. Expected Compensating Variation and Willingness to Pay, Holding Location
Constant, for Scenarios A2 and B1

                                       Panel A




                                       Panel B




                                          34
                                   Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Household Characteristics
                                                          Full sample         Prime-aged         Greater than 55        Movers
                                                          (N = 54,008)        (N = 33,180)         (N = 17,643)       (N = 22,759)
                                                                    Std.                Std.                 Std.               Std.
Variable                Description                     Mean        dev.    Mean       dev.      Mean       dev.    Mean       dev.
Age of household head   Age                             49.11      17.03    40.79      8.20      69.50      9.41    39.89      15.19
(mean)
Gender of household     Male (%)                         63.93               67.02               60.60               64.21
head
Marital status of       Married (%)                      52.22               55.43               50.99               46.81
household head
Race of household       White (%)                        82.70               81.13               87.03               83.86
head                    Black (%)                        13.11               13.97               10.98                9.97
                        Other (%)                         4.20                4.91               1.99                 6.16
Education of            No high school (%)               12.86                7.56               23.09                5.77
household head          High school (%)                  25.96               24.06               29.71               15.22
                        Some college (%)                 30.89               33.73               23.65               31.11
                        College graduate (%)             19.33               22.67               12.95               31.12
                        Postgraduate education (%)       10.96               11.99               10.62               16.78
Household head          Left state of birth (%)          42.65               40.99               47.32               66.69
Movement from place     Left census division of birth    32.78               31.28               36.86               53.86
of birth                (%)
                        Left census region of birth      26.55               24.98               30.85               43.68
                        (%)
Household wage          Sum of the wage earnings of     $49,960   $54,508   $64,098   $55,106   $26,307   $47,544   $58,208   $60,898
earnings (mean)         all household members
Household wage          Households with zero wage        16.75               2.23                46.94               8.83
earnings                earnings (%)




                                                                      35
                                   Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Household Characteristics
                                                           Full sample             Prime-aged            Greater than 55             Movers
                                                           (N = 54,008)            (N = 33,180)            (N = 17,643)            (N = 22,759)
                                                                     Std.                    Std.                    Std.                   Std.
Variable                 Description                     Mean        dev.        Mean       dev.         Mean       dev.         Mean       dev.
Total household          Sum of wage, business, and     $63,312 $58,671         $69,161 $59,723         $57,294 $58,615         $67,532 $65,438
income (mean)            farm incomes and income
                         from other sourcesa of all
                         household members
Household annual         Sum of monthly mortgage        $15,556     $9,082      $16,193    $9,437       $15,481    $8,560       $14,693    $9,711
housing expenditures     payment or rent, cost of
(mean)                   utilities, insurance, and
                         property taxes
Size of household        1 member (%)                    26.16                   21.05                   36.03                   29.75
                         2 members (%)                   34.69                   27.35                   47.68                   34.87
                         3 or more members (%)           39.15                   51.59                   16.28                   35.38
a
 Income from other sources would include Social Security income; welfare (public assistance) income; Supplementary Security income; interest,
dividend, and rental income; retirement income; and other income.




                                                                        36
                                       Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of Amenity Variables

Variable                                                         N      Mean       Std. Dev.   Minimum   Maximum      Median
Avg Winter Temperature (°F)                                      284     37.339      12.158      9.442      67.922      34.996
Avg Summer Temperature (°F)                                      284     73.309       5.817     60.848      89.733      72.517
Annual Snowfall (inches)                                         284     20.360      21.366      0.000      84.050      18.050
Summer Precipitation (inches)                                    284     10.966       5.057      0.440      23.300      11.932
July Relative Humidity (%)                                       284     66.246      10.891     22.500      78.000      70.500
Annual Sunshine (% of possible sunshine in 24 hours)             284     60.764       8.323     43.000      78.000      58.000
Avg Elevation (miles)                                            284      0.197       0.273      0.000       1.620       0.130
Distance to Coast (miles)                                        284    141.096     169.592      0.009     824.451      91.025
Visibility > 10 Miles (% of hours)                               284     46.053      19.541      5.000      85.500      45.500
Mean PM2.5 (micrograms/cubic meter)                              284     12.829       2.884      5.382      19.535      12.818
Population Density (persons per square mile)                     284    471.767     983.041      5.400   13,043.600    259.050
Violent Crime Rate (number of violent crimes per 1000 persons)   284      4.560       2.214      0.069      12.330       4.349
Park Area (square miles)                                         284    192.908     584.303      0.000    5,477.564     24.893
Transportation Score                                             284     50.370      29.181      0.000     100.000      50.280
Education Score                                                  284     51.230      29.322      0.000     100.000      51.130
Arts Score                                                       284     51.137      29.055      0.000     100.000      51.140
Healthcare Score                                                 284     49.201      28.657      0.000      98.300      49.430
Recreation Score                                                 284     53.342      28.386      0.000     100.000      54.245
Land Area (square miles)                                         284   2,277.136   3,406.116    46.688   39,377.380   1,559.118
Number of Counties                                               284      2.845       2.906      1.000      25.000       2.000




                                                                 37
                Table 3. Marginal Willingness to Pay for Climate Amenities (Base Discrete Choice Models)
                                           Model 1 (Full)           Model 1 (Prime)              Model 1 (>55)            Model 1 (Movers)
Sample                                       All Ages                Prime-Aged                  Over 55 Years             Changed MSA
                                           (Base Model)                                                                      between
                                                                                                                           1995 and 2000
PANEL A: 1st Stage Estimates
                                          Coef                       Coef                       Coef                        Coef
Variable
                                        (Std Err)                  (Std Err)                  (Std Err)                   (Std Err)
Std. Dev: Avg Winter Temperature         0.0666                     0.0588                     0.0742                     0.0781
                                        (0.0020)                   (0.0026)                   (0.0039)                   (0.0038)
Std. Dev: Avg Summer Temperature         0.0522                     0.0592                     0.0331                     0.0698
                                        (0.0060)                   (0.0068)                   (0.0091)                   (0.0079)
Correlation Coefficient                  -0.8332                    -0.6893                    -0.9936                    -0.8245

PANEL B: 2nd Stage Estimates
                                           Coef      MWTP             Coef      MWTP             Coef      MWTP             Coef       MWTP
Variable
                                        (Std Err)   (Std Err)      (Std Err)   (Std Err)      (Std Err)   (Std Err)      (Std Err)    (Std Err)
Mean: Avg Winter Temperature             0.0249       $709          0.0209       $518          0.0375      $1,035         0.0424        $983
                                        (0.0056)     ($160)        (0.0058)     ($144)        (0.0070)     ($199)        (0.0078)      ($184)
Mean: Avg Summer Temperature             -0.0307     -$873          -0.0253     -$627          -0.0516    -$1,424         -0.0478     -$1,109
                                        (0.0091)     ($260)        (0.0100)     ($249)        (0.0106)     ($301)        (0.0121)      ($283)
July Humidity                             -0.0269    -$764         -0.0208      -$514           -0.0325      -$896          -0.0316     -$734
                                         (0.0049)    ($142)       (0.0054)      ($135)         (0.0054)     ($155)         (0.0059)     ($139)
Annual Snowfall                           -0.0166    -$471         -0.0170      -$422           -0.0154      -$425          -0.0215     -$499
                                         (0.0024)     ($70)       (0.0026)       ($66)         (0.0026)      ($75)         (0.0029)      ($69)
Ln(Summer Precipitation)                  0.1408      $376         0.1708        $403           0.0926       $232           0.3279       $741
                                         (0.0720)    ($192)       (0.0768)      ($181)         (0.0823)     ($206)         (0.0890)     ($202)
Annual Sunshine                           -0.0155    -$441         -0.0149      -$368           -0.0111      -$307          -0.0127     -$296
                                         (0.0057)    ($162)       (0.0060)      ($149)         (0.0067)     ($185)         (0.0076)     ($177)
Note: When entering the regressions non-linearly, amenity variables are evaluated at population-weighted means in order to compute MWTP.
Non-linear covariates are the following: population density, summer precipitation, and elevation enter in log form while distance to the coast
enters the model quadratically.



                                                                     38
               Table 4. Marginal Willingness to Pay for Climate Amenities (Sensitivity to Moving Costs)
                                            Model 1                   Model 2                     Model 3                  Model 4
Sensitivity                                Base Model               Moving Costs:              Moving Costs:             Moving Costs:
                                                                    Ln(Distance)               Married and                 Omitted
                                                                                                  Children
                                                                                                Interactions
PANEL A: 1st Stage Estimates
                                         Coef                      Coef                       Coef                      Coef
Variable
                                       (Std Err)                 (Std Err)                  (Std Err)                 (Std Err)
Std. Dev: Avg Winter Temperature        0.0666                    0.0758                     0.0664                    0.0022
                                       (0.0020)                  (0.0020)                   (0.0020)                  (0.0148)
Std. Dev: Avg Summer Temperature        0.0522                    0.0717                     0.0525                    0.0210
                                       (0.0060)                  (0.0049)                   (0.0059)                  (0.0278)
Correlation Coefficient                -0.8332                   -0.8263                    -0.8295                   -0.9975

PANEL B: 2nd Stage Estimates
                                          Coef     MWTP             Coef      MWTP             Coef     MWTP             Coef       MWTP
Variable
                                        (Std Err) (Std Err)       (Std Err) (Std Err)        (Std Err) (Std Err)       (Std Err) (Std Err)
Mean: Avg Winter Temperature             0.0249     $709           0.0278      $790           0.0248     $704           0.0232       $659
                                        (0.0056)   ($160)         (0.0056)    ($162)         (0.0056)   ($159)         (0.0054)     ($154)
Mean: Avg Summer Temperature            -0.0307     -$873         -0.0319      -$907         -0.0308     -$872         -0.0169       -$478
                                        (0.0091)   ($260)         (0.0095)    ($269)         (0.0091)   ($259)         (0.0090)     ($255)
July Humidity                           -0.0269     -$764         -0.0285      -$809         -0.0268     -$758         -0.0189       -$535
                                        (0.0049)   ($142)         (0.0050)    ($145)         (0.0049)   ($141)         (0.0044)     ($125)
Annual Snowfall                         -0.0166     -$471         -0.0165      -$468         -0.0165     -$467         -0.0038       -$109
                                        (0.0024)    ($70)         (0.0024)     ($70)         (0.0024)    ($69)         (0.0023)      ($66)
Ln(Summer Precipitation)                 0.1408     $376           0.0953      $254           0.1426     $379           0.0922       $245
                                        (0.0720)   ($192)         (0.0739)    ($197)         (0.0720)   ($192)         (0.0666)     ($177)
Annual Sunshine                         -0.0155     -$441         -0.0170      -$482         -0.0153     -$434         -0.0100       -$284
                                        (0.0057)   ($162)         (0.0059)    ($168)         (0.0057)   ($162)         (0.0057)     ($161)
Note: When entering the regressions non-linearly, amenity variables are evaluated at population-weighted means in order to compute
MWTP. Non-linear covariates are the following: population density, summer precipitation, and elevation enter in log form while distance to
the coast enters the model quadratically.


                                                                   39
              Table 5. Marginal Willingness to Pay for Climate Amenities (Sensitivity to Second Stage Specifications)
                                       Model 1                  Model 5                 Model 6                  Model 7                  Model 8
Sensitivity                          Base Model                  Omit                  Ln(land area)        Include number of           Omit Other
                                                             Ln(Population               replaces                counties            Climate Variables
                                                                Density)              Ln(population
                                                                                         density)

2nd Stage Estimates
                                    Coef     MWTP            Coef       MWTP         Coef     MWTP            Coef     MWTP            Coef     MWTP
Variable
                                  (Std Err) (Std Err)      (Std Err)   (Std Err)   (Std Err) (Std Err)      (Std Err) (Std Err)      (Std Err) (Std Err)

Mean: Avg Winter Temperature       0.0249     $709          0.0263      $748        0.0255      $725         0.0287     $815          0.0435    $1,237
                                  (0.0056)   ($160)        (0.0059)    ($169)      (0.0060)    ($171)       (0.0050)   ($142)        (0.0047)   ($139)
Mean: Avg Summer
Temperature                       -0.0307    -$873         -0.0299     -$849       -0.0313     -$890        -0.0298    -$848         -0.0288    -$820
                                  (0.0091)   ($260)        (0.0100)    ($285)      (0.0103)    ($293)       (0.0091)   ($259)        (0.0110)   ($313)
July Humidity                     -0.0269    -$764         -0.0247     -$702       -0.0219     -$623        -0.0246    -$700
                                  (0.0049)   ($142)        (0.0055)    ($157)      (0.0058)    ($166)       (0.0047)   ($135)
Annual Snowfall                   -0.0166    -$471         -0.0152     -$434       -0.0142     -$404        -0.0134    -$381
                                  (0.0024)    ($70)        (0.0026)     ($75)      (0.0027)     ($77)       (0.0023)    ($65)
Ln(Summer Precipitation)           0.1408     $376          0.0969      $258        0.0925      $247         0.0751     $200
                                  (0.0720)   ($192)        (0.0769)    ($205)      (0.0792)    ($211)       (0.0710)   ($189)
Annual Sunshine                   -0.0155    -$441         -0.0190     -$540       -0.0184     -$524        -0.0147    -$417
                                  (0.0057)   ($162)        (0.0059)    ($168)      (0.0060)    ($170)       (0.0057)   ($163)
Notes:
(1) As these sensitivities only involve changing 2nd stage variables, only estimates from stage 2 are reported.
(2) When entering the regressions non-linearly, amenity variables are evaluated at population-weighted means in order to compute MWTP. Non-linear
covariates are the following: population density, summer precipitation, and elevation enter in log form while distance to the coast enters the model
quadratically.



                                                                            40
        Table 6. Temperature, Temperature Changes, and Willingness to Pay Conditional on Current Location,
                                              by Census Division
               Census region          Northeast                                        South                           Midwest                          West                All
Census division                    NE         MA                           SA           WSC             ESC          ENC    WNC                   M             P           All
PANEL A: Baseline Values (1970 to 2000)
Share of population                5%         15%                         19%             11%           3%            17%           4%           6%          19%            46%
ST                                  69         71                          78              81            77            71           71            74          71             74
WT                                  28         30                          48              49            43            27           22            37          47             39
MWTP for ST                       (711)      (737)                       (1215)          (989)         (910)         (617)        (363)         (820)       (1343)         (940)
MWTP for WT                        388        466                         1324           1017           813           279          (93)          661         1288           819

PANEL B: Projected Values under SRES Scenarios (2020 to 2050)
Change in ST (A2)                 3.1        3.1         3.0                              5.2           4.7           3.6           4.1          3.7           3.4          3.6
Change in WT (A2)                 1.9        2.2         2.1                              2.2           2.2           2.0           1.9          2.7           1.9          2.1
Change in ST (B1)                 2.8        2.5         2.7                              5.5           4.3           3.3           3.9          3.7           3.1          3.3
Change in WT (B1)                 4.5        5.1         3.1                              3.0           3.0           3.7           3.6          2.9           2.0          3.4

WTP (A2): based on sorting                (1435)          (1259)          (637)         (2610)        (2421)        (1652)       (1770)        (1534)       (1750)        (1541)
WTP (B1): based on sorting                 (202)            552            485          (2281)        (1547)         (936)       (1713)        (1203)       (1231)         (682)
WTP (A2): ignoring sorting                (1318)          (1196)         (1172)         (2941)        (2531)        (1737)       (2201)        (1348)       (1611)        (1662)
WTP (B1): ignoring sorting                  802            1385           (173)         (2630)        (1667)         (251)        (868)        (1196)       (1315)         (529)
Notes: MWTP for ST and WT a re cal culated for ea ch household using coeffi cient dis tributions from Model 1, conditi onal on MSA choice. Values a re a vera ged a cross all
households in an MSA to obtain the a vera ge MSA MWTP. WTP is cal cula ted by mul tipl ying MSA MWTP by the releva nt tempera ture change. All di vision level va riables a re MSA
values wei ghted by MSA popula tion. NE = New England; MA = Mi ddle Atlanti c; SA = South Atlanti c; WSC = Wes t South Central; ESC = Eas t South Central ; ENC = East North
Central ; WNC = Wes t North Central ; M = Mountain; P = Pa cifi c




                                                                                        41
Table 7. Temperature, Temperature Changes, and Willingness to Pay Conditional on Current Location, by Census
                                                  Region
                                                                                Northeast                 South               Midwest               West                All
PANEL A: Baseline Values (1970 to 2000)
Share of population                                                                 20%                   33%                    22%                25%               100%
ST                                                                                   70                    79                     71                 72                 74
WT                                                                                   30                    48                     26                 45                 39
MWTP for ST                                                                        (730)                 (1108)                 (567)                 (1213)          (940)
MWTP for WT                                                                         447                   1170                   206                1192               819


PANEL B: Projected Values under SRES Scenarios (2020 to 2050)
Change in ST (A2)                                                                   3.1                    3.9                   3.7                 3.5                3.6
Change in WT (A2)                                                                   2.1                    2.1                   1.9                 2.1                2.1
Change in ST (B1)                                                                   2.6                    3.8                   3.4                 3.3                3.3
Change in WT (B1)                                                                   4.9                    3.1                   3.7                 2.2                3.4

WTP (A2): based on sorting                                                        (1302)                 (1485)                (1675)              (1697)             (1541)
WTP (B1): based on sorting                                                         368                    (660)                (1089)              (1224)              (682)
WTP (A2): ignoring sorting                                                        (1226)                 (1910)                (1828)              (1546)             (1662)
WTP (B1): ignoring sorting                                                         1243                  (1161)                 (372)              (1285)              (529)
Notes: MWTP for ST and WT a re cal culated for ea ch household using coeffi cient dis tributions from Model 1, conditi onal on MSA choice. Values a re a vera ged a cross all
households in an MSA to obtain the a vera ge MSA MWTP. WTP is cal cula ted by mul tipl ying MSA MWTP by the releva nt tempera ture change. All region-level va riables a re MSA
values wei ghted by MSA popula tion.




                                                                                       42
               Table 8. Expected Compensating Variation and Willingness to Pay, Holding Location Constant,
                                               for Scenarios A2 and B1
                    Census region                Northeast                                 South                              Midwest                       West                   All
Census division                               NE              MA             SA             WSC            ESC            ENC          WNC            M             P             All
E(CV) scenario A2                           (1423)          (1245)          (613)          (2485)         (2338)        (1623)        (1705)        (1491)        (1673)        (1492)
E(CV) scenario B1                            (171)            602            589           (2083)         (1447)         (904)        (1665)        (1098)        (1020)         (574)

WTP scenario A2                             (1435)          (1259)          (637)          (2610)         (2421)        (1652)        (1770)        (1534)        (1750)        (1541)
WTP scenario B1                              (202)            552            485           (2281)         (1547)         (936)        (1713)        (1203)        (1231)         (682)
Notes: E(CV) is cal cula ted as des cribed in the text for ea ch household. Values a re a veraged over all households in an MSA, a nd MSA a vera ges a re weighted by popula tion to yield
di vision a vera ges. MWTP for ST and WT a re calculated for ea ch household using coeffi cient dis tributions from Model 1, conditional on MSA choi ce. Values a re a vera ged across
all households in a n MSA to obtain the a vera ge MSA MWTP. WTP is cal cula ted by mul tipl ying MSA MWTP by the relevant tempera ture change. All di vision-level va riables a re
MSA values weighted by MSA population. NE = New England; MA = Middle Atlantic; SA = South Atlanti c; WSC = West South Central ; ESC = East South Central ; ENC = East North
Central ; WNC = Wes t North Central ; M = Mountain; P = Pa cifi c




                                                                                           43
Appendix A

                   Table A-1. Summary of Hedonic Wage Coefficients
Variables                                              Mean of Estimates   Std Dev of Estimates
(Dependent Variable: log(wage rate))                    from 284 MSAs         from 284 MSAs
High School (left out category is no high school)           0.098                 0.038
Some College                                                0.180                 0.045
College Graduate                                            0.382                 0.069
Higher Education                                            0.546                 0.074
Age                                                         0.048                 0.007
Age squared (divided by 100)                                0.000                 0.000
Married                                                     0.092                 0.021
Male                                                        0.215                 0.040
Black (left out category is white)                          -0.070                0.070
Other Race                                                  -0.055                0.054
Speaks English Well                                         0.126                 0.103
Hispanic                                                    -0.057                0.074
Business Operations Occupation (left out category is        -0.122                0.067
Management Occupation)
Financial Specialists Occupation                            -0.116                0.072
Computer and Math Occupation                                0.004                 0.089
Engineering Occupation                                      -0.073                0.083
Life, Physical, & Social Sciences Occupation                -0.180                0.100
Social Services Occupation                                  -0.328                0.078
Legal Occupation                                            -0.039                0.127
Teachers Occupation                                         -0.190                0.093
Other Educational Occupation                                -0.473                0.129
Arts, Sports & Media Occupation                             -0.243                0.094
Healthcare Practitioners Occupation                         0.062                 0.078
Healthcare Support Occupation                               -0.330                0.078
Protective Services Occupation                              -0.240                0.106
Food and Serving Occupation                                 -0.428                0.077
Maintenance Occupation                                      -0.472                0.074
Personal Care Service Occupation                            -0.423                0.114
High Skill Sales Occupation                                 -0.136                0.067
Low Skill Sales Occupation                                  -0.228                0.062
Office Support Occupation                                   -0.298                0.049
Construction Trades & Extraction Workers Occupation         -0.246                0.090
Maintenance Workers Occupation                              -0.192                0.065
Production Occupation                                       -0.317                0.084
Transportation Occupation                                   -0.357                0.075



                                                44
                    Table A-1. Summary of Hedonic Wage Coefficients
Variables                                                Mean of Estimates      Std Dev of Estimates
(Dependent Variable: log(wage rate))                      from 284 MSAs            from 284 MSAs
Construction Industry (left out category is Mining and        -0.180                   0.095
Utilities) a
Manufacturing Industry                                         -0.120                   0.107
Wholesale Industry                                             -0.185                   0.097
Retail Industry                                                -0.339                   0.094
Transportation Industry                                        -0.084                   0.107
Information & Communications Industry                          -0.134                   0.109
Finance Industry                                               -0.175                   0.105
Professional and Scientific Management Services                -0.220                   0.101
Industry
Educational and Health Social Services Industry                -0.267                   0.092
Recreation and Food Services Industry                          -0.370                   0.110
Other Services Industry                                        -0.343                   0.101
Public Administration Industry                                 -0.126                   0.095
a
 Since these two industries have a very low number of observations, we bundled them together as the
omitted category




                                                   45
              Table A-2. Summary of Hedonic Housing Coefficients
Variables
                                                   Mean of Estimates   Std Dev of Estimates
(Dependent Variable: log(user costs including
                                                    from 284 MSAs         from 284 MSAs
insurance and utility costs))
House is Owned                                          0.464                 0.144
3 Bedrooms (left out category is less than three        0.160                 0.061
bedrooms)
4 Bedrooms                                              0.208                 0.082
5 Bedrooms                                              0.324                 0.110
Greater than 5 Bedrooms                                 0.500                 0.163
2 Rooms (left out category is less than two             0.080                 0.133
rooms)
3 Rooms                                                 0.053                 0.140
4 Rooms                                                 0.075                 0.146
5 Rooms                                                 0.126                 0.154
6 Rooms                                                 0.218                 0.156
Greater than 6 Rooms                                    0.413                 0.176
Complete Kitchen                                        -0.104                0.261
Complete Plumbing                                       0.221                 0.212
1 to 10 Acres                                           0.246                 0.140
0 to 1 years old (left out category is over 61          0.428                 0.157
years old)
2 to 5 years old                                        0.404                 0.158
6 to 10 years old                                       0.358                 0.150
11 to 20 years old                                      0.247                 0.127
21 to 30 years old                                      0.150                 0.122
31 to 40 years old                                      0.093                 0.113
41 to 50 years old                                      0.039                 0.089
51 to 60 years old                                      -0.011                0.075
Number of Units in Structure: Single-Attached           -0.082                0.105
(left out category is single family detached)
2 Units in Structure                                    -0.089                0.107
3 to 4 Units in Structure                               -0.135                0.095
5 to 9 Units in Structure                               -0.167                0.106
10 to 19 Units in Structure                             -0.132                0.127
20 to 49 Units in Structure                             -0.154                0.151
Over 50 Units in Structure                              -0.190                0.207




                                                   46
   Table A-3. Marginal Willingness to Pay for All Location-Specific Amenities (Base Discrete Choice Models)
                                     Model 1 (Full)         Model 1 (Prime)          Model 1 (>55)         Model 1 (Movers)
Sample                                 All Ages              Prime-Aged              Over 55 Years          Changed MSA
                                     (Base Model)                                                             between
                                                                                                            1995 and 2000
PANEL A: 1st Stage Estimates
                                     Coef                    Coef                    Coef                    Coef
Variable
                                   (Std Err)               (Std Err)               (Std Err)               (Std Err)
Std. Dev: Avg Winter Temperature    0.0666                  0.0588                  0.0742                  0.0781
                                   (0.0020)                (0.0026)                (0.0039)                (0.0038)
Std. Dev: Avg Summer Temperature    0.0522                  0.0592                  0.0331                  0.0698
                                   (0.0060)                (0.0068)                (0.0091)                (0.0079)
Correlation Coefficient            -0.8332                  -0.6893                 -0.9936                 -0.8245

PANEL B: 2nd Stage Estimates
                                     Coef       MWTP         Coef       MWTP         Coef       MWTP         Coef       MWTP
Variable
                                   (Std Err)   (Std Err)   (Std Err)   (Std Err)   (Std Err)   (Std Err)   (Std Err)   (Std Err)
Mean: Avg Winter Temperature        0.0249      $709        0.0209      $518        0.0375     $1,035       0.0424       $983
                                   (0.0056)    ($160)      (0.0058)    ($144)      (0.0070)     ($199)     (0.0078)     ($184)
Mean: Avg Summer Temperature       -0.0307      -$873       -0.0253     -$627       -0.0516    -$1,424      -0.0478    -$1,109
                                   (0.0091)    ($260)      (0.0100)    ($249)      (0.0106)     ($301)     (0.0121)     ($283)
July Humidity                      -0.0269      -$764       -0.0208     -$514       -0.0325     -$896       -0.0316     -$734
                                   (0.0049)    ($142)      (0.0054)    ($135)      (0.0054)    ($155)      (0.0059)    ($139)
Annual Snowfall                    -0.0166      -$471       -0.0170     -$422       -0.0154     -$425       -0.0215     -$499
                                   (0.0024)     ($70)      (0.0026)     ($66)      (0.0026)     ($75)      (0.0029)     ($69)
Ln(Summer Precipitation)            0.1408      $376        0.1708      $403        0.0926      $232        0.3279      $741
                                   (0.0720)    ($192)      (0.0768)    ($181)      (0.0823)    ($206)      (0.0890)    ($202)
Annual Sunshine                    -0.0155      -$441       -0.0149     -$368       -0.0111     -$307       -0.0127     -$296
                                   (0.0057)    ($162)      (0.0060)    ($149)      (0.0067)    ($185)      (0.0076)    ($177)
Ln(Population Density)              0.2283        $7        0.2094        $6        0.2939        $9        0.2535        $6
                                   (0.0452)      ($1)      (0.0494)      ($1)      (0.0521)      ($2)      (0.0592)      ($2)




                                                             47
   Table A-3. Marginal Willingness to Pay for All Location-Specific Amenities (Base Discrete Choice Models)
                                          Model 1 (Full)           Model 1 (Prime)             Model 1 (>55)           Model 1 (Movers)
Sample                                      All Ages                Prime-Aged                 Over 55 Years              Changed MSA
                                          (Base Model)                                                                      between
                                                                                                                         1995 and 2000
Mean PM2.5                              0.0708      $2,014         0.0572     $1,416         0.0990     $2,731         0.0767     $1,779
                                       (0.0159)     ($455)        (0.0164)    ($408)        (0.0182)    ($519)        (0.0202)    ($471)
Violent Crime Rate                      0.0045       $129          0.0006       $15          0.0115      $316          -0.0090     -$208
                                       (0.0136)     ($386)        (0.0142)    ($352)        (0.0166)    ($458)        (0.0173)    ($402)
Transportation Score                    0.0093       $263          0.0105      $259          0.0081      $223          0.0038        $88
                                       (0.0015)      ($42)        (0.0015)     ($39)        (0.0018)     ($51)        (0.0018)     ($42)
Education Score                         0.0034        $97          0.0043      $106          0.0011       $29          0.0053      $123
                                       (0.0015)      ($44)        (0.0016)     ($41)        (0.0017)     ($48)        (0.0018)     ($41)
Arts Score                              0.0048       $136          0.0043      $106          0.0048      $132          0.0034        $79
                                       (0.0017)      ($49)        (0.0018)     ($46)        (0.0020)     ($55)        (0.0021)     ($50)
Healthcare Score                        0.0005        $13          0.0002        $4          0.0004       $11          0.0016        $37
                                       (0.0012)      ($33)        (0.0012)     ($31)        (0.0014)     ($39)        (0.0015)     ($34)
Recreation Score                        0.0131       $374          0.0124      $307          0.0150      $414          0.0156      $363
                                       (0.0015)      ($44)        (0.0016)     ($41)        (0.0018)     ($54)        (0.0019)     ($46)
Park Area                               0.0002         $4          0.0001        $4          0.0002        $5          0.0002        $4
                                       (0.0001)       ($2)        (0.0001)      ($1)        (0.0001)      ($2)        (0.0001)      ($2)
Visibility > 10 Miles                   0.0078       $222          0.0073      $180          0.0094      $259          0.0093      $216
                                       (0.0032)      ($92)        (0.0033)     ($82)        (0.0038)    ($106)        (0.0037)     ($87)
Ln(Elevation)                           0.0810     $13,069         0.0895    $12,450         0.0873    $14,273         0.1468    $17,898
                                       (0.0441)    ($7,126)       (0.0481)   ($6,706)       (0.0475)   ($7,798)       (0.0547) ($6,683)
Distance to Coast                      -0.0025       -$45          -0.0020     -$25          -0.0035     -$65          -0.0034      -$52
                                       (0.0007)      ($15)        (0.0007)     ($14)        (0.0008)     ($18)        (0.0009)     ($15)
(Distance to Coast)^2                   0.0000                     0.0000                    0.0000                    0.0000
                                       (0.0000)                   (0.0000)                  (0.0000)                  (0.0000)
Num. of Obs. (MSAs)                       284                       284                        284                       284
Adjusted R-squared                        0.84                      0.82                      0.82                       0.78
Note: When entering the regressions non-linearly, amenity variables are evaluated at population-weighted means in order to compute
MWTP. Non-linear covariates are the following: population density, summer precipitation, and elevation enter in log form while distance to
the coast enters the model quadratically.


                                                                    48
           Table A-4. Marginal Willingness to Pay for Climate Amenities (Sensitivity to HB Specifications)
                                                       Model 1                           Model 9                          Model 10
Sensitivity                                           Base Model                       Quadratic HB                Log(Wage) in 1st stage
                                                                                                                   with housing price index
                                                                                                                         in 2nd stage
PANEL A: 1st Stage Estimates
                                                   Coef                              Coef                             Coef
Variable
                                                (Std Err)                         (Std Err)                        (Std Err)
Std. Dev: Avg Winter Temperature                 0.0666                            0.0664                           0.0673
                                                (0.0020)                          (0.0020)                         (0.0020)
Std. Dev: Avg Summer Temperature                 0.0522                            0.0536                           0.0527
                                                (0.0060)                          (0.0059)                         (0.0059)
Correlation Coefficient                          -0.8332                           -0.8273                          -0.8257

PANEL B: 2nd Stage Estimates
                                                   Coef        MWTP                 Coef         MWTP                 Coef         MWTP
Variable
                                                (Std Err)     (Std Err)          (Std Err)      (Std Err)           (Std Err)     (Std Err)
Mean: Avg Winter Temperature                     0.0249         $709              0.0253          $588               0.0226         $885
                                                (0.0056)       ($160)            (0.0055)        ($136)            (0.0057)        ($247)
Mean: Avg Summer Temperature                     -0.0307       -$873              -0.0319        -$740              -0.0256       -$1,004
                                                (0.0091)       ($260)            (0.0091)        ($220)            (0.0093)        ($402)
July Humidity                                    -0.0269       -$764              -0.0264        -$614              -0.0296       -$1,160
                                                (0.0049)       ($142)            (0.0049)        ($121)            (0.0050)        ($224)
Annual Snowfall                                  -0.0166       -$471              -0.0166        -$385              -0.0169        -$662
                                                (0.0024)        ($70)            (0.0024)         ($61)            (0.0024)        ($110)
Ln(Summer Precipitation)                         0.1408         $376              0.1433          $312               0.1495         $550
                                                (0.0720)       ($192)            (0.0716)        ($161)            (0.0737)        ($297)
Annual Sunshine                                  -0.0155       -$441              -0.0143        -$331              -0.0183        -$716
                                                (0.0057)       ($162)            (0.0056)        ($136)            (0.0059)        ($253)
Note: When entering the regressions non-linearly, amenity variables are evaluated at population-weighted means in order to compute
MWTP. Non-linear covariates are the following: population density, summer precipitation, and elevation enter in log form while distance to
the coast enters the model quadratically.


                                                                    49
Appendix B

Derivation of Model 10 (Housing Price Index in Stage 2)

Suppose household i maximizes a Cobb-Douglas utility function




subject to a budget constraint                      where Cij is consumption of a composite good in
city j, Hij is housing, ρj is a city-specific housing price index, and all other variables are as
previously defined. Substituting optimal values for Cij and Hij and taking logs yields the indirect
utility for household i living in city j 32



 where                 . Combining all terms that vary only by MSA gives an alternative
specification for indirect utility:



where                           . First stage estimation proceeds via simulated maximum likelihood
as in our base case.
        In the second stage, we would like to regress the estimated MSA fixed effects ( ) on the
housing price index and local amenities according to the following regression:



However, ρj is likely to be correlated with the error term ηij. Thus, we rearrange and estimate the
following equation



recalling that ρj is the estimated fixed effect from a national hedonic regression of housing
expenditures on housing characteristics and that, by the properties of Cobb-Douglas utility, we
have that          is the proportion of income spent on housing. Thus, multiplying the median



32




                                                   50
share of income spent on housing (0.25) from our sample of households by   (estimated in the
first stage) gives us an estimate for




                                             51
