                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CREDIT FRICTIONS AND OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY

                                           Vasco Cúrdia
                                         Michael Woodford

                                        Working Paper 21820
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21820


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2015




Revision of a paper prepared for the BIS annual conference, "Whither Monetary Policy?" Lucerne,
Switzerland, June 26-27, 2008. We would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Olivier Blanchard, Bill Brainard,
V.V. Chari, Fiorella DeFiore, Marco Del Negro, Gauti Eggertsson, Simon Gilchrist, Marvin Goodfriend,
Charles Goodhart, Miles Kimball, John Leahy, Bennett McCallum, Tommaso Monacelli, Argia Sbordone,
Frank Smets and Oreste Tristani for helpful comments, and the NSF for research support of the second
author through a grant to the NBER. The content of this document does not necessarily reflect the
views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21820.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Vasco Cúrdia and Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy
Vasco Cúrdia and Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 21820
December 2015
JEL No. E44,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

We extend the basic (representative-household) New Keynesian [NK] model of the monetary transmission
mechanism to allow for a spread between the interest rate available to savers and borrowers, that can
vary for either exogenous or endogenous reasons. We find that the mere existence of a positive average
spread makes little quantitative difference for the predicted effects of particular policies. Variation
in spreads over time is of greater significance, with consequences both for the equilibrium relation
between the policy rate and aggregate expenditure and for the relation between real activity and inflation.

Nonetheless, we find that the target criterion—a linear relation that should be maintained between
the inflation rate and changes in the output gap—that characterizes optimal policy in the basic NK
model continues to provide a good approximation to optimal policy, even in the presence of variations
in credit spreads. Such a "flexible inflation target" can be implemented by a central-bank reaction
function that is similar to a forward-looking Taylor rule, but adjusted for changes in current and expected
future credit spreads.


Vasco Cúrdia
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street, MS 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105
vasco.curdia@sf.frb.org

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


1       Introduction
It is common for theoretical evaluations of alternative monetary policies — most notably,
the literature that provides theoretical foundations for inflation targeting — to be conducted
using models of the monetary transmission mechanism that abstract altogether from financial
frictions.1 There is generally assumed to be a single interest rate — “the interest rate” —
that is at once the policy rate that constitutes the operating target for the central bank, the
rate of return that all households and firms receive on savings, and the rate at which anyone
can borrow against future income. In models with more complete theoretical foundations,
this is justified by assuming frictionless financial markets, in which all interest rates (of
similar maturity) must be equal in order for arbitrage opportunities not to exist. It is also
common to assume a representative household, and firms that maximize the value of their
earnings streams to that household, so that there is no need for credit flows in equilibrium in
any event; such models imply that a breakdown of credit markets would have no allocative
significance. Many of the quantitative DSGE models developed in central banks and other
policy institutions before the recent financial crisis share these features.2
    Such models abstract from important complications of actual economies, even those that
are financially quite sophisticated. Sizeable spreads exist, on average, between different
interest rates; moreover, these spreads are not constant over time, especially in periods of
financial stress. And “tighter” financial conditions, indicated by increases in the size of credit
spreads, are commonly associated with lower levels of real expenditure and employment. This
poses obvious questions for the practical application of much work in the theory of monetary
policy.3 If a model is to be calibrated or estimated using time series data, which actual
interest rate should be taken to correspond to “the interest rate” in the model? When the
model is used to to give advice about how interest rates should respond to a particular type
of shock, which actual interest rate (if any) should be made to respond in the way that “the
interest rate” does in the model? How large an error is likely to be made by abstracting from
credit frictions, with regard to the model’s predictions for the variables that appear in it?
Moreover, some questions clearly cannot even be addressed using models that abstract from
credit frictions. Most notably, how should a central bank respond to a “financial shock” that
increases the size of the spreads resulting from credit frictions?
    This paper seeks to address these questions by presenting a simple extension of the basic
    1
     See, for example, Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) or Woodford (2003), among many other references.
    2
     The models of Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007) provide an especially influential example.
   3
     The pre-crisis generation of DSGE models was criticized on this ground by Issing (2006) and Goodhart
(2007), among others.



                                                   2
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


“New Keynesian” model (as developed, for example, in Woodford, 2003) in which a credit
friction is introduced, allowing for a time-varying wedge between the interest rate available to
households on their savings and the interest rate at which it is possible to borrow. Financial
intermediation matters for the allocation of resources due to the introduction of heterogeneity
in the spending opportunities currently available to different households. While the model
remains highly stylized, it has the advantage of nesting the basic New Keynesian model
(extensively used in normative monetary policy analysis) as a special case, and of introducing
only a small number of additional parameters, the consequences of which for conclusions
about the monetary transmission mechanism and the character of optimal policy can be
thoroughly explored. The approach taken also seeks to develop a tractable model, with as
small a state space as is consistent with an allowance for financial frictions and heterogeneity,
and hence only modestly greater complexity than the basic New Keynesian model.
    Among the questions to be addressed are the following: If the parameters determining
the degree of heterogeneity and the size of credit frictions are calibrated so as to match both
the volume of bank credit and the spread between bank deposit and lending rates in the US
economy, how much of a difference does this make (relative to the frictionless baseline) for
the model’s predictions for the response of the economy to various types of shocks, under a
given monetary policy rule? How much of a difference does it make for the implied responses
to real disturbances under an optimal monetary policy? How much of a difference does
it make for the form of the quadratic stabilization objective that would correspond to the
maximization of average expected utility? How much of a difference does it make for the
form of the optimal target criterion for monetary stabilization policy? And how should
policy optimally respond to a “financial shock”?
    The model also provides perspective on “rules of thumb” for policy in times of financial
turmoil proposed in the recent literature. For example, McCulley and Toloui (2008) and
Taylor (2008) propose that the intercept term in a “Taylor rule” for monetary policy should
be adjusted downward in proportion to observed increases in spreads.4 Here we use our simple
model to ask whether it is correct to say that the “natural” or “neutral” rate of interest is
lower when credit spreads increase (assuming unchanged fundamentals otherwise), and to
the extent that it is, how the size of the change in the natural rate compares to the size of
the change in credit spreads. We also ask whether it is approximately correct to say that
a proper response to a “financial shock” is to conduct policy according to the same rule as
   4
    Similarly, Meyer and Sack (2008) propose, as a possible account of recent U.S. Federal Reserve policy,
a Taylor rule in which the intercept—representing the Fed’s view of “the equilibrium real funds rate”—has
been adjusted downward in response to credit market turmoil, and use the size of increases in spreads in
early 2008 as a basis for a proposed magnitude of the appropriate adjustment.


                                                    3
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


under other circumstances, except with the operating target for the policy rate adjusted by a
factor that is proportional to the increase in credit spreads; and again, to the extent that such
an approximation is used, we ask what proportion of adjustment should be made. Cúrdia
and Woodford (2010) use the framework presented in this paper to evaluate the positive
and normative consequences of adopting the proposals of McCulley and Toloui (2008) and
Taylor (2008) and find that an adjustment for variations in credit spreads can improve upon
the standard Taylor rule, but the optimal size (and direction) of adjustment depends on the
source of the variation in credit spreads.
    Other authors have argued that if financial disturbances are an important source of
macroeconomic instability, a sound approach to monetary policy will have to pay attention
to the balance sheets of financial intermediaries. It is sometimes suggested that policy
should respond to variations in the growth rate of monetary or credit aggregates, rather
than — as in the case of both the Taylor rule and conventional prescriptions for “flexible
inflation targeting” — seeking to determine the appropriate level of short-term interest
rates purely on the basis of observations of or projections for measures of inflation and real
activity. Here we consider two possible interpretations of such proposals: as an argument
for targeting monetary and/or credit aggregates, or at least adopting a target criterion
that involves such variables along with others; or as an argument for their special value
as indicators, so that such variables should receive substantial weight in the central bank’s
reaction function. We address the first issue by deriving an optimal target criterion for
monetary policy, under certain simplifying assumptions, and seeing to what extent it involves
either money or credit. We address the second issue, under assumptions that are arguably
more realistic, by computing the optimal responses to shocks, and asking what kinds of
indicator variables would allow a simple rule of thumb to bring about equilibrium responses
of this kind.
    Of course, we are not the first to investigate ways in which New Keynesian [NK] models
can be extended to allow for financial frictions of one type or another. A number of authors
have analyzed DSGE models with financial frictions of one type or another before the recent
financial crisis.5 Many of the best-known contributions introduce obstacles to the willingness
   5
    Probably the most influential early example was the model of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999).
More recent contributions include Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2003, 2010), Christiano et al. (2008),
Gertler, Gilchrist and Natalucci (2007), and Iacoviello (2005). Faia and Monacelli (2007) consider how
two different types of financial frictions affect welfare-based policy evaluation, though from a perspective
somewhat different than the one taken here; they compare alternative simple rules, rather than computing
optimal policy, as we do, and compute the welfare associated with a particular rule under a complete
specification of shocks, rather than considering what a given simple rule implies about the equilibrium
responses to shocks considered individually. Cúrdia (2008) considers optimal policy in the spirit of the



                                                     4
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


of savers to lend to borrowers, but assume that borrowers directly borrow from the suppliers
of savings. The recent financial crisis increased interest in models like ours that explicitly
introduce intermediaries and allow for a spread between the interest received by savers and
that paid by borrowers; early contributions include Hulsewig, Mayer and Wollmershauser
(2009), Teranishi (2008), Sudo and Teranishi (2008), and Gerali, Neri and Signoretti (2008).6
    More recently, Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) also seek to provide a canonical model of
credit market frictions and economic activity. Their work extends the “financial accelerator”
framework to the case in which financial intermediaries themselves are exposed to the risk of
default and thus face constraints on their ability to attract deposits (unlike Bernanke, Gertler
and Gilchrist, 1999). Gertler and Kiyotaki use this model to discuss the consequences to
real activity in the case of an imperfect interbank market, in which the banks cannot fully
offset their risk exposure by pooling their loans. Their analysis is similar in spirit to ours
but less focused on monetary policy. Related recent contributions include those of Meh and
Moran (2010), Kiyotaki and Moore (2012), and Jermann and Quadrini (2012).
    In general, these models are fairly complex, in the interest of microfoundation and/or
quantitative realism, and the results obtained are mostly numerical. Our aim here is some-
what different. While the interest of such analyses is clear, especially to policy institutions
seeking quantitative estimates of the effects of particular contemplated actions, we believe
that it is also valuable to seek analytical insights of the kind that can only be obtained from
analyses of simpler, more stylized models. Here we focus on the consequences for monetary
policy analysis of two basic features of economies — heterogeneity of non-financial economic
units, of a kind that gives the financial sector a non-trivial role in the allocation of resources;
and costs of financial intermediation, that may be subject to random variation for reasons
relating largely to developments in the financial sector — in the simplest possible setting,
where we do not introduce other departures from the basic NK model.
    Two contributions have aims more closely related to ours. Like us, Goodfriend and
McCallum (2007) consider a fairly simple NK model, with new model elements limited to
those necessary to allow for multiple interest rates with different average levels (including,
like us, a distinction between bank lending rates and the policy rate).7 As in the present
paper, a primary goal is to “investigate quantitatively how much a central bank can be misled
by relying on a [NK] model without money and banking when managing its interbank-rate
present paper, but in a more complex model with features specific to emerging-market economies.
   6
     See Gerali, Neri and Signoretti (2008, sec. 2) for a more detailed discussion of early work in this vein.
See also Brunnermeier, Eisenbach and Sannikov (2012) for a very extensive survey of the macroeconomic
implications of financial frictions of a variety of types.
   7
     This paper provides a quantitative analysis of type of model first proposed by Goodfriend (2005).



                                                      5
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


policy instrument.” De Fiore and Tristani (2011) also propose a simple generalization of the
basic NK model in order to introduce a distinction between loan rates and the policy; also
like us, they consider how financial frictions affect the “natural rate of interest,” and the role
of such a concept in inflation determination in an economy with credit frictions.
    The approaches taken by these authors nonetheless differ from ours in important respects.
In particular, unlike us, Goodfriend and McCallum assume a representative-household model;
as a consequence, financial intermediation matters for resource allocation in their model only
because they assume that certain liabilities of banks (transactions balances) play a crucial
role in facilitating transactions. We instead treat the fact that some (but not all) financial
intermediaries finance (some) of their lending by providing accounts that are useful as means
of payment as inessential to the primary function of financial intermediaries in the economy;
and in our model, for the sake of simplicity, we assume that intermediaries finance themselves
entirely by issuing deposits that supply no transactions services at all (so that in equilibrium,
deposits must pay the same interest rate as government debt).
    De Fiore and Tristani instead have two types of infinite-lived agents (“households” and
“entrepreneurs,” following Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), one of which saves while
the other borrows; but in their model, unlike ours, agents belong permanently to one of
these categories, and one is tempted to identify the division between them with the division
between households and firms in the flow of funds accounts. This would be desirable, of
course, if one thought that the model did adequately capture the nature of that division,
as the model would yield additional testable predictions. But in fact, there are both saving
units and borrowing units at a given point in time, both in the household sector and in the
firm sector; and a saving unit at one point in time need not be a saving unit forever. We
accordingly prefer not to introduce a distinction between households and firms (or “house-
holds” and “entrepreneurs”) at all, and also not to assume that the identities of our savers
and borrowers are permanent.8 In addition, De Fiore and Tristani, like Goodfriend and
McCallum, assume that money must be used in (some) transactions, while we abstract from
transactions frictions of this kind altogether in order to simplify our analysis.9
   8
     In fact, De Fiore and Tristani list as an important “undesirable property” of their model the fact that
in it, “households and entrepreneurs are radically different agents” (p. 23), as the predicted equilibrium
behavior of “households” as a group does not look much like that of the aggregate household sector in actual
economies.
   9
     Goodfriend and McCallum justify the introduction of a cash-in-advance constraint in their model, stating
(footnote 6) that “medium-of-exchange money is implicitly central to our analysis because it is by managing
the aggregate quantity of reserves, which banks hold to facilitate transactions, that monetary policy affects
interest rates.” However, while in their model, banks hold reserves at the central bank only because of
a reserve requirement proportional to transactions balances, this need not be true in actual economies, a
number of which (such as Canada) have abolished reserve requirements. Moreover, it is possible in principle


                                                     6
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


    With the extensive use of unconventional policies by central banks across the world
in response to the financial crisis, models such as the one we discuss have been called to
evaluate those policies. That goes beyond the scope of this paper. Cúrdia and Woodford
(2011) extend our framework to explicitly evaluate the use of the central bank’s balance
sheet to stabilize the economy, namely through “credit policy” — the purchase of illiquid
assets by the central bank. Gertler and Karadi (2011) also analyze the use of “credit policy”
through an extension of Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010).
    We develop our model in section 2, and compare its structure with that of the basic NK
model. We then consider, in section 3, the implications of the model for the equilibrium
effects of a variety of types of exogenous disturbances, under a given assumption about
monetary policy (such as that it conform to a “Taylor rule”), and ask to what extent the
basic NK model gives incorrect answers to these questions. Section 4 considers optimal
monetary policy in the context of our model, defined to mean a policy that maximizes the
average expected utility of households, and again considers how different the conclusions
are from those derived from the basic NK model. We also discuss the way in which the
interest-rate reaction function required to implement a “flexible inflation target” should
involve responses to variations in credit spreads. Section 5 summarizes our conclusions.


2     A New Keynesian Model with Financial Frictions
Here we sketch a model that introduces heterogeneity of the kind needed in order for financial
intermediation to matter for resource allocation, and a limit on the degree of intermediation
that occurs in equilibrium, with a minimum of structure. We stress the similarity between
the model presented here and the basic New Keynesian model, and show how the standard
model is recovered as a special case of the one developed here. This sets the stage for a
quantitative investigation of the degree to which credit frictions of an empirically realistic
magnitude change the predictions of the model.
for a central bank to control the interest rate in the interbank market for central-bank deposits without there
being any demand for such reserves other than as a riskless store of value, as discussed in Woodford (2003,
chap. 2). Hence there is no need to introduce a demand for money for transactions purposes in our model,
in order for it to be possible to suppose that the central bank controls a short-term nominal interest rate,
that will correspond to the rate at which banks can fund themselves.




                                                      7
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


2.1     Financial Frictions and Aggregate Demand
We depart from the assumption of a representative household in the standard model, by
supposing that households differ in their preferences. Each household i seeks to maximize a
discounted intertemporal objective of the form
                            ∞
                            X                                           Z   1                                   
                                      t       τt (i)                                 τt (i)
                       E0         β           u        (ct (i); ξt ) −           v            (ht (j; i) ; ξt ) dj ,
                            t=0                                          0


where τt (i) ∈ {b, s} indicates the household’s “type” in period t. Here ub (c; ξ) and us (c; ξ)
are two different period utility functions, each of which may also be shifted by the vector of
aggregate taste shocks ξt , and v b (h; ξ) and v s (h; ξ) are correspondingly two different functions
indicating the period disutility from working. As in the basic NK model, there is assumed
to be a continuum of differentiated goods, each produced by a monopolistically competitive
supplier; ct (i) is a Dixit-Stiglitz aggegator of the household’s purchases of these differentiated
goods. The household similarly supplies a continuum of different types of specialized labor,
indexed by j, that are hired by firms in different sectors of the economy; the additively
separable disutility of work v τ (h; ξ) is the same for each type of labor, though it depends on
the household’s type and the common taste shock.10
    Each agent’s type τt (i) evolves as an independent two-state Markov chain. Specifically,
we assume that each period, with probability 1 − δ (for some 0 ≤ δ < 1) an event occurs
which results in a new type for the household being drawn; otherwise it remains the same
as in the previous period. When a new type is drawn, it is b with probability πb and s with
probability πs , where 0 < πb , πs < 1, πb + πs = 1. (Hence the population fractions of the two
types are constant at all times, and equal to πτ for each type τ.) We assume moreover that

                                                         ubc (c; ξ) > usc (c; ξ)

for all levels of expenditure c in the range that occur in equilibrium. (See Figure 1, where
these functions are graphed in the case of the calibration discussed below.11 ) Hence a change
in a household’s type changes its relative impatience to consume,12 given the aggregate
  10
     As in Woodford (2003), the vector ξt may contain multiple elements, which may or may not be correlated
with one another, so that the notation makes no assumption about correlation between disturbances to the
utility of consumption and disturbances to the disutility of work.
  11
     In the equilibrium discussed below, in the case of small enough disturbances, equilibrium consumption
by the two types varies in neighborhoods of the two values c̄b and c̄s shown in the figure.
  12
     As explained below, all households have the same expectations regarding their marginal utilities of
expenditure far in the future. Hence if type b households have a higher current marginal utility of expenditure,
they also have a higher valuation of current (marginal) expenditure relative to future expenditure; thus we


                                                                    8
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


state ξt ; in addition, the current impatience to consume of all households is changed by the
aggregate disturbance ξt . We also assume that the marginal utility of additional expenditure
diminishes at different rates for the two types, as is also illustrated in the figure; type b
households (who are borrowers in equilibrium) have a marginal utility that varies less with
the current level of expenditure, resulting in a greater degree of intertemporal substitution
of their expenditures in response to interest-rate changes. Finally, the two types are also
assumed to differ in the marginal disutility of working a given number of hours; this difference
is calibrated so that the two types choose to work the same number of hours in steady state,
despite their differing marginal utilities of income. For simplicity, the elasticities of labor
supply of the two types are not assumed to differ.13
    The coexistence of the two types with differing impatience to consume creates a social
function for financial intermediation. In the present model, as in the basic New Keynesian
model, all output is consumed either by households or by the government;14 hence inter-
mediation serves an allocative function only to the extent that there are reasons for the
intertemporal marginal rates of substitution of households to differ in the absence of finan-
cial flows. The present model reduces to the standard representative-household model in the
case that one assumes that ub (c; ξ) = us (c; ξ) and v b (h; ξ) = v s (h; ξ).
    We shall assume that most of the time, households are able to spend an amount dif-
ferent from their current income only by depositing funds with or borrowing from financial
intermediaries, and that the same nominal interest rate is available to all savers, and that a
(possibly) different nominal interest is available to all borrowers,15 independent of the quan-
tities that a given household chooses to save or to borrow. (For simplicity, we shall also
assume in the present exposition that only one-period riskless nominal contracts with the
intermediary are possible for either savers or borrowers.) The assumption that households
may say that they are more impatient to consume.
  13
     As is specified below in our discussion of our calibrated examples, we assume that the function v b (h; ξ)
differs from v s (h; ξ) only by a multiplicative factor.
  14
     The “consumption” variable is therefore to be interpreted as representing all of private expenditure, not
only consumer expenditure. In reality, one of the most important reasons for some economic units to wish
to borrow from others is that the former currently have access to profitable investment opportunities. Here
we treat these opportunities as if they were opportunities to consume, in the sense that we suppose that the
expenditure opportunities are valuable to the household, but we abstract from any consequences of current
expenditure for future productivity. For discussion of the interpretation of “consumption” in the basic New
Keynesian model, see Woodford (2003, pp. 242-243).
  15
     Here “savers” and “borrowers” identify households according to whether they choose to save or borrow,
and not by their “type”. We assume that at any time, each household is able to save or borrow (or both
at once, though it would never make sense to do so) at market interest rates. In the equilibrium described
below, it turns out that a household i borrows in period t if and only if τt (i) = b, but this is a consequence
of optimization rather than an implication of a participation constraint.



                                                      9
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


cannot engage in financial contracting other than through the intermediary sector introduces
the financial friction with which the paper is concerned.
    Our analysis is simplified (though this may not be immediately apparent!) by allowing
for an additional form of financial contracting. We assume that households are able to sign
state-contingent contracts with one another, through which they may insure one another
against both aggregate risk and the idiosyncratic risk associated with a household’s random
draw of its type, but that households are only intermittently able to receive transfers from
the insurance agency; between the infrequent occasions when a household has access to
the insurance agency, it can only save or borrow through the financial intermediary sector
mentioned in the previous paragraph. The assumption that households are eventually able to
make transfers to one another in accordance with an insurance contract signed earlier means
that despite our assumption of infinite-lived households, households’ respective marginal
utilities of income do not eventually become more and more dispersed as a result of their
differing individual type histories. This facilitates aggregation (so that our model still has
a low-dimensional state space), and allows us to obtain stationary equilibrium fluctuations
and to use local methods to characterize them. At the same time, the fact that households
may go for years without access to insurance transfers means that there remains a non-trivial
financial friction for the banking sector to partially mitigate.16
    To simplify the presentation, we assume here that the random dates on which a given
household i has access to the insurance agency are the same dates as those on which it
draws a new type. Thus with probability δ each period, household i is unable to receive any
insurance transfer in the current period, and also retains the same type as in the previous
period. With probability 1 − δ, it learns at the beginning of the period that it has access
to the insurance agency. In this case, it receives a net transfer Tt (i) (under the terms of
an insurance contract signed far in the past), that may depend on the history of aggregate
disturbances through the current period, and also on i’s type history through the previous
period (but not on its type in period t, which is not yet known). After receiving the insurance
transfer, household i learns its new type (an independent drawing as explained above), and
then makes its spending, saving and borrowing decisions as in any other period, but taking
into account its new type and its post-transfer financial wealth.
    Household i’s beginning-of-period (post-transfer) nominal net financial wealth At (i) is
  16
    A similar device is commonly used in models of “liquidity,” where access to frictionless financial interme-
diation is assumed to be possible only at discrete points in time, and that only a smaller class of exchanges
are possible at interim dates. See, e.g., Lucas and Stokey (1987), Lucas (1990), Fuerst (1992), or Lagos and
Wright (2005). Here we use a similar device to facilitate aggregation, but without doing so in a way that
implies that the allocative consequences of financial frictions are extremely transitory.



                                                      10
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


then given by

               At (i) = [Bt−1 (i)]+ 1 + idt−1 + [Bt−1 (i)]− 1 + ibt−1 + Dtint + Tt (i),
                                                                    
                                                                                                          (2.1)

where Bt−1 (i) is the household’s nominal net financial wealth at the end of period t − 1;

                             [B]+ ≡ max (B, 0) ,            [B]− ≡ min (B, 0) ;

idt is the (one-period, riskless nominal) interest rate that savers receive at the beginning of
period t + 1 on their savings deposited with intermediaries at the end of period t, while ibt is
the interest rate at which borrowers are correspondingly able to borrow from intermediaries
in period t for repayment at the beginning of period t+1; and Dtint represents the distributed
profits of the financial intermediary sector. We assume that each household owns an equal
share in the intermediary sector,17 and so receives an equal share of the distributed profits
each period; profits are distributed each period as soon as the previous period’s loans and
depositors are repaid. Note that the final term Tt (i) is necessarily equal to zero in any
period in which household i does not have access to the insurance agency. A household’s
end-of-period nominal net financial wealth Bt (i) is correspondingly given by
                                                       Z
                       Bt (i) = At (i) − Pt ct (i) +       Wt (j)ht (j; i)dj + Dt + Ttg ,                 (2.2)

where Pt is the Dixit-Stiglitz price index in period t (and hence the price of the composite
consumption good); Wt (j) is the wage of labor of type j in period t; Dt represents the
household’s share in the distributed profits of goods-producing firms; and Ttg is the net
nominal (lump-sum) government transfer received by each household in period t.
    Any pair of identically situated households with access to the insurance agency will
contract with one another so that if, in any state of the world at some future date, they
again each have access to the insurance agency at the same time, a transfer will take place
between them that equalizes their marginal utilities of income at that time (if each has
behaved optimally in the intervening periods). Given that they have identical continuation
problems at that time (before learning their new types), as functions of their post-transfer
financial wealths, such an agreement will ensure that their post-transfer financial wealths
are identical (again, if each has behaved optimally18 ). If we suppose that at some time in
  17
     We do not allow trading in the shares of intermediaries, in order to simplify the discussion of households’
saving and borrowing decisions. Euler equations of the form (2.10)–(2.11) below would still apply, however,
even if households could also trade the shares of either banks or goods-producing firms.
  18
     It is important to note, however, that the contractual transfer Tt (i) is only contingent on the history of


                                                       11
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


the past, all households originally started with identical financial wealth and access to the
insurance agency, then they should have contracted so that in equilibrium, in each period
t, all those households with access to the insurance agency in period t will obtain identical
post-transfer financial wealth. If we suppose, finally, that transfers through the insurance
agency must aggregate to zero each period (because the agency does not accumulate financial
assets or borrow), then each household with access to the insurance agency at the beginning
of period t must have post-transfer wealth equal to
                                                          Z
                                          At (i) = At ≡        At (h)dh.                              (2.3)

The beginning-of-period wealth of households who do not have access to the insurance agency
is instead given by (2.1), with Tt (i) set equal to zero.
    If we let dt denote aggregate real deposits with financial intermediaries at the end of
period t,19 and bt aggregate real borrowing from intermediaries, then we must have
                                      Z                                        Z
                         P t bt = −        At (i)di,      pt [bgt   + dt ] =        At (i)di,
                                      Bt                                       St


where Bt is the set of households i for which At (i) < 0, St is the (complementary) set
of households for which At (i) ≥ 0, and bgt is real government debt at the end of period
t. We assume that government debt is held directly by savers, rather than by financial
intermediaries, so that the rate of return that must be paid on government debt is idt , the rate
paid on deposits at the intermediaries. (For simplicity, we assume here that all government
debt also consists of riskless, one-period nominal bonds, so that deposits and government
debt are perfect substitutes.) The aggregate beginning-of-period assets At of households
referred to in (2.3) are then given by

                    At = [(dt−1 + bgt−1 )(1 + idt−1 ) − bt−1 (1 + ibt−1 )]Pt−1 + Dtint ,              (2.4)

integrating (2.1) over all households i.
    The supply of government debt evolves in accordance with the government’s flow budget
aggregate and individual-specific exogenous states, and not on the actual wealth that household i has at the
beginning of period t. Thus a spendthrift household is not insured an equal post-transfer wealth as other
households, regardless of how much it has spent in past periods.
  19
     Here “real” deposits and other real variables are measured in units of the Dixit-Stiglitz composite
consumption good, the price of which is Pt . Deposit contracts, loan contracts, and government debt are
actually all assumed to be non-state-contingent nominal contracts. We introduce real measures of the volume
of financial intermediation because we assume that the intermediation technology specifies real costs of a
given volume of real lending.


                                                       12
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


constraint
                             bgt = bgt−1 (1 + idt−1 )/Πt + Gt + Ttg /Pt − τt Yt ,                        (2.5)

where Πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 is the gross rate of inflation, Gt is government purchases of the composite
good, τt is a proportional tax on sales of goods,20 and Yt is the quantity of the composite
good produced by firms. Given the sales tax, the distributed profits of firms are equal to
                                                           Z
                                 Dt = (1 − τt )Pt Yt −         Wt (j)ht (j)dj,                           (2.6)

               R
where ht (j) ≡ ht (j; i)di is aggregate labor hired of type j.
   Households take as given the evolution of the two interest rates idt and ibt . In equilibrium,
these are linked by a relation of the form

                                        1 + ibt = (1 + idt )(1 + ωt ),                                   (2.7)

where the credit spread ωt is determined by a structural relation

                                                 ωt = ωt (bt ),                                          (2.8)

reflecting the behavior of competitive intermediaries, explained further in the next section.
We allow the credit spread to vary endogenously with the volume of private credit (reflecting
capacity limits in the intermediary sector), but we also allow it to vary for exogenous reasons;
the latter are the “purely financial disturbances” which will receive particular attention in
our analysis.
    The other aspect of the intermediary sector that matters for aggregate demand determi-
nation in our model is the use of resources by the intermediary sector. As is discussed further
in the next section, we assume that the origination of real loans in the quantity bt involves
costs Ξt (bt ). Using this general notation, market-clearing in the goods market requires that
                                             Z
                                      Yt =       ct (i)di + Gt + Ξt (bt )                                (2.9)

each period.
    We turn now to the implications of optimal household decisions with regard to consump-
tion, saving, and borrowing. A household for which At (i) > 0 (i.e., a saver) must satisfy a
  20
    Note that there are two potential sources of government revenue in our model: variation in the size of the
net lump-sum transfers Ttg , and variation in the tax rate τt . We introduce the process {τt } as an additional
source of time-varying supply-side distortions.


                                                      13
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


first-order condition
                                      λt (i) = β(1 + idt )Et [λt+1 (i)/Πt+1 ]                       (2.10)

in period t, where λt (i) = uc (ct (i); ξt ) is the household’s marginal utility of (real) income in
period t, while a household for which At (i) < 0 (a borrower) must instead satisfy

                                      λt (i) = β(1 + ibt )Et [λt+1 (i)/Πt+1 ].                      (2.11)

We need not discuss the corresponding first-order condition for a household that chooses
At (i) = 0 exactly (though this is certainly possible, given the kink in households’ budget
sets at this point), as no households are in this situation in the equilibria that we describe
here.
    Under conditions specified in the Appendix, one can show that there is an equilibrium
in which every household of type s has positive savings, while every household of type b
borrows, in every period. Hence the interest rate that is relevant for a given household’s
intertemporal tradeoff turns out to be perfectly correlated with the household’s type (though
this is not due to participation constraints). Moreover, because in equilibrium, households
that access the insurance agency in a given period t have the same marginal utility of income
at the beginning of that period (before learning their new types), regardless of their past
histories, it follows that in any period, all households of a given type have the same marginal
utility of income, regardless of their histories. Hence we can write λτt for the marginal utility
of (real) income of any household of type τ in period, where τ ∈ {b, s}. Thus the equilibrium
evolution of the marginal utility of income for all households can be described by just two
stochastic processes, {λbt , λst }.
    These two processes satisfy the two Euler equations

                                     1 + ibt 
                                                                                           
                  λbt    = βEt                 [δ + (1 − δ) πb ] λbt+1 + (1 − δ) πs λst+1       ,   (2.12)
                                     Πt+1

                                     1 + idt 
                                                                                           
                   λst   = βEt                (1 − δ) πb λbt+1 + [δ + (1 − δ) πs ] λst+1            (2.13)
                                      Πt+1
in each period. (These follow from (2.10) – (2.11), taking into account the probability of
switching type from one period to the next.) It follows that all households of a given type
must also choose the same consumption in any period, and, assuming an interior choice for
consumption by households of each type, these common consumption levels must satisfy

                                         λbt = ub0 (cbt ),        λst = us0 (cst ),


                                                             14
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


which relations can be inverted to yield demand functions

                                   cbt = cb (λbt ; ξt ),        cst = cs (λst ; ξt ).                  (2.14)

Substituting these into (2.9) yields an equilibrium relation

                             Yt = πb cb (λbt ; ξt ) + πs cs (λst ; ξt ) + Gt + Ξt (bt )                (2.15)

linking aggregate demand to the two marginal utilities of income and aggregate borrowing.
    The three relations (2.12)–(2.15) generalize the “intertemporal IS relation” of the basic
NK model, which can be expressed by an equation relating aggregate demand to the marginal
utility of income of the representative household (analogous to (2.15)) and a single equation
relating that marginal utility of income to the expected real rate of return implied by the
model’s single interest rate. The present model implies a similar relation between interest
rates and the timing of expenditure as in the basic model. The main differences are (i) that
now there are two different interest rates that each affect aggregate demand (though with
the same sign), by affecting the expenditure decisions of different economic units, and (ii)
that the resources used by the banking sector can also affect aggregate demand.
    The presence of two interest rates relevant to aggregate demand determination does not
mean there are two independent dimensions of monetary policy. Instead, the two rates must
be linked by equations (2.7)–(2.8), determining the equilibrium credit spread.21 If we intro-
duce no further frictions, the policy rate (which is a rate at which banks are willing to lend
short-term funds to one another) corresponds to the deposit rate idt ;22 and we may suppose
that the central bank directly controls this rate.23 In the case that banking uses no real
resources (so that Ξt (bt ) = 0 regardless of the volume of lending) and the credit spread ωt
is purely exogenous (i.e., independent of the volume of lending),24 the system consisting of
equations (2.7)–(2.8) and (2.12)–(2.15) gives a complete account of how real aggregate de-
  21
     Of course, there is an additional, independent dimension of central-bank policy if the central bank has
measures, independent of its control of the policy rate, that can influence the financial frictions represented
by the functions Ξt (bt ) or χt (bt ) introduced in the next section. We leave this issue for future work.
  22
     We could introduce a distinction between the rate that banks pay depositors and the rate banks pay
one another for overnight funds, by supposing, as Goodfriend and McCallum (2007) do, that banks must
hold unremunerated reserves in proportion to their deposits, while required reserves are not increased by
borrowing funds in the interbank market. We abstract from reserve requirements here.
  23
     The issues involved in discussing how the central bank actually controls the policy rate are no different
here than in the case of the standard NK model. See, for example, Woodford (2003, chap. 2).
  24
     The model of the credit spread explained in the next section implies that this would be true in the case
that no real resources are used in intermediation, and the default rate is independent of the scale of lending,
so that the function χt (b) is linear.



                                                           15
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


mand is determined by the expected path of the policy rate idt relative to expected inflation.25
This predicted relation between aggregate demand and the expected path of future interest
rates is of essentially the same kind as in the basic NK model. Hence the introduction of
financial frictions, of a kind capable of accounting for the observed average size and vari-
ability of spreads between deposit rates and lending rates, need not imply any substantial
change in our understanding of the way in which central-bank control of short-term interest
rates determines aggregate expenditure.
     Indeed, the basic NK model remains nested as a special case of the model proposed here.
In the case that both types of households have identical preferences (ub (c; ξ) = us (c; ξ) and
v b (h; ξ) = v s (h : ξ)), and the wedge between the deposit rate and lending rate is always
zero (ωt (b) = 0 at all times), our model is equivalent to the basic NK model. For in this
case ibt = idt at all times, so that there is a single interest rate; equations (2.12)–(2.13) then
imply that λbt = λst at all times;26 and since the functions cb (λ; ξ) and cs (λ; ξ) must be
identical in this case, equilibrium must involve cbt = cst at all times. Equation (2.15) then
reduces simply to the standard relation Yt = ct +Gt , while equations (2.12)–(2.13) imply that
the common marginal utility of income of all households satisfies the usual Euler equation.
Of course, this parameterization is not the one we regard as most empirically realistic (in
particular, it would not account for observed spreads, as discussed below); but since the
model has exactly the implications of the basic NK model for some parameter values, it
becomes merely a quantitative issue to determine how different its predictions are for other
parameter values. In fact, our results reported below suggest that for many questions, a
reasonably parameterized version of this model yields predictions quite similar to those of
an appropriately parameterized version of the basic NK model.


2.2     The Intermediary Sector
Here we further explain our assumptions about the behavior of intermediaries and the de-
terminants of the equilibrium credit spread ωt . We allow for two sources of credit spreads
— one of which follows from an assumption that intermediation requires real resources,
and the other of which does not — which provide two distinct sources of “purely financial”
disturbances in our model.
    First, we assume that real resources Ξt (bt ) are consumed in the process of originating loans
  25
     To be more precise, the expected path of real interest rates determines only desired current expenditure
relative to expected future expenditure, so that current aggregate demand also depends on expected long-run
output, just as in the basic NK model (see, e.g., Woodford, 2003, chap. 4). The expected long-run level of
output is determined by supply-side factors and by the long-run inflation target.
  26
     See the Appendix for demonstration of this.

                                                     16
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


of real quantity bt , and that these resources must be produced and consumed in the period
in which the loans are originated.27 The function Ξt (bt ) is assumed to be non-decreasing and
at least weakly convex. Strict convexity of Ξt (b) would indicate increasing costs owing to a
capacity constraint, e.g. the scarcity of available managerial time.
    In addition, we suppose that in order to originate a quantity of loans bt that will be repaid
(with interest) in the following period, it is necessary for an intermediary to also make a
quantity χt (bt ) of loans that will be defaulted upon, where χt (bt ) is also a non-decreasing,
weakly convex function. (This function may also be strictly convex, due to reduced accuracy
of screening the larger the volume of lending relative to the bank’s capacity.)
    We assume that the bank cannot tell the legitimate borrowers and fraudulent borrowers
apart, and so must treat them equally. However, the bank is able to predict the fraction
of its loans that will turn out to be fraudulent, and so correctly predicts that loan repay-
                                                    
ments in period t + 1 will total only Pt bt 1 + ibt , even though the loans extended had value
Pt [bt + χt (bt )]. The fact that the same interest rate must be charged for both types of loans
means that the existence of the default risk increases the cost of financing projects that are
known to the borrower to be riskless; so a credit spread due to this kind of risk represents
a barrier to efficient financial intermediation. The opportunity to make a fraudulent loan
contract is assumed to arrive randomly to each household with equal probability, regardless
of the household’s current type. Thus each household has additional real income each period
equal to χt (bt ), its earnings from fraud. Each household also chooses how many legitimate
loan contracts to enter into, understanding that these loans must be repaid; only type b
households choose to enter legitimate loan contracts in equilibrium.
    A bank collects deposits dt in the largest quantity that can be repaid from the proceeds
of its loans (anticipating that a certain fraction of the loans will not be repaid). Any excess
funds received from depositors that are not lent out or used to pay the resource costs of loan
origination are distributed immediately to the bank’s shareholders. Thus real distributions
in period t equal
                                  Πint
                                   t = dt − bt − χt (bt ) − Ξt (bt ) .
  27
    This real resource cost can be interpreted in either of two ways: either as a quantity of the composite
produced good that is used in the activity of banking, or as a quantity of a distinct type of labor that
happens to be a perfect substitute for consumption in the utility of households (so that the value of this
labor requirement in units of the composite good is exogenously given). The interpretation that is chosen
does not affect the validity of the equations given here, though it affects the interpretation of variables such
as “ct ” in terms of the quantities measured in national income accounts. See the Appendix for further
discussion.




                                                      17
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy

                                             
Since deposits dt satisfy 1 + idt dt = 1 + ibt bt , it follows that

                                              dt = (1 + ωt ) bt ,                                      (2.16)

and real distributions by intermediaries equal

                                     Πint
                                      t = ωt bt − χt (bt ) − Ξt (bt ) .


The income flow to households must also include households’ earnings from fraud; hence we
write28
                               Dtint = Pt [ωt bt − Ξt (bt )] .                      (2.17)

    We assume competition among intermediaries, both in the loan market and the deposit
market. Thus a given intermediary takes both ibt and idt as given, independent of its own
scale of operations, and chooses bt to maximize Πint   t , leading to the first-order condition for
optimal credit supply
                                  ωt − χ0t (bt ) − Ξ0t (bt ) = 0.

Hence in equilibrium, competition between banks leads to an equilibrium credit spread

                                     ωt = ωt (bt ) ≡ χ0t (bt ) + Ξ0t (bt ) .                           (2.18)

Thus χt (bt ) plays the role of a “markup” factor that can cause credit spreads in excess of
the marginal resource cost of loan origination.
    Like Goodfriend and McCallum (2007), we simply posit a reduced-form intermediation
technology, rather than seeking to provide a deeper behavioral justification for the spread
between the interest rate available to savers and the one at which it is possible to borrow.
This means that we are unable to consider possible effects of central-bank policy on the
efficiency of the banking system.29 We can, however, consider the consequences for the
  28
     The earnings from fraud are not actually collected from the intermediaries as a dividend to shareholders.
But like those dividends, we assume that the earnings from fraud are a lump-sum distribution to each
household, so there is no harm in combining the two sources of income in a single term. Both sources of
income depend on activity in the intermediary sector, though for different reasons.
  29
     Certainly we do not deny that at least at certain times, central banks do seek to affect the efficiency of
the banking system; this is true most obviously in the case of actions taken in a central bank’s capacity as
“lender of last resort” during a financial crisis. However, we regard such actions as representing a largely
independent dimension of policy from monetary policy, by which we mean control of the supply of central-
bank balances to the payments system, and of the overnight interest rate paid for such balances in the
interbank market. (Additional lending to intermediaries through the discount window or similar facilities
need not imply any increase in the total supply of central-bank deposits, as the actions of the Federal Reserve
between September 2007 and September 2008 illustrated.) Here we are concerned solely with the analysis


                                                       18
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


effects of monetary policy, and for the optimal conduct of monetary policy, of the existence
of, and of exogenous variation in, obstacles to fully efficient financial intermediation.


2.3     The Dynamics of Private Indebtedness
We allow in general for the possibility that aggregate real borrowing bt from financial inter-
mediaries may affect aggregate demand, by affecting the real resources used by the banking
sector (the term Ξt (bt ) in (2.15)), by affecting the equilibrium spread between the deposit
rate and the lending rate (equation (2.8)), or both. Hence in general a complete model of
how interest-rate policy affects aggregate demand requires that we model the evolution of
aggregate bank credit, or alternatively, of aggregate household indebtedness.
    Integrating (2.1) over all those borrowers in period t who did not have access to the
insurance agency in the current period, one finds aggregate net beginning-of-period assets
for these households of
                                 −δPt−1 bt−1 (1 + ibt−1 ) + δπb Dtint .

Adding to this quantity the beginning-of-period assets (At per household) of those households
who did receive insurance transfers at the beginning period t and then learned that they are
of type b, one obtains
                     Z
                           At (i)di = (1 − δ)πb At − δPt−1 bt−1 (1 + ibt−1 ) + δπb Dtint              (2.19)
                      Bt


for the aggregate beginning-of-period net assets of borrowers in period t. Moreover, inte-
grating (2.2) over all period t borrowers, one obtains
                                         Z
                            P t bt = −        At (i)di + πb [Pt cbt − wtb − Dt − Ttg ],
                                         Bt


where wtτ denotes the real wage income of each household of type τ .30 Finally, using (2.19)
to substitute for aggregate beginning-of-period assets, and then using (2.4) to substitute for
At , using (2.5) to substitute for Ttg , using (2.6) to substitute for Dt , using (2.16) to substitute
for dt , using (2.7) to substitute for ibt , using (2.17) to substitute for Dtint , and using (2.15) to
of the central bank’s monetary policy decisions, taking as given the evolution of the intermediation frictions
(that may reflect other dimensions of central-bank policy, as well as developments elsewhere in the economy).
   30
      The fact that each household of a given type has the same labor supply and same wage income follows
from the fact that in equilibrium each has the same marginal utility of income; see the further discussion of
labor supply below.




                                                         19
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


substitute for Yt , one obtains

           bt = δ[bt−1 + πs ωt−1 (bt−1 )bt−1 + πb Ξt−1 (bt−1 )](1 + idt−1 )/Πt − πb Ξt (bt )
                   +πb [δbgt−1 (1 + idt−1 )/Πt − bgt ] + πb πs [(cbt − cst ) − (wtb − wts )],   (2.20)

using the notation ωt (bt ) for the function defined in (2.18).
   The dynamics of private indebtedness thus depend, among other things, on the distri-
bution of wage income across households of the two types. Any household i, if acting as a
wage-taker in the market for labor of type j, will supply hours ht (j; i) to the point at which

                                   τ (i)
                                  vht (ht (j; i); ξt ) = λt (i)Wt (j)/Pt .                      (2.21)

Aggregation of the labor supply behavior of the two types is facilitated if, as in Benigno and
Woodford (2005), we assume the isoelastic functional form

                                                        ψτ 1+ν −ν
                                      v τ (h; ξt ) ≡       h H̄t ,
                                                       1+ν

where {H̄t } is an exogenous labor-supply disturbance process; ψb , ψs > 0 are (possibly)
different multiplicative coefficients for the two types; and the coefficient ν ≥ 0 (inverse of
the Frisch elasticity of labor supply) is assumed to be the same for both types. Solving (2.21)
for the competitive labor supply of each type and aggregating, we obtain
                                                       "                #1/ν
                                                           λ̃t Wt (j)
                                       ht (j) = H̄t
                                                           ψ Pt

for the aggregate supply of labor of type j, where
                                                                                ν
                                              λb            λs
                                           
                                  λ̃t ≡ ψ πb ( t )1/ν + πs ( t )1/ν                  ,          (2.22)
                                              ψb            ψs
                                           h                              i−ν
                                                   −1/ν
                                    ψ≡         πb ψb      +   πs ψs−1/ν         .

Alternatively, we obtain
                                    Wt (j)/Pt = ψ λ̃−1
                                                    t (ht (j)/H̄t )
                                                                   ν
                                                                                                (2.23)

for the real wage required if firms are to be able to hire a quantity ht (j) of labor of type
j. More generally (and also as in Benigno and Woodford), we allow for the possibility of
imperfect competition in the labor market, and suppose that the real wage required to hire

                                                       20
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


a given aggregate quantity of labor of type j is given by

                                                       −1
                                    Wt (j)/Pt = µw                    ν
                                                 t ψ λ̃t (ht (j)/H̄t ) ,                                (2.24)

where µw  t ≥ 1 is an exogenous, possibly time-varying markup factor, indicating variations in
the market power of labor.
    The above theory of labor supply implies that households of type τ supply fraction
πτ (ψλτt /ψτ λ̃t )1/ν of all labor of each type j, and hence receive that same fraction of aggregate
labor income. However, in order to solve for the dynamics of private indebtedness, we must
also determine the distribution of national income between labor and capital (since profits
are distributed equally to all households, unlike wage income). Once again, aggregation is
facilitated by assuming (as in Benigno and Woodford) an isoelastic production function

                                             yt (i) = Zt ht (i)1/φ

for each differentiated good i, where φ ≥ 1 and Zt is an exogenous, possibly time-varying
productivity factor, common to all goods. Dixit-Stiglitz preferences (on the part of govern-
ment as well as households31 ) imply that the demand for each differentiated good i is given
by
                                                       −θ
                                                 pt (i)
                                   yt (i) = Yt              ,
                                                  Pt
where Yt is demand for the composite good, pt (i) is the price of good i, Pt is the price of the
composite good, and θ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across differentiated goods.
    Using these relations to solve for the labor demand ht (i) of each firm i as a function of
its price, integrating over the firms in each industry j to find the total demand for labor of
type j,32 solving for the implied real wage for labor of type j, and finally integrating over all
types of labor, we obtain a total wage bill
                              Z                                               1+ωy
                                                             Pt           Yt
                                  Wt (j)ht (j)dj =   ψµw
                                                       t                               ∆t ,             (2.25)
                                                           λ̃t H̄tν       Zt
  31
     Dixit-Stiglitz preferences imply that household utility depends only on the quantity purchased of a certain
composite good, a CES aggregate of the purchases of the individual goods. We assume that government
purchases quantity Gt of this same composite good, and that the composition of government purchases
minimize the cost of obtaining that quantity of the composite good. We similarly assume that the resources
Ξt used in intermediation are in units of the composite good, and that intermediaries obtain these resources
at minimum cost.
  32
     Note that we assume, as in Woodford (2003, chap. 3), that all firms in a given industry re-evaluate their
prices at the same time, so that the price pt (i) is at each time the same for all firms i in industry j.



                                                      21
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


where ωy ≡ φ(1 + ν) − 1 ≥ 0 and
                                            Z             −θ(1+ωy )
                                                  pt (i)
                                   ∆t ≡                                 di ≥ 1
                                                   Pt

is a measure of the dispersion of goods prices (taking its minimum possible value, 1, if and
only if all prices are identical). In the Calvo model of price adjustment, this dispersion
measure evolves according to a law of motion

                                            ∆t = h(∆t−1 , Πt ),                                      (2.26)

where the function h(∆, Π) is defined in the Appendix.
    Using (2.25) for the total wage bill and our conclusion regarding the distribution of the
wage bill between households of the two types, we can solve for the wage income of households
of each type. This solution, together with the consumption functions (2.14), allows us to
write the last term in square brackets in (2.20) as a function of the form B(Yt , λbt , λst , ∆t ; ξ˜t ),
defined in the Appendix, where the vector ξ˜t of exogenous disturbances includes both the
vector of preference shocks ξt and the additional exogenous disturbances At and µw           t . The
law of motion for private indebtedness bt can then be written

            bt = δ[bt−1 + πs ωt−1 (bt−1 )bt−1 + πb Ξt−1 (bt−1 )](1 + idt−1 )/Πt − πb Ξt (bt )
                 +πb [δbg (1 + id )/Πt − bgt ] + πb πs B(Yt , λb , λs , ∆t ; ξ˜t ).
                            t−1       t−1                                   t    t                   (2.27)

This allows us to describe the evolution of real private debt as a function of its own past
level, disturbances to the financial sector (possible exogenous shifts in the functions Ξt (b)
and ωt (b)), the evolution of the policy rate idt relative to inflation, the evolution of real
government debt bgt , and the additional aggregate variables (Yt , λbt , λst , ∆t ; ξ˜t ) that determine
the relative expenditure and the relative incomes of the two types of households.
    The system of equations consisting of (2.7)–(2.8), (2.12)–(2.15), and (2.26)–(2.27), to-
gether with a monetary-policy reaction function (such as a Taylor rule) to specify idt (as a
function of variables such as inflation and real activity) and a fiscal rule to specify the real
public debt bgt (also possibly as a function of variables such as inflation and real activity),
then comprise a complete “aggregate demand block” for our model, that suffices to deter-
mine the evolution of the variables {λbt , λst , ibt , idt , Πt , ∆t , bt } given the evolution of {Yt } and
the exogenous disturbances. It remains to specify the model’s “aggregate supply block,”
that determines aggregate output Yt for any given evolution of inflation and other vari-


                                                       22
                     Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


ables, in order to have a complete general-equilibrium model of the monetary transmission
mechanism.
    A noteworthy property of this system is that when credit frictions matter, Ricardian
equivalence generally does not obtain. Even if we consider alternative paths for {bgt } while
holding the path of distorting taxes {τt } constant, so that contemplated changes in the path
of government debt are achieved entirely through changes in the size of lump-sum transfers, a
change in the path of the public debt will generally require a different equilibrium evolution
of real activity, interest rates and inflation, contrary to the implication of the basic NK
model.33 For (2.27) implies that in the absence of any offsetting changes in the paths of
other endogenous variables, a change in the path of {bgt } will require an offsetting change
in the path of {bt }; essentially, government borrowing crowds out private borrowing, in the
absence of changes in macroeconomic conditions that increase aggregate private saving.34
In the special case considered at the end of the previous section (when Ξt = 0 and ωt is
independent of the level of private debt), this change in the path of private indebtedness still
has no consequences for the determination of aggregate output, interest rates or inflation,
or for the allocation of consumption or labor effort between the two types of households,
and so Ricardian equivalence still obtains. However, except in this special case, a change in
the path of private indebtedness has consequences for aggregate demand determination, by
changing the spread between the lending rate and the deposit rate, by changing the resources
used by intermediaries, or both.


2.4      Aggregate Supply
It remains to specify the aggregate supply side of the model. This part of the model remains
the same as the basic NK model (as expounded, for example, in Benigno and Woodford,
2005), except that in modelling the cost of supplying a given quantity of output (and hence
  33
       Crucial to this result is our assumption here that the government can borrow from the private sector at a
rate more favorable than that available to private non-financial borrowers: the rate idt at which intermediaries
are able to obtain funding, rather than the rate ibt paid by households that must borrow from intermediaries.
In effect, when the public debt is increased the government is (among other things) borrowing at this lower
rate on behalf of households that would like to borrow at this rate but are assumed to be unable to do so
on their own account. This increases aggregate demand in somewhat the same way as a reduction in credit
spreads does.
    34
       In the simple case in which ωt (bt ) = Ξt (bt ) = 0, (2.27) determines the evolution of an aggregate credit
variable, bt + πb bgt , in a way that is independent of the composition of that variable, so that a unit increase in
bgt requires a reduction of bt by precisely πb units, so that each borrowing household must borrow exactly one
unit less for each unit that is borrowed (per capita) by the government. The relation between the evolution
of the two variables is more complex when private indebtedness increases credit frictions while government
debt does not, but the most important effect of government borrowing remains the “crowding out” of private
borrowing.

                                                        23
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


the incentives of price-setters) we must take account of the differing labor supply behav-
ior of savers and borrowers. The model of labor supply explained above implies that the
equilibrium real marginal cost of supplying output in any industry j is equal to

                                                  φψµw t   yt (j)ωy
                                         st (j) = 1+ωy              .
                                                 Zt    H̄tν λ̃t

This differs from the expression in Benigno and Woodford only in that the factor λ̃t in the
denominator is no longer the marginal utility of income of a representative household, and
so is no longer so simply related to aggregate real expenditure.
    As in the basic NK model, we assume staggered price adjustment of the kind first hy-
pothesized by Calvo (1983). This implies an inflation equation of the form

                                                 Πt = Π(zt ),                                            (2.28)

where zt is a vector of two forward-looking variables, recursively defined by a pair of relations
of the form
                            zt = G(Yt , λbt , λst ; ξ˜t ) + Et [g(Πt+1 , zt+1 )],          (2.29)

where the vector-valued functions G and g are defined in the Appendix. (Among the argu-
ments of G, the vector of exogenous disturbances ξ˜t now includes the sales tax rate τt , in
addition to the disturbances already mentioned; this is relevant to firms’ pricing decisions,
as they balance after-tax marginal revenue with the marginal cost of supplying more
    These relations are of exactly the same form as in the basic NK model, except that two
distinct marginal utilities of income are here arguments of G; in the case that λbt = λst = λt ,
the relations (2.29) reduce to exactly the ones in Benigno and Woodford (2005). The system
(2.28)–(2.29) indicates the nature of the short-run aggregate-supply trade-off between infla-
tion and real activity at a point in time, given expectations regarding the future evolution of
inflation and of the variables {zt }. (The precise nature of the implied aggregate-supply rela-
tion is discussed further in section 2.1.) Equations (2.7)–(2.8), (2.12)–(2.15), (2.26)–(2.27),
and (2.28)–(2.29), together with equations specifying interest-rate policy and the evolution
of the public debt, then comprise a complete system of equations for determination of the
endogenous variables {Yt , λbt , λst , ibt , idt , zt , Πt , ∆t , bt }, given the evolution of the exogenous dis-
turbances.




                                                       24
                 Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


3     Credit Frictions and the Propagation of Disturbances
We have shown that it is possible to generalize the basic NK model in a fairly straightforward
way to incorporate credit frictions — more specifically, a spread between the deposit rate
and the lending rate, that may be large or small, constant or variable, and exogenous or
endogenous, depending how we choose to parameterize the model. This shows, at the very
least, that the inherent structure of NK models does not in some way require one to ignore the
existence of such frictions. But how much does this generalization change the implications
of the resulting model?
    In this section, we consider the effects on the economy of a variety of types of exogenous
disturbances, including monetary policy shocks, under simple specifications of monetary pol-
icy. Our goal is not yet to compare monetary policies, but rather to compare the predictions
of alternative model specifications; we wish to determine to what extent our conclusions
about the consequences of a given monetary policy are affected by the introduction of het-
erogeneity and credit frictions.


3.1    Log-Linearized Structural Relations
To approach this question, we log-linearize the structural relations of our model around
steady-state values of the various endogenous variables that represent a perfect foresight
equilibrium in the case of no random variation in any of the exogenous disturbance pro-
cesses, as discussed further in the Appendix. The solution to these linear equations under a
correspondingly log-linear specification of monetary policy provides a linear approximation
to the equilibrium responses to the various types of disturbances, in the case that these
random variations are small enough. The linearity of the solution allows us to discuss the
equilibrium responses to individual shocks independently of whether other exogenous vari-
ables change concurrently, and to discuss the size of the responses relative to the size of the
shock without caring about the size of the shock that is considered.
    We first summarize the structure of the log-linearized model, as these equations them-
selves provide considerable insight into the model’s implications, and the similarities and
differences between the predictions of the generalized model and those of the basic NK
model (which is itself most familiar in its log-linearized form). We log-linearize the struc-
tural relations of the previous section around a steady state with zero inflation (Π̄ = 1). This
means that in our analysis, we shall restrict attention to monetary policy rules that imply
an inflation rate of zero, or one not far from zero, in the absence of stochastic disturbances.
This simplification is familiar in the standard NK literature, and we follow it here in order

                                              25
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


to focus solely on the new complications introduced by heterogeneity and credit frictions.
Moreover, we show in section 3 that according to the present model, optimal monetary policy
has this property; hence the approximation adopted here suffices for the study of monetary
policies that are close enough to optimal policy.
    We turn first to the model’s “aggregate demand” block. Log-linearization of equations
(2.12)–(2.13) yields

                         λ̂bt = ı̂bt − Et πt+1 + χb Et λ̂bt+1 + (1 − χb )Et λ̂st+1 ,          (3.1)

                        λ̂st = ı̂dt − Et πt+1 + χs Et λ̂st+1 + (1 − χs )Et λ̂bt+1 .           (3.2)

Here we introduce the notation λ̂τt ≡ log(λτt /λ̄τ ) for τ = b, s; ı̂m            m        m
                                                                     t ≡ log(1 + it /1 + ı̄ ) for
m = b, d; and πt ≡ log Πt for the rate of inflation. (In each case, a variable with a bar
indicates the steady-state value of the corresponding variable, discussed in the Appendix.)
The coefficients 0 < χb , χs < 1 are defined by

                                   χτ = β(1 + r̄τ )[δ + (1 − δ)πτ ]

for τ = b, s.
    Log-linearization of (2.7) similarly yields

                                              ı̂bt = ı̂dt + ω̂t ,                             (3.3)

where ω̂t ≡ log(1 + ωt /1 + ω̄). We can similarly log-linearize (2.8) to obtain ω̂t as a linear
function of b̂t , where we define b̂t ≡ log(bt /b̄).
   Subtracting (3.2) from (3.1) then implies that

                                          Ω̂t = ω̂t + δ̂Et Ω̂t+1 ,                            (3.4)

where Ω̂t ≡ λ̂bt − λ̂st is a measure of the inefficiency of financial intermediation, insofar as the
marginal utilities of the two (ex ante identical) types would be equated if financial markets
were frictionless, and
                                        δ̂ ≡ χb + χs − 1 < 1.




                                                     26
                     Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


Because δ̂ < 1,35 (3.4) can be “solved forward” to yield
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                              Ω̂t =         δ̂ j Et ω̂t+j .
                                                      j=0


The system consisting of (3.1)–(3.2) can then equivalently be expressed by (3.4) and a single
additional equation that relates the average marginal utility of income to interest rates and
the expected marginal utilities of income in the following period. The most useful equation
of the latter sort is the one that involves the particular average of λ̂bt and λ̂st that determines
aggregate demand Ŷt .
    Log-linearization of (2.15) yields

                                   Ŷt = sc c̄t − σ̄(λ̂t + sΩ Ω̂t ) + Ĝt + Ξ̂t ,                           (3.5)

where we define Ŷt ≡ log(Yt /Ȳ ), Ĝt ≡ (Gt − Ḡ)/Ȳ , and Ξ̂t ≡ (Ξt − Ξ̄)/Ȳ ;36 λ̂t ≡ πb λ̂bt +
πs λ̂st is the average (log) marginal utility of income; and the exogenous disturbance c̄t is a
weighted average of changes in the impatience to consume of the two types of households.
The coefficient σ̄ measures the (appropriately weighted) average37 sensitivity of households’
expenditure decisions to variations in the marginal utility of income (or equivalently, their
interest-sensitivity);
                                    σ̄ ≡ πb sb σb + πs ss σs > 0,                           (3.6)

where στ is each type’s intertemporal elasticity of substitution and sτ ≡ c̄τ /Ȳ is the steady-
state share of each type’s purchases in aggregate national expenditure. The coefficient

                                                            s b σ b − s s σs
                                            s Ω ≡ πb πs                                                     (3.7)
                                                                    σ̄

indicates the degree to which aggregate demand is affected by heterogeneity in the marginal
utility of income, given the average marginal utility of income; this depends on the degree to
which the expenditure decisions of borrowers are more interest-elastic than those of savers.
  35
      See the Appendix for proof.
  36
      We do not define these last two hat variables as log deviations from the steady-state value, so that we
can discuss calibrations in which Ḡ or Ξ̄ may equal zero, though we still consider small non-zero values of
the corresponding disturbances.
   37
      Definition (3.6) implies that σ̄ is only actually an average of σb and σs in the case that Ḡ = Ξ̄ = 0. More
generally, σ̄ is sc times the average household intertemporal elasticity of substitution, where sc ≡ πb sb + πs ss
is the share of private expenditure in aggregate expenditure. In terms of the notation used in Woodford
(2003, pp. 80, 243), σ̄ is the coefficient analogous to σ in the representative-household model, while the
coefficients στ are analogous to the intertemporal elasticity of substitution σC .



                                                        27
                     Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


(More precisely, what matters is how much the aggregate reduction in borrowing by borrow-
ers, per percentage point increase in the interest rate that they face, exceeds the aggregate
increase in saving by savers in response to an interest-rate increase of the same size.)
    Solving (3.5) for λ̂t as a function of aggregate expenditure, and substituting for λ̂t in the
corresponding weighted average of (3.1) and (3.2), we obtain an “intertemporal IS relation”

                      Ŷt = −σ̄(ı̂avg
                                  t   − Et πt+1 ) + Et Ŷt+1 − Et ∆gt+1 − Et ∆Ξ̂t+1
                                            −σ̄sΩ Ω̂t + σ̄(sΩ + ψΩ )Et Ω̂t+1 ,                                  (3.8)

where
                                                ı̂avg
                                                  t   ≡ πb ı̂bt + πs ı̂dt                                       (3.9)

is the average of the interest rates that are relevant (at the margin) for all of the savers
and borrowers in the economy, gt ≡ Ĝt + sc c̄t is a composite “autonomous expenditure”
disturbance as in Woodford (2003, pp. 80, 249),

                                        ψΩ ≡ πb (1 − χb ) − πs (1 − χs ),

and ∆ indicates a first difference.
    Note that the first four terms on the right-hand side of (3.8) are exactly as in the basic
NK model (with appropriate generalizations of the definitions of variables and coefficients to
allow for heterogeneity), while the final two terms exist only in the case of credit frictions.
An important difference between this relation and the standard “IS relation” is that the
interest rate appearing in it is no longer the policy rate. Instead, (3.3) together with (3.9)
imply that the policy rate ı̂dt and the rate that is relevant for the IS relation are linked by
the equilibrium relation
                                       ı̂avg
                                         t   = ı̂dt + πb ω̂t ,                            (3.10)

indicating that the spread between them increases when credit spreads increase.
     The complete aggregate demand block developed in section 1.1 can then be summarized
(in our log-linear approximation) by the intertemporal IS relation (3.8), together with (3.10)
connecting the average interest rate with the policy rate, the log-linear version of (2.8) for the
determination of the credit spread, and (3.4) for the determination of the marginal-utility
gap Ω̂t . In the case that either ω̂t or Ξ̂t depends (to first order) on the evolution of b̂t , com-
pletion of the system of equilibrium relations requires a law of motion for aggregate private
indebtedness. Log-linearizing (2.27), and using the same method as above to substitute for
λ̂bt and λ̂st , we obtain an equation for b̂t as a linear function of b̂t−1 , ı̂dt−1 − πt , Ŷt , Ω̂t , b̂gt , b̂gt−1 ,

                                                          28
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


and the exogenous disturbances. (See the Appendix for details.)
   Log-linearization of the aggregate-supply block consisting of equations (2.28)–(2.29) yields
the log-linear aggregate-supply relation

                                  ˆ − ν h̄ − (1 + ω )Ẑ + µ̂w + τ̂ ] + βE π ,
                  πt = ξ[ωy Ŷt − λ̃                                                          (3.11)
                                     t    t        y   t    t     t      t t+1


through calculations explained in the Appendix, where we define λ̃            ˆ ≡ log(λ̃ /λ̃),
                                                                                          ¯ h̄ ≡
                                                                                t       t      t
                                   w        w    w
log(H̄t /H̄), Ẑt ≡ log(Zt /Z̄), µ̂t ≡ log(µt /µ̄ ), τ̂t ≡ − log(1 − τt /1 − τ̄ ), and

                                            1 − α 1 − αβ
                                       ξ≡                >0
                                              α 1 + ωy θ

(where 0 < α < 1 is the fraction of prices that remain unchanged from one period to the
next) determines the sensitivity of the inflation rate to variation in average marginal costs.
Note that (3.11) takes exactly the same form as in the basic NK model, except that here λ̃  ˆ
                                                                                              t

replaces the marginal utility of income of the representative household.
   It is also important to note that the “average” marginal utility of income λ̃ˆ that enters
                                                                                 t

the aggregate-supply relation is in general not exactly the same as the one that enters the
aggregate-demand relation (3.5). The two are related through the identity

                                       ˆ = λ̂ + (γ − π )Ω̂ ,
                                       λ̃ t  t    b   b   t


where                                                       !1/ν
                                                    ψ λ̄b
                                        γb ≡ π b       ¯           .
                                                    ψ λ̃b

                             ˆ in (3.11), and then using (3.5) to substitute for λ̂ as in the
Using this to substitute for λ̃ t                                                  t

derivation of (3.8), we obtain an aggregate-supply relation

                πt = κ(Ŷt − Ŷtn ) + ut + ξ(sΩ + πb − γb )Ω̂t − ξσ̄ −1 Ξ̂t + βEt πt+1 ,      (3.12)

with a slope
                                       κ ≡ ξ(ωy + σ̄ −1 ) > 0.

Here the composite exogenous disturbance term Ŷtn (the “natural rate of output”) is a linear
combination of the disturbances c̄t , Ĝt , h̄t , and Ẑt (sources of variation in the flexible-price
equilibrium level of output that, in the absence of steady-state distortions or financial fric-
tions, correspond to variations in the efficient level of output, as discussed further in section


                                                   29
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


3); the additional exogenous term ut (the “cost-push shock”) is instead a linear combination
of the disturbances µ̂w t and τ̂t (sources of variation in the flexible-price equilibrium level of
output that do not correspond to any change in the efficient level of output). This is identi-
cal to the “new Keynesian Phillips curve” of the basic NK model, with the exception of the
terms proportional to Ω̂t and Ξ̂t , indicating “cost-push” effects of the credit frictions in our
extended model.
    Equations (3.8) and (3.12) are thus direct analogs of two of the equations of the canonical
“three-equation model”; the third equation (a central-bank reaction function, such as a
Taylor rule, for the policy rate as a function of inflation and output) is unchanged by the
existence of credit frictions. In the case that both {ω̂t } and {Ξ̂t } can be treated as exogenous
processes (so that {Ω̂t } is exogenous as well), these same three equations again provide a
complete system for the determination of equilibrium inflation, output and interest rates,
except that one must adjoin equation (3.10) to connect the interest rate that appears in the
IS relation to the policy rate. If one substitutes the central-bank reaction function for ı̂dt
in (3.10), in order to derive the implied response of the average interest rate — or if one
supposes that the central bank uses the average interest rate as its operating target, a policy
proposal that we analyze further in section 3 — then one again obtains a three-equation
model directly analogous to the basic NK model. For example, if the central bank follows a
Taylor rule of the form
                                      ı̂dt = φπ πt + φy Ŷt + m
                                                               t ,                           (3.13)

then the complete model would consist of (3.8), (3.12), and

                                ı̂avg
                                  t   = φπ πt + φy Ŷt + πb ω̂t + m
                                                                   t .                      (3.14)

The only differences relative to the basic NK model are that the interest rate appearing in
this three-equation system is not the only relevant interest rate and may not correspond to
the policy rate; that the numerical values of the coefficients σ̄ and κ must take appropriate
account of the different degrees of interest-sensitivity of expenditure of different units in the
economy; and that time-varying financial frictions are an additional source of disturbance
terms in all three equations.
    It follows that at least in this case, inflation and output determination can be understood
in exactly the same way as in the basic NK model, regardless of the average size of credit
frictions, or their degree of variability. For example, in the case that the monetary policy
equation involves no response to lagged variables (or to any endogenous variables other
than inflation, output, or forecasts of these), and the policy implies a determinate rational-


                                                 30
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


expectations equilibrium, that equilibrium will make inflation, output and interest rates
all a function solely of the economy’s current state — to be precise, the current values of
Ŷtn , gt , ut , ω̂t , Ξ̂t , and the monetary policy disturbance, and current information about the
expected future evolution of these variables. (As has often been remarked of the basic NK
model, the model is thus “purely forward-looking,” and cannot explain inflation persistence
other than as a consequence of persistence in the exogenous disturbances just mentioned.)
      In the simple case of a monetary policy described by (3.13), the conditions for determinacy
of equilibrium remain exactly the same as in the basic NK model; in the case that φπ , φy ≥
0, these amount simply to the requirement that the policy rule conform to the “Taylor
Principle” (Woodford, 2003, p. 254), i.e., that the response coefficients satisfy

                                                  1−β
                                           φπ +       φy > 1.
                                                   κ

If this condition is satisfied, one can solve for inflation as a function of current and expected
future values of the disturbance processes in exactly the same way as is explained in Woodford
(2003, chap. 4, secs. 2.2, 2.4), and the coefficients on current and expected future values
of the disturbances c̄t , Ĝt , h̄t , at , µ̂w     t      m
                                             t , τ̂ , or t at all horizons are identical to the predictions
of the basic NK model, if the latter model is calibrated to have the same values for the
coefficients β, ξ, σ̄, and ωy .38 The only difference in the solution is that shocks to the current
or expected future values of the financial disturbances ω̂t and Ξ̂t will affect equilibrium
inflation as well.
    Moreover, not only does the model predict the same numerical responses to non-financial
disturbances, under given monetary-policy coefficients (φπ , φy ) — so that one’s conclusions
about the desirability of a particular choice of those coefficients, from the point of view of how
they effect the economy’s response to non-financial disturbances, will be unchanged — but
the predicted responses to financial disturbances do not really involve any new considerations
(beyond the mere fact that such disturbances can occur and ought to be measured in order
to properly conduct policy). The effects of variations in the processes {ω̂t , Ξ̂t } on inflation
and output are predicted to be the same as the effects that other kinds of disturbances have,
when they shift the three equations to a similar extent and with a similar expected degree of
persistence. Thus the effects of financial shocks on inflation can be decomposed into three
  38
     Of course, the numerical values of some of these coefficients may be different, owing to the existence of
credit frictions, than they would be in an economy without such frictions, owing, for example, to an effect
of steady-state distortions resulting from credit spreads on the steady-state level of output, and hence the
point at which various elasticities are evaluated. This would not, however, affect the accuracy of predictions
made by the NK model if it were correctly parameterized to match the elasticities observed in an actual
economy.


                                                     31
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


types of effects that are already present in the basic NK model: the effects of a disturbance
to the “natural rate of interest” (a shift in the real average interest rate consistent with
a zero output gap), the effects of a “cost-push shock” (a shift in the size of output gap
required for price stability), and the effects of a “monetary policy shock” (a change in the
average interest rate relative to what would ordinarily follow from the current inflation rate
and output gap, in this case due to a change in the credit spread rather than a change in
the policy rate). Financial disturbances typically have effects of all three types; but their
consequences can be easily understood if the consequences of those three general types of
disturbances are already understood.
    The case in which {ω̂t , Ξ̂t } are both completely exogenous processes is, of course, a fairly
special one. If one or both of them depends on the volume of bank lending, as allowed for in
our exposition above, a larger system of equations, including the law of motion for private
debt, is needed in order to predict the evolution of inflation, output and interest rates. We
do not seek to present analytical results for this more complex case, but instead offer some
illustrative numerical results.


3.2     Model Calibration
The numerical values for parameters that are used in our calculations are explained in the
Appendix. Many of the model’s parameters are also parameters of the basic NK model, and
in the case of these parameters we assume similar numerical values as in the numerical anal-
ysis of the basic NK model in Woodford (2003). The new parameters that are also needed
for the present model are those relating to heterogeneity or to the specification of the credit
frictions. The parameters relating to heterogeneity are the fraction πb of households that
are borrowers, the degree of persistence δ of a household’s “type”, the steady-state expendi-
ture level of borrowers relative to savers, sb /ss , and the interest-elasticity of expenditure of
borrowers relative to that of savers, σb /σs .39
    In the calculations reported here, we assume that πb = πs = 0.5, so that there are an
equal number of borrowers and savers. We assume that δ = 0.975, so that the expected
time until a household has access to the insurance agency (and its type is drawn again) is 10
years. This means that the expected path of the spread between lending and deposit rates
for 10 years or so into the future affects current spending decisions, but that expectations
  39
     Another new parameter as a consequence of heterogeneity is the steady-state level of government debt
relative to GDP, b̄g /Ȳ . This parameter need not be specified in the representative-household basic NK model,
since changes in it simply imply a different steady-state level of net transfers, and the size of these does not
affect any of the equilibrium relations. In the model with heterogeneity, it does matter, because of the failure
of Ricardian equivalence noted above. But in our baseline calculations, we assume that b̄g = 0.


                                                      32
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


regarding the spread several decades in the future are nearly irrelevant.
    We calibrate the degree of heterogeneity in the steady-state expenditure shares of the two
types so that the implied steady-state debt b̄ is equal to 80 percent of annual steady-state
output.40 This value matches the median ratio of private (non-financial, non-government,
non-mortgage) debt to GDP over the period 1986-2008.41 This requires a ratio sb /ss = 1.27.
We calibrate the value of σb /σs to equal 5. This is an arbitrary choice, though the fact
that borrowers are assumed to have a greater willingness to substitute intertemporally is
important, as this results in the prediction that an exogenous tightening of monetary policy
(a positive value of the residual m
                                   t in (3.13)) results in a reduction in the equilibrium volume
of credit bt (see Figures 2 and 5 below). This is consistent with VAR evidence on the effects
of an identified monetary policy shock on household borrowing.42
    It is also necessary to specify the steady-state values of the functions ω(b) and Ξ(b)
that describe the financial frictions, in addition to making clear what kinds of random
perturbations of these functions we wish to consider when analyzing the effects of “financial
shocks.” We here mainly present results for two cases. In each case, we assume that there is
no steady-state default risk (χ̄(b) = 0), so that the steady-state credit spread is due entirely
to the marginal resource cost of intermediation. But we do allow for exogenous shocks to
the default rate (which then becomes slightly positive); specifically, we assume that

                                                 χt (b) = χ̃t b,

where {χ̃t } is an exogenous disturbance process taking non-negative values. The “financial
shock” in Figure 15 below is an exogenous increase in χ̃t .43
    We consider two cases that differ in the specification of the (time-invariant) intermedi-
ation technology Ξ(b). In the case of a linear intermediation technology (not shown), we
suppose that Ξ(b) = ω̄b, while in the case of a convex intermediation technology (shown in
Figure 15), we assume that
                                         Ξ(b) = Ξ̃bη                                    (3.15)
  40
      In our quarterly model, this means that b̄/Ȳ = 3.2.
  41
      We exclude mortgage debt when calibrating the degree of heterogeneity of preferences in our model,
since mortgage debt is incurred in order to acquire an asset, rather than to consume current produced goods
in excess of current income.
   42
      See, for example, Den Haan, Sumner and Yamashiro (2010).
   43
      In treating the “financial shock” as involving an increase in markups but no increase in the real resources
used in banking, we follow Gerali, Neri and Signoretti (2008). These authors cite the Eurosystem’s quarterly
Bank Lending Survey as showing that since October 2007, banks in the euro area had “strongly increased
the margins charged on average and riskier loans” (p. 24).




                                                       33
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


for some η > 1.44 In both cases, in our numerical analyses we assume a steady-state
credit spread ω̄ equal to 2.0 percentage points per annum,45 following Mehra, Piguillem
and Prescott (2008).46 (Combined with our assumption that “types” persist for 10 years
on average, this implies a steady-state “marginal utility gap” Ω̄ ≡ λ̄b /λ̄s = 1.22, so that
there would be a non-trivial welfare gain from transferring further resources from savers to
borrowers.) In the case of the convex technology, we set η so that a one-percent increase
in the volume of credit increases the credit spread by one percentage point (per annum).47
The assumption that η > 1 allows our model to match the prediction of VAR estimates that
an unexpected tightening of monetary policy is associated with a slight reduction in credit
spreads (see, e.g., Lown and Morgan, 2002). We have chosen a rather extreme value for this
elasticity in our calibration of the convex-technology case, in order to make more visible the
difference that a convex technology makes for our results. (In the case of a smaller value of
η, the results for the convex technology are closer to those for the linear technology, and in
fact are in many respects similar to those for an economy with no financial frictions at all.)
    As a first exercise, we consider the implied equilibrium responses of the model’s endoge-
nous variables to the various kinds of exogenous disturbances, under the assumption that
monetary policy is described by a Taylor rule of the form (3.13). The coefficients of the mon-
etary policy rule are assigned the values φπ = 2 and φy = 0.25 as in Woodford (2003, chap.
4), allowing comparison between our quantitative results here and those presented there for
a calibrated representative-household model. Among other disturbances, we consider the
effects of random disturbances to the error term m t in the monetary policy rule. Later, we
consider the predicted dynamics under optimal monetary policy.
  44
      One interpretation of this function is in terms of a monitoring technology of the kind assumed in Good-
friend and McCallum (2007). Suppose that a bank produces monitoring according to a Cobb-Douglas
                            −1    −1
production function, k 1−η Ξηt , where k is a fixed factor (“bank capital”), and must produce a unit of
monitoring for each unit of loans that it manages. Then the produced goods Ξt required as inputs to the
monitoring technology in order to manage a quantity b of loans will be given by a function of the form
(3.15), where Ξ̃ = k 1−η . A sudden impairment of bank capital, treated as an exogenous disturbance, can
then be represented as a random increase in the multiplicative factor Ξ̃. This is another form of “financial
shock”, with similar, though not identical, effects as the default rate shock considered in the numerical results
presented below; see the Appendix for further discussion.
   45
      In our quarterly numerical model, this means that we choose a value such that (1 + ω̄)4 = 1.02.
   46
      Mehra et al. argue for this calibration by dividing the net interest income of financial intermediaries
(as reported in the National Income and Product Accounts) by a measure of aggregate private credit (as
reported in the Flow of Funds). As it happens, this value also corresponds to the median spread between the
FRB index of commercial and industrial loan rates and the federal funds rate, over the period 1986-2007.
   47
      This requires that η = 51.6.




                                                       34
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


3.3     Numerical Results
We begin by considering the predicted responses to aggregate disturbances of a kind that
also exist in the basic NK model, in order to determine how accurate that model’s answers
are about the questions to which it gives answers. We first consider the case of a linear
intermediation technology. In this case, the credit spread ωt evolves exogenously, as assumed
in the discussion at the end of section 1.1, but Ξt is no longer independent of bt . Nonetheless,
in this case we continue to find that for a reasonable parameterization of the quantity of
resources used in intermediation, the existence of credit frictions makes virtually no difference
for the predicted equilibrium responses to shocks.
    This is illustrated in Figures 2-4 for three particular types of exogenous disturbances. In
Figure 2 we consider the equilibrium responses to a contractionary monetary policy shock,
represented by a unit (one percentage point, annualized) increase in m     t . We furthermore
                                                                     m
assume that the policy disturbance is persistent; specifically, t is assumed to follow an
AR(1) process with coefficient of autocorrelation ρ = 0.75. The separate panels of the figure
indicate the impulse responses of output, inflation,48 the deposit rate, the lending rate, 49
and aggregate private debt respectively. Figure 3 illustrates the equilibrium responses of the
same variables to a unit positive innovation in the productivity factor, where the disturbance
is again assumed to have an autocorrelation of 0.75, and monetary policy is conducted in
accordance with (3.13) with no random term. Figure 4 shows the corresponding equilibrium
responses in response to an increase in government purchases by an amount equal to one
percent of total output.
    In each figure, the predicted impulse responses under our model with financial frictions
(the case labeled ‘FF’ in each figure) are contrasted with those under two variant parameter-
izations of the model. The case labeled ‘NoFF’ corresponds to an otherwise identical model
in which ωt (b) ≡ 0 and Ξt (b) ≡ 0, but we retain the heterogeneity in preferences, parame-
terized in the same way as in the ‘FF’ model. The case labeled ‘RepHH’ is one in which in
addition to assuming zero credit frictions, we assume identical preferences for the two types;
this model is equivalent to a representative-household model (specifically, to the basic NK
model as presented in Woodford, 2003, chap. 4). Comparison of these three cases allows us
  48
      In the plots, both the inflation rate and the interest rates are reported as annualized rates, so that 0.10
means an increase in the inflation rate of 10 basis points per annum. In terms of our quarterly model, what
is plotted is not the response of πt , but rather the response of 4πt .
   49
      In the present model, the spread between the deposit rate and the lending rate is exogenously fixed, and
so these two variables necessarily respond by exactly the same amount, except in the case of a shock to the
exogenous credit spread itself. However, we include both panels as we use the same format for the figures
to follow, when inclusion of both is no longer redundant.



                                                       35
                     Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


to separately consider the degree to which credit frictions as opposed to heterogeneity make
a difference.
    In each of Figures 2 through 4, we observe that the impulse responses of output, inflation,
and the two interest rates are virtually identical under all three parameterizations of the
model. (The same is true for the other aggregate disturbances that have analogs in the
representative-household model — a common disturbance to the impatience to consume of
all households, a disturbance to the disutility of work, a shock to government purchases, a
shock to the tax rate, or a shock to the wage markup — though we do not include these
figures here.) We have already explained in section 2.1 why this would be true in the case
that the resources used in intermediation are independent of the volume of lending. Our
numerical results indicate that even when we assume that intermediation uses resources
(and indeed that credit spreads are entirely due to the marginal resource cost of making
additional loans), and that the required resources are proportional to the volume of lending,
heterogeneity and the existence of a steady-state credit spread (of a realistic magnitude) still
make only a negligible difference. This is because the contribution of the banking sector to
the overall variation in the aggregate demand for produced goods and services is still quite
small.50
    Financial frictions matter somewhat more for equilibrium dynamics if we also assume that
credit spreads vary endogenously with the volume of lending. Figures 5-9 show equilibrium
responses of the same aggregate variables to a variety of types of exogenous disturbances, in
the case of the “convex intermediation technology” calibration discussed in section 2.2. Fig-
ures 5-7 show responses to the same three kinds of shocks as in Figures 2-4 respectively, but
for the alternative intermediation technology. Figure 8 shows the corresponding responses to
an exogenous increase in the impatience to consume of savers; and Figure 9 shows responses
to an exogenous increase in real government debt by an amount equal to 1 percent of GDP.
In each case, the disturbance is modeled as an AR(1) process with autoregressive coefficient
0.75.
    In the case of the monetary policy shock (Figure 5), we again find that the equilibrium
responses of output and inflation are nearly the same in all three models, though the ‘FF
model’ is no longer quite so indistinguishable from the ‘NoFF’ model. The most important
effect of allowing for endogeneity of the credit spread is on the implied responses of interest
rates to the shock. Because credit contracts in response to this shock (as noted earlier, though
  50
     Note that in each of Figures 2-4, the existence of the credit frictions in the ‘FF’ model makes a substantial
difference for the equilibrium evolution of credit bt relative to the prediction of the ‘NoFF’ model. However,
this change in the size of the banking sector does not have substantial consequences for aggregate output,
employment, or inflationary pressure.


                                                       36
                       Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


now by less than in Figure 2), the spread between the lending rate and the deposit rate
decreases, in accordance with the empirical finding of Lown and Morgan (2002). This means
that the deposit rate need no longer decline as much as does the lending rate. Moreover,
because the reduced spread has an expansionary effect on aggregate demand, output declines
slightly less in response to the shock than in the ‘NoFF’ model; this is also a reason for the
deposit rate to decline less. Thus the most visible effect is on the predicted response of the
deposit rate, which is visibly smaller in the ‘FF model.’ The effects of financial frictions are
similarly mainly on the path of the deposit rate in the case of a shock to the sales tax rate
τt (not shown).
    The effects of financial frictions are not quite as trivial in the case of the technology shock
(Figure 6). Though again the largest effect is on the path of the deposit rate, in this case the
endogeneity of the credit spread also has non-negligible effects on the equilibrium response
of output. (The primary reason for the difference is that this shock has a larger immediate
effect on the path of credit, and hence a larger immediate effect on the equilibrium spread in
the case of the convex technology.) Because an increase in productivity leads to an expansion
of credit, credit spreads now increase in the ‘FF model’; this is has a contractionary effect on
aggregate demand, so that output increases less than in the ‘NoFF model’. Similar effects of
financial frictions are observed in the case of a disturbance to the disutility of working (an
exogenous increase in the multiplicative factor H̄t in (2.23)). The effects of an increase in
the wage markup µw    t or the tax rate τt are likewise similar, but with opposite signs to the
effects shown in Figure 6.
    The effects of financial frictions are even more significant in the case of a shock to gov-
ernment purchases (Figure 7) or to the consumption demand of savers (Figure 8).51 These
are both disturbances that crowd out the expenditure of private borrowers (as the most
interest-sensitive category of expenditure) to a significant extent, and so substantially re-
duce equilibrium borrowing and credit spreads. In each case, the reduction in spreads has a
further expansionary effect on aggregate demand, so that output increases by more than in
the ‘NoFF’ model.
    Note that the effect would be quite different in the case of a shock to the consumption
demand of borrowers rather than savers (not shown). In this case, private credit would
increase rather than decreasing, and by less than in Figure 8, because of the greater interest-
elasticity of the demand of borrowers; this would imply a small increase in spreads, making
the disturbance slightly less expansionary, but with a less dramatic effect than in Figure 8.52
  51
       The shock considered here increases the value of cs (λ) by one percent for each possible value of λ.
  52
       The effect of financial frictions in this case is somewhat similar to the case of the technology shock shown



                                                         37
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


The aggregate effects of financial frictions are even smaller in the case of a uniform increase
in the consumption demand of both types of households, since in this case the effects of the
two types of expenditure on equilibrium credit spreads partially offset one another.
    Finally, the consequences of financial frictions are of particular qualitative significance
in the case of a disturbance to the path of government debt (Figure 9). Here we consider a
disturbance to fiscal policy that temporarily increases the level of government debt, through
a lump-sum transfer to households, which is then gradually taken back over a period of time,
so that the path of real government debt is eventually the same as it would have been in
the absence of the shock. In the case of the ‘NoFF model’, Ricardian equivalence holds,
as in the representative household model; and so in these cases, the fiscal shock has no
effect on output, inflation, or interest rates. However, an increase in government borrowing
crowds out private borrowing, and in the case of the convex intermediation technology, the
reduced private borrowing implies a reduction in spreads. This has an expansionary effect on
aggregate demand, with the consequence that both output and inflation increase, as shown
in the figure.53
    To sum up, we find that under an empirically realistic calibration of the average size of
credit spreads, the mere existence of a positive credit spread does not imply any substantial
quantitative difference for our model’s predictions, either about the effects of a monetary
policy shock or about the effects of other kinds of exogenous disturbances under a given
systematic monetary policy.54 What matters somewhat more is the degree to which there
is variation in credit spreads. If spreads vary endogenously (as in our model with a convex
intermediation technology), then the effects of disturbances are somewhat different, espe-
cially in the case of types of disturbances — such as variations in government borrowing, or
changes in the relative spending opportunities available to savers as opposed to borrowers
— that particularly affect the evolution of the equilibrium volume of private credit.
    Another important difference of the model with credit frictions is the possibility of exoge-
nous disturbances to the banking sector itself, represented by exogenous variation in either
the intermediation technology Ξt (b) or the default rate χt (b). Again, these disturbances mat-
in Figure 6. See the Appendix for the corresponding figure.
   53
      Ricardian equivalence does not hold precisely in the ‘FF model’ even in the case of the linear intermedi-
ation technology. However, in this case (not shown) there is no reduction in credit spreads in response to the
shock, and the only consequence for aggregate demand comes from the reduction in the resources used by
the banking sector, so that shock is actually (very slightly) contractionary in this case. (See the Appendix
for the corresponding figure.) But there is very little difference in the predictions of the ‘NoFF’ and ‘FF’
models in the case of that technology, so that we omit the figure here.
   54
      The Appendix includes figures with the equilibrium responses to all the exogenous disturbances con-
sidered, for both the exogenous spread (linear technology) and the endogenous spread (convex technology)
cases.


                                                      38
                     Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


ter to the determination of aggregate output, inflation and interest rates primarily to the
extent that they imply variation in credit spreads. The equilibrium effects of disturbances of
this kind under alternative monetary policies are considered further below (see Figure 15).


4      Optimal Monetary Stabilization Policy
We turn now to the implications of credit frictions for optimal monetary policy. We shall
suppose that the objective of policy is to maximize the average ex ante expected utility of
the households. This implies an objective of the form
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                            E0          βU (Yt , λbt , λst , ∆t ; ξ˜t )                           (4.1)
                                                  t=0


where

                  U (Yt , λbt , λst , ∆t ; ξ˜t ) ≡ πb ub (cb (λbt ; ξt ); ξt ) + πs us (cs (λst ; ξt ); ξt )
                                                                      !− 1+ν  ν        1+ω
                                                        ψ         λ̃t             −ν     Yt
                                                   −                            H̄t                   ∆t ,        (4.2)
                                                     1 + ν Λ̃t                           Zt

and                                                                                                      ν
                                       1
                                            h
                                                    −1            1+ν           −1             1+ν
                                                                                                      i 1+ν
                           Λ̃t ≡ ψ    1+ν       πb ψb ν    λbt      ν
                                                                         +   πs ψs ν   (λst )    ν            .

Again, the derivation is provided in the Appendix. Note that the final term in (4.2) represents
the average disutility of working, averaging both over the entire continuum of types of labor j
and over the two types of households, using the model of equilibrium labor supply discussed
in section 1.2.
    While one might reasonably consider the optimal use of fiscal policy for stabilization
purposes as well, we shall here consider only the optimal conduct of monetary policy, taking
as given the state-contingent evolution of the fiscal variables {τt , bgt }. The problem with
which we are concerned is thus the choice of state-contingent paths for the endogenous
variables {Yt , λbt , λst , ibt , idt , zt , Πt , ∆t , bt }, consistent with the structural relations (2.7)–(2.8),
(2.12)–(2.15), (2.26)–(2.27), and (2.28)–(2.29), so as to maximize (4.1). Note that there is
one fewer structural relations per period than endogenous variables, so that there is one
dimension of variation of monetary policy each period, which may be thought of as the
central bank’s choice of the policy rate idt .
    We can analyze the solution to this optimization problem, by differentiating a Lagrangian


                                                                  39
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


to obtain a system of first-order conditions, that take the form of nonlinear (expectational)
stochastic difference equations. (Details are given in the Appendix.) A first important
conclusion, demonstrated in the Appendix, is that when there are no stochastic disturbances
(i.e., each of the exogenous variables in ξ˜t takes a constant value), the first-order conditions
for optimality admit a stationary (or steady state) solution, in which the rate of inflation is
zero. Hence under an optimal policy commitment, in the absence of stochastic disturbances
the inflation rate will eventually converge to zero;55 and in the case of small enough stochastic
disturbances, the optimal policy commitment will involve an inflation rate that fluctuates
asymptotically around zero. To the extent that the disturbances are small enough for a
linear approximation to the equilibrium relations to provide an adequate approximation to
the equilibrium dynamics, optimal policy involves a long-run average inflation rate of zero,
even in the stochastic case.
    This result generalizes the one obtained by Benigno and Woodford (2005) for the case with
representative-household, and implies that the optimal inflation target is independent of the
(average) severity of the distortions resulting from credit frictions, just as it is independent
of the severity of the steady-state distortions resulting from market power in the goods
or labor markets or from distorting taxes. This indicates a first important respect in which
conclusions about optimal policy derived from a model that abstracts from financial frictions
continue to apply when one allows for such frictions. The result also justifies our attention
here only to the consequences of alternative policies that imply a long-run average inflation
rate near zero (as in our analysis of the consequences of a Taylor rule in section 2); since
we know that the optimal policy commitment involves inflation fluctuations around zero,
we can restrict our analysis to policies with that property, both when seeking to further
characterize optimal policy, and when investigating the desirability of simple policy rules
that are intended to approximate optimal policy.
  55
     Under a once-and-for-all commitment chosen to maximize the objective (4.1) at some initial date, under
no constraints other than those required for a perfect foresight equilibrium from the time of adoption of
the policy commitment onward — the “Ramsey” policy problem — a higher inflation rate will be chosen
initially, in order to exploit the short-run aggregate-supply trade-off without having to take account of any
consequences of anticipation of such inflation in the period prior to adoption of the policy; but the policy will
involve a commitment to eventually reduce the inflation rate to zero, since the long-run inflation commitment
internalizes the consequences of anticipation of the inflation rate in prior periods. (See Woodford, 2003, chap.
7, for discussion of this in the context of the basic NK model.) Optimal policy “from a timeless perspective,”
in the sense defined in Woodford (2003, chapter 7) and Benigno and Woodford (2005), instead involves zero
inflation at all times, in the absence of stochastic disturbances.




                                                       40
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


4.1     Linear-Quadratic Analysis
Under certain simplifying assumptions, we can obtain an analytical solution for the optimal
state-contingent policy — or more precisely, for a linear approximation to optimal policy,
in the case of small enough fluctuations around the optimal (zero-inflation) long-run steady
state — using the method of linear-quadratic approximation introduced in Rotemberg and
Woodford (1997) and further expounded by Benigno and Woodford (2012).56 Under these
assumptions, we can derive a quadratic loss function for monetary stabilization policy with
the property that minimization of the loss function is equivalent (in the case of small enough
disturbances) to maximization of the utility-based objective (4.1). The linear policy rule
that minimizes the quadratic loss function subject to the linear constraints obtained by
log-linearizing the model structural relations (as in section 2.1) then provides a linear ap-
proximation to optimal policy.
     We begin by using structural relation (2.15) together with the definition Ωt ≡ λbt /λst to
solve for λbt and λst as functions of Yt , Ωt , Ξt , and the exogenous disturbances. Substituting
these solutions into (4.2), we obtain a period utility function Ũ (Yt , Ωt , Ξt , ∆t ; ξ˜t ) to replace
the function U defined in (4.2). We then compute a quadratic (Taylor-series) approximation
to the function Ũ around the values of its arguments in the zero-inflation steady state,
(Ȳ , Ω̄, Ξ̄, 1; 0). This takes an especially simple form under the following special assumptions:
(i) the steady-state tax distortion τ̄ exactly cancels the distortion resulting from market
power in the goods markets (1 − τ = µp ≡ θ/(θ − 1)), so that in the zero-inflation steady
state, price is equal to marginal cost; (ii) there is no steady-state wage markup (µ̄w = 1); (iii)
the steady-state credit spread ω̄ = 0 (which, because of relation (3.4), implies that Ω̄ = 1 as
well); and (iv) there are no resources consumed by the intermediary sector in steady state
(Ξ̄ = 0). Note that the assumed absence of steady-state distortions of any of these kinds does
not mean that we cannot consider the effects of these distortions; as with the other exogenous
disturbances, we consider the effects of small departures from the steady-state values. But
in the special case considered in this section, each of these distortions is assumed to be of
order O(||ξ||) in the notation of Woodford (2003, chap. 6). Finally, we also assume (v) that
the gradient Ξ̄b = 0 in steady state as well, so that any endogenous variation in the resources
used by the banking sector is of at most second order, though we allow for variations in the
  56
    These simplifying assumptions are not required in order to compute a valid LQ approximation to our
policy problem, as explained in Benigno and Woodford (2012). However, in general, the algebraic expression
of the solution to the LQ problem will be complex, so we discuss it here only in a special case allowing a
solution of a simple form. The same general method is used, however, to approximately characterize optimal
policy in the numerical results presented below, that do not rely upon the simplifying assumptions introduced
in this section.


                                                     41
                     Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


intercept Ξt (b̄) that are of order O(||ξ||).57
    In this special case, the Taylor series approximation to the period utility function takes
the simple form

         λ̄Ȳ n −1                 ∗ 2                       ˆ
                                                               o
 Ũt = −       (σ̄ + ωy )(Ŷt − Ŷt ) + λ̃Ω Ω̂t + (2/1 + ωy )∆t − λ̄Ξt + t.i.p. + O(||ξ||3 ), (4.3)
                                              2
           2

where the term “t.i.p.” collects terms that are independent of monetary policy (because
they depend only on exogenous disturbances) and the residual is of at most third order in
the amplitude of the disturbances. Here

                                                               σ̄ −1 b̃
                                           Ŷt∗ ≡ Ŷtn +              Ξt ,                                      (4.4)
                                                           σ̄ −1 + ωy

where Ŷtn is defined as in (3.12), and Ξb̃ measures the departure of the exogenous factor
                                           t

Ξ̃t from its steady-state value. Thus the target level of output Ŷt∗ is a function solely of
                                58

exogenous disturbances, and indicates the optimal common level of production of each good
given the current values of those disturbances, if one takes as given the marginal utility gap
Ω̂t (which determines the way in which a given aggregate consumption level must be allocated
across the two types of households) and the quantity of resources Ξt that are consumed by
the intermediary sector.59 Moreover, λ̄ is the common steady-state marginal utility of income
of all households (under a calibration in which Ω̄ = 1); σ̄ is the “aggregate” intertemporal
elasticity of substitution defined in (3.6) above; the coefficient λ̃Ω > 0 is defined in the
Appendix; and hats denote percentage deviations from the steady-state values of the various
variables, as in section 2.1.
     Taking a discounted sum of these terms, and using a second-order Taylor series approxi-
mation to (2.26) to substitute for the ∆ˆ t terms in terms of inflation, we obtain a quadratic
  57
     This last assumption is not necessary in order for the approximation (4.3) to average utility to be valid,
but it is necessary in order for the terms in (4.3) that depend on policy to be purely quadratic, i.e., for them
to include no linear terms. This last condition is necessary in order for the loss function to be evaluated to
second order under alternative policies using only linear approximations to the model’s structural relations,
as discussed in Woodford (2003, chap. 6) and Benigno and Woodford (2012).
  58
     Note that Ŷ ∗ is a modified version of Ŷ n in which the term Ĝ is replaced by Ĝ + Ξ
                 t                               t                           t
                                                                                               b̃ . Effectively,
                                                                                                t     t
exogenous variations in Ξt (b̄) have an effect like that of variations in Gt , insofar as both represent variations
in “autonomous expenditure” by sectors other than the private non-financial sector (represented by the
“households” of our model). See the Appendix for details.
  59                                                                                b̃ = 0 at all times — Ŷ n is the
     In a version of the model without financial frictions — so that Ω̂ = Ξ = Ξ
                                                                         t       t   t                      t
efficient level of output of each good, given current preferences and technological possibilities, as remarked
earlier.




                                                         42
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


objective
                          ∞
                          X                     ∞
                                                X
                                 β t Ũt = −K         β t Lt + t.i.p. + O(||ξ||3 ),           (4.5)
                           t=0                  t=0

where K > 0 and the period loss function is of the form

                           Lt = πt2 + λy (Ŷt − Ŷt∗ )2 + λΩ Ω̂2t + λΞ Ξbt b̂t ,              (4.6)

for certain weights λy , λΩ , λΞ > 0 defined in the Appendix. Maximization of average expected
utility is thus equivalent (to the order of approximation required here) to minimization of
the expected discounted value of the loss function (4.6). And because the terms in (4.6) are
purely quadratic, the loss function can be evaluated to second order using only a log-linear
approximation to the equilibrium dynamics of the endogenous variables under a given policy.
Hence it is possible to use the log-linearized structural relations (derived in section 2.1) as the
constraints in our (approximate) optimal policy problem. We thus obtain a linear-quadratic
(LQ) problem, the solution to which provides a log-linear (approximate) characterization of
optimal policy.
     It is noteworthy that in (4.6), both the effects of the various types of exogenous distur-
bances (other than the “purely financial” disturbance Ξ    b̃ ) on the “target” level of output Ŷ ∗
                                                             t                                    t
and the relative weight λy placed on the output-gap stabilization objective are identical (as
functions of the model parameters) to those in the corresponding derivation for the basic
NK model, modulo the need to “average” the preferences of the two types of households in
defining both the elasticity σ̄ and the composite disturbance to “autonomous expenditure”
gt . In particular, not only is the output gap appearing here the same one that appears in
the aggregate-supply relation (3.12) — again except for the effect of the purely financial
disturbance Ξ  b̃ — just as in the basic NK model; but in addition the weight is given by
                 t

λy = κ/θ, where κ is the slope of the inflation/output-gap tradeoff in (3.12), again as in
the basic NK model. Thus in the special case that there are no financial frictions (i.e.,
ωt = Ξ̃t = Ξt = 0 at all times), so that the last two terms in (4.6) vanish, along with the
non-standard terms in (3.12), and Ŷt∗ is simply equal to Ŷtn , both the welfare-based loss func-
tion and the aggregate-supply relation (that defines the available trade-off between dynamic
paths for the two variables in the loss function) are of exactly the same form as in the basic
NK model, once one defines “average” variables appropriately. The existence of preference
heterogeneity of the kind assumed in the present model — heterogeneity both with respect
to the interest-sensitivity of different units’ expenditure decisions and with respect to the
time variation in their opportunities for productive expenditure — does not in itself require


                                                       43
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


any substantial modification of the theory of optimal monetary stabilization policy.
    If we instead allow for time-varying financial frictions (though no steady-state distortions,
as explained above), but assume that there is no endogenous variation in these frictions — i.e.,
that {ωt , Ξt } are exogenous processes, independent of the evolution of private indebtedness60
— we continue to obtain a very simple characterization of optimal policy. In this case, the
final term in (4.6) is zero, and the penultimate term is independent of policy (to second
order), since the log-linear approximate structural relation (3.4) implies that if {ωt } is an
exogenous process, {Ωt } is also an exogenous process, at least up to a residual that is at most
of second order, so that Ω̂2t is exogenous, at least up to a residual of order O(||ξ||3 ). Hence
the loss function can be written (ignoring terms independent of policy) in the standard New
Keynesian form, which is to say, as
                                                ∞
                                                X
                                           E0         β t [πt2 + λy x2t ],                                (4.7)
                                                t=0


where xt ≡ Ŷt − Ŷt∗ is the welfare-relevant output gap. In this case, the appropriate objectives
of stabilization policy remain as in the basic NK model; the only differences made by financial
frictions relate to the feasible paths for inflation and the output gap, and to the path for the
policy rate required to implement given paths for inflation and the output gap.
    Time-variation in financial frictions does matter for the optimal conduct of monetary
policy, because they shift both the IS relation (3.8) and the aggregate-supply relation (3.12)).
However, only the latter relation represents a constraint upon the set of achievable outcomes
for the target variables, inflation and the output gap. And the only effect of financial frictions
on this relation is the presence of an additional additive disturbance term. The first-order
conditions that characterize the solution to the LQ problem of minimizing (4.7) subject to
the constraint that (3.12) hold each period are unaffected by the additional disturbance
terms, and so is the optimal target criterion that expresses the linear relation that must
exist between the evolution of inflation and of the output gap in order for the first-order
conditions for optimality to be satisfied. Just as in the basic NK model, the optimal target
criterion is of the form61
                                     πt + (λy /κ)(xt − xt−1 ) = 0.                           (4.8)
  60
      For example, we may assume that (i) no real resources are used in intermediation, so that Ξt (b) = 0,
and the credit spread ωt is due entirely to default risk; and (ii) the default rate χ̃t evolves exogenously, and
is unaffected by the volume of bank lending.
   61
      See Woodford (2003, chap. 7) for derivation of this characterization of optimal policy in the case of the
basic NK model, and for further discussion of the implementation of optimal policy using a target criterion.



                                                         44
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


While the state-contingent paths for inflation and the output gap that satisfy this criterion
are different in the case of a time-varying credit spread, the criterion that the central bank
should use at each point in time to determine if policy remains on track is unchanged. Not
only can optimal policy still be characterized as “flexible inflation targeting,” but the optimal
target criterion is of an identical form to what is optimal in the absence of credit frictions.


4.2     Implementing the Optimal Policy
The implementation of an optimal policy does require the central bank to monitor the varying
size of the credit frictions — more precisely, the varying size of credit spreads — in order to
determine how it must act in order to ensure fulfillment of the target criterion (4.8). These
matter for two reasons. First, the paths of inflation and the output gap consistent with (4.8)
depend in general on the evolution of credit spreads, because of the effect of those spreads
on the aggregate-supply trade-off (3.12). And second, the path of policy rates required to
implement given (feasible) paths for inflation and output depends on the path of credit
spreads, because of their effects on both the relation (3.8) between average interest rates
and expenditure and the relation (3.10) between the policy rate and the relevant “average”
interest rate.
    The required adjustment of the policy rate follows from standard treatments (e.g., Clar-
ida, Gali and Gertler, 1999; Woodford, 2003, chap. 7) of the optimal interest-rate response
to “cost-push shocks” and variations in the natural rate of interest in the context of the basic
NK model. Variations in credit spreads result in a total cost-push term in the aggregate-
supply relation equal to62
                                      uFt F = ut + ξsΩ Ω̂t ,

where ut ≡ ξ(µ̂w t + τ̂t ) is the cost-push term in the absence of financial frictions (but taking
account of preference heterogeneity), and the coefficient sΩ is defined as in (3.7); and they
similarly result in a natural rate of interest (understood to mean the real value of the relevant
average rate of interest that would be required to maintain a zero output gap at all times)
equal to
                           rtn,F F = rtn + sΩ Et ∆Ω̂t+1 − (σ̄ + ωy−1 )−1 Et ∆Ξ
                                                                             b̃ ,
                                                                               t


where rtn is similarly the natural rate of interest in the absence of financial frictions (but
  62
    The cost-push effect of variations in Ω̂t here has a simpler expression than in (3.12), because of the
assumption in this section that Ω̄ = 1, which implies that γb = πb . The effect of variations in Ω̂t on the
natural rate of interest given below is similarly simpler than the one indicated in (3.8), because ψΩ = 0 in
the special case in which Ω̄ = 1.



                                                    45
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


taking account of preference heterogeneity). The standard theory of how “the interest rate”
should be adjusted in response to exogenous variations in the processes {ut , rtn } continues
to apply under this extension of the basic NK model, but it now should be understood
to determine the optimal operating target for the average interest rate ı̂avg t . The required
adjustment of the central bank’s policy rate idt is then given by (3.10), and this relation is
also shifted when credit spreads change.
    A useful description of the ultimate implications for interest-rate policy can be given by
solving equilibrium relations (3.8), (3.10) and (3.12) for the policy rate required in order for
the equilibrium values of πt and xt to satisfy the target criterion (4.8). In this exercise we
take as given the values of the expectations Et πt+1 and Et xt+1 , as well as the values of all
predetermined or exogenous variables; solve for the implied values of πt and xt conditional
upon the choice of idt ; substitute these solutions for πt and xt into the target criterion; and
then solve for the value of idt that implies that (4.8) should be satisfied. The resulting
interest-rate reaction function is what Evans and Honkapohja (2006) call an “expectations-
based reaction function.” Because it responds directly to (observed) current expectations,
such a policy ensures that the target criterion is satisfied regardless of whether expectations
are those consistent with the optimal equilibrium. Such an approach to the implementation of
policy has important advantages; in particular, it ensures both that the optimal equilibrium is
the only (non-explosive) rational-expectations equilibrium consistent with the central bank’s
reaction function, and that this equilibrium is “E-stable,” facilitating convergence to the
rational-expectations equilibrium under least-squares learning dynamics.63
    In the case of the model developed here (under the assumptions used to derive (4.8), this
reaction function takes the form

                    idt = rtn + φu ut + [1 + βφu ]Et πt+1 + σ̄ −1 Et xt+1 − φx xt−1
                             −[πb + δ̂ −1 sΩ ]ω̂t + [(δ̂ −1 − 1) + φu ξ]sΩ Ω̂t
                             −(σ̄ + ω −1 )−1 E ∆Ξ
                                         y      t
                                                   b̃ ,
                                                       t+1                                 (4.9)

where
                                         κ                              λy
                          φu ≡                  > 0,         φx ≡               > 0.
                                 σ̄(κ2   + λy )                     σ̄(κ2+ λy )
The terms on the first line of (4.9) are exactly the reaction function derived by Evans and
Honkapohja (2006) for the basic NK model; note that the rule can be viewed as a forward-
looking variant of a “Taylor rule.” The second and third lines contain the additional terms
 63
      See Evans and Honkapohja (2006), Preston (2008), and Woodford (2003, chap. 7).



                                                       46
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


that must be added in the case of credit frictions, taking into account the effects of credit
spreads and of the resources used in intermediation on the effective natural rate of interest,
the cost-push effects of credit spreads, and the consequences of spreads for the gap between
the policy rate and the average interest rate. (We have written the terms on the second line
in terms of ω̂t and Ω̂t rather than Ω̂t and Et Ω̂t+1 , by using (3.4) to eliminate the expected
gap term. This makes it easiest to contrast the effects of transitory as opposed to more
persistent variations in credit spreads.)
    Because the coefficient multiplying ω̂t is negative, while the term multiplying Ω̂t is positive
(under the assumption that sb σb > ss σs ), the appropriate adjustment of the intercept of the
reaction function is generally negative in the case of a transitory increase in credit spreads,
but less negative (for any given size of increase in credit spreads) the more persistent the
increase is expected to be. It is furthermore worth noting that in the limiting case in which
sb σb >> ss σs and δ approaches 1, the coefficient on ω̂t in (4.9) approaches -1. Since the
coefficient on Ω̂t is also fairly small under a realistic calibration (about 0.03 in the calibration
used above), it follows that the optimal reduction in the policy rate (relative to what the
reaction function would otherwise call for) in response to a purely transitory increase in
credit spreads will equal nearly 100 percent of the increase in spreads, as proposed by Taylor
(2008) and McCulley and Toloui (2008). In this limiting case, it is really only the interest rate
faced by borrowers that matters for aggregate demand, and thus it is only the consequence
of the policy rate for the rate that will be faced by borrowers that matters for fulfillment
of the target criterion; in this case the reasoning of Taylor and of McCulley and Toloui is
essentially correct.
    Even in the case of a less extreme parameterization of the structural model and a more
persistent disturbances to credit markets, the optimal adjustment can easily be a large
fraction of the size of the increase in credit spreads. For example, in the case of the calibration
discussed above and in the case of a financial shock with the degree of persistence assumed in
Figures 15 below (i.e., an autoregressive coefficient of 0.75), the reduction in the intercept of
the central-bank reaction function will be by about 85 basis points for each percentage point
increase in credit spreads. However, under a parameterization in which the expenditure
decisions of borrowers are not so largely responsible for the interest sensitivity of aggregate
expenditure, the optimal reduction in the policy rate in response to an increase in credit
spreads would be smaller. For example, in the case that sb σb = ss σs , the coefficient on ω̂t is
equal to exactly −πb , while the coefficient on Ω̂t is zero. In this case, it is only optimal to
reduce the policy rate by πb percentage points for every percentage point increase in credit
spreads; in this case, the optimal reaction function is most simply expressed in terms of an


                                                47
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


operating target for iavg                     d     b
                      t , rather than either it or it . (It is also interesting to note that in this
case, the optimal response is independent of the degree of persistence of the disturbance to
credit markets.)
    These analytical results depend, of course, on a number of simplifying assumptions.
Matters are more complicated, in particular, if we assume that either the resources used in
financial intermediation, the size of credit spreads, or both depend on the volume of bank
lending. Rather than seek analytical results in the more general case, we present some
illustrative numerical calculations of optimal policy in calibrated examples, and investigate
the degree to which the insights suggested by the analysis of this simple case continue to
apply.


4.3     Numerical Analysis
In order to check the degree to which the results obtained above for a special case continue to
hold, at least approximately, under more general assumptions, we numerically analyze opti-
mal policy in the calibrated economies for which we have already analyzed the consequences
of a simple Taylor rule in section 2. Under assumptions more general than those used in
the previous section, we can characterize the optimal responses to exogenous disturbances
of various sorts by deriving the first-order conditions that characterize optimal (Ramsey)
policy — the problem of maximizing (4.1) subject to constraints (2.7)–(2.8), (2.12)–(2.15),
(2.26)–(2.27), and (2.28)–(2.29) — and then log-linearizing them around the zero-inflation
optimal steady state. The resulting log-linear equations can be solved for log-linear optimal
dynamic responses of the various endogenous variables to (small enough) random shocks to
each of the exogenous disturbance processes.
    A useful question about these optimal responses is the degree to which they can be
achieved through one or another rule for the conduct of monetary policy. Given our results
for the special case treated in the previous section, one obvious candidate for a rule is
flexible inflation targeting, here understood to mean a commitment to adjust the policy
rate as necessary to ensure that the target criterion (4.8) holds at all times.64 Other simple
  64
    More precisely, the target criterion that we assume is the one that characterizes optimal policy in
the representative-household model. The target criterion discussed in the previous section corresponded to
optimal policy in a representative household model in which the steady-state level of output is efficient, which
required that 1 − τ = µp ≡ θ/(θ − 1). More generally, the optimal target criterion for the representative-
household model continues to be of the form (4.8), but the definition of the output gap xt and the relative
weight λy are slightly different, as explained in Benigno and Woodford (2005). To be precise, in our numerical
solutions under the “flexible inflation targeting rule” (4.8), we define the variable xt as in Benigno and
Woodford, except that the exogenous level of government purchases Ĝ is replaced by Ĝ + Ξ
                                                                         t                  t
                                                                                               b̃ , as in (4.4).
                                                                                                 t




                                                      48
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


proposals that we shall consider include the simple Taylor rule analyzed in section 2, and
a strict inflation targeting rule, under which monetary policy stabilizes the inflation rate
regardless of the type of disturbance that occurs.
     The equilibrium responses of the endogenous variables to a technology shock (of exactly
the same kind previously considered in Figures 3 and 6) under each of these alternative
monetary policies are shown in Figure 10. (The model parameterization is again the one
with a convex intermediation technology, as in Figures 5-9.) The solid line (labeled ‘Optimal’)
indicates the equilibrium responses to the increase in productivity under the optimal policy.
The dashed line (labeled ‘PiStab’) instead indicates responses under a policy that fully
stabilizes inflation (i.e., strict inflation targeting); the line marked with + signs (labeled
‘Taylor’) indicates responses under policy conducted in accordance with the Taylor rule;
and the line marked with x’s (labeled ‘FlexTarget’) indicates responses under the flexible
inflation targeting policy.
     In the case of this kind of shock, the aggregate-supply relation (3.12) implies that there
is little inconsistency between inflation stabilization and output-gap stabilization; and as a
consequence strict inflation targeting and flexible inflation targeting are barely distinguish-
able policies.65 They are also both very close to the optimal policy, confirming that in this
respect the analytical results of the previous section continue to provide a good approxima-
tion. The Taylor rule is instead much less close to an optimal policy, because it requires
policy to be tightened in response to the output increase, even when this does not represent
high output relative to the natural rate (which is increased by the technology shock). Similar
results are obtained in the case of exogenous shocks to the disutility of labor, the demand
of borrowers, or to the path of government debt (none of which are shown here): in each
case, there is sufficiently little tension between the requirements of inflation stabilization and
of output-gap stabilization that flexible inflation targeting and strict inflation targeting are
similar policies, and both are fairly close to optimal policy (while the Taylor rule is much
less close).
     Figure 11 shows the corresponding equilibrium responses in the case of a shock to the
wage markup µw    t , under the same four alternative policies. This case is interesting because
it is one in which strict inflation targeting is clearly not an optimal policy, even in the
representative-household model, owing to the substantial “cost-push” effect of such a shock.
(However, even in this case, strict inflation targeting is still more similar to optimal policy
than is adherence to the Taylor rule.) The figure shows that in the case of this kind of shock,
  65
    In fact, if we did not allow for endogeneity of the credit spread, as in the model with a linear interme-
diation technology, they would not differ at all.



                                                     49
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


as with other “supply shocks” such as disturbances to the disutility of labor supply or to the
tax rate, flexible inflation targeting is nonetheless quite a close approximation to optimal
policy.
    Figure 12 shows the corresponding equilibrium responses to a shock to the level of gov-
ernment purchases (of the kind previously assumed in Figures 4 and 7); and Figure 13 shows
the responses to a shock to the demand of savers (of the kind previously assumed in Figure
8). In the case of a shock to government purchases, strict inflation targeting is again not
optimal,66 and in at least some respects the Taylor rule is in this case closer to the optimal
policy than would be strict inflation targeting.67 Nonetheless, once again flexible inflation
targeting is the closest to optimal policy of the set of simple policy rules considered here,
though optimal policy would be slightly tighter in the period of the shock. In the case of a
shock to the demand of savers as well, flexible inflation targeting is the closest to optimal
policy, though again optimal policy would be slightly tighter in the period of the shock.
Flexible inflation targeting is nonetheless a slightly tighter policy (initially) in response to
the expansionary shock than strict inflation targeting would be, though it is not excessively
tight in the way that the simple Taylor rule is.
    Figure 14 instead considers equilbrium responses to a shock to the demand of borrowers
(again, the shock increases their purchases by one percent for a given marginal utility of
income). In this case, the way in which the strict inflation targeting policy is suboptimal
is opposite to the case of two “demand shocks” just considered: under an optimal policy,
inflation would be allowed to rise slightly in response to the shock. But again the flexible
inflation targeting policy deviates from strict inflation targeting in the correct direction,
while both targeting rules are substantially better than the simple Taylor rule.
    Finally, Figure 15 shows the corresponding equilibrium responses in the case of a shock
to the default rate χ̃t , of a size sufficient to increase the credit spread ωt by four percentage
points (annualized). This kind of shock (not discussed in section 2.3 because there is no
analogous shock in the models without financial frictions) would be quite contractionary if
monetary policy were conducted in accordance with an unadjusted Taylor rule.68 But as in
the case of a productivity shock (shown in Figure 10) or a shock to the disutility of labor
supply, either kind of inflation targeting is much closer to optimal policy. Yet even in this
case, flexible inflation targeting is not quite an equivalent policy to strict inflation targeting,
  66
     This would be true even in the representative-household model, given the existence of steady-state
distortions, as discussed by Benigno and Woodford (2005).
  67
     The response of output is more nearly optimal under the Taylor rule.
  68
     This effect could be substantially mitigated, of course, by a spread-adjusted Taylor rule of the kind
proposed by Taylor (2008). See Cúrdia and Woodford (2010) for numerical analysis of rules of that kind.



                                                   50
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


and is closer to the optimal policy.
     Overall, our conclusion is that while the additional distortions that were omitted in the
special case for which we were able to give an analytical characterization of optimal policy
in section 3.1 are of at least some significance in our calibrated model, the flexible inflation
targeting rule (4.8) continues to provide a fairly good approximation to optimal policy, in
response to each of the variety of types of exogenous disturbances discussed above.69 Since
this is also the rule that characterizes optimal policy in the basic NK model, in at least this
sense the basic NK model remains quite a good guide to policy in the kind of environment that
we consider. Of course, it is important to remember that the policy prescription provided by
(4.8) is not a complete description of the way in which the policy rate should be adjusted: it is
still necessary to use a model of the transmission mechanism to determine what adjustments
of the policy rate are needed to ensure that the target criterion is satisfied. And the model
used for this latter purpose needs to be one that takes account of the credit frictions — in
particular, that takes account of the variations over time in the size of credit spreads. But
the target criterion around which monetary policy deliberations are structured may not need
to be changed in response to the existence of credit frictions.


5      Conclusions
With regard to the most general question raised in our introduction — implications for
models for policy analysis — our results suggest that the basic view of the way in which
monetary policy influences aggregate expenditure and inflation presented in New Keynesian
models need not be modified in any fundamental way as a consequence of the observation
that substantial spreads exist on average between different interest rates in the economy, or
that these spreads are not always constant over time. We have exhibited a simple extension of
the basic NK model in which a time-varying positive spread exists between the interest rate
available to savers and the interest rate at which borrowers can borrow. Yet in at least the
simplest version of this model, the monetary transmission mechanism is virtually identical to
that of the basic NK model: monetary policy can be viewed purely as central-bank control
of a short-term nominal interest rate (the deposit rate idt ), and the ways in which aggregate
expenditure and inflation are determined by the expected central-bank reaction function for
the policy rate (e.g., a Taylor rule specification) are nearly identical to those in the basic
NK model. Hence the fundamental lessons implied by that framework for monetary policy
  69
    The Appendix includes figures with the equilibrium responses to all the exogenous disturbances consid-
ered, under the alternative policies discussed.


                                                   51
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


analysis continue to apply (for example, the conclusion that central banks influence the
aggregate economy primarily by affecting the expected future path of short-run real rates of
return, rather than through their control of the current short rate as such, the conclusion
that optimal policy is history-dependent, and so on).
    This does not mean that financial frictions are irrelevant to output and inflation deter-
mination. Even in the simplest case of the present model, time-variation in credit spreads
affects both the “IS relation” between the expected path of the real policy rate and aggregate
expenditure and the “AS relation” between aggregate output and inflation. However, in the
simplest version of the model, these spreads simply contribute additional additive terms to
these relations, corresponding to a new form of exogenous disturbance, in addition to the
real sources of variation in the natural rate of interest and natural rate of output, and the
“cost-push” disturbances allowed for in the basic NK model. The occurrence of such addi-
tional disturbances matters: successful monetary policy requires appropriate adjustment of
the policy rate in response to disturbances, and this requires monitoring them in real time
and correctly identifying their character as they occur. But the effects of “financial shocks”
in the simplest version of our model with credit frictions are not fundamentally different than
the effects of a certain linear combination of types of shocks that are already considered in
the standard NK literature, and the appropriate response to them (from the point of view
of stabilization of inflation and/or real activity) is the same as would be appropriate in the
case of that combination of familiar shocks.
    Among other things, allowing for credit spreads need not require any reconsideration
of the often-noted de-emphasis of measures of the money supply and sources of money
demand in standard NK models.70 We have shown that it is possible to extend the basic NK
model to incorporate time-varying credit frictions, without making any reference to money or
introducing a transactions role for money. This can be interpreted as a “cashless” model in
which there actually are no transactions balances and no government liabilities that are held
other than for their pecuniary returns. But as usual, the model can also be interpreted as
one in which money does supply liquidity services and earns a correspondingly lower return
than government debt, and in which the central bank implements its interest-rate target by
adjusting the supply of money. It remains the case, under this latter interpretation, that
  70
     Critics of the omission of a fundamental role for monetary aggregates in NK models (e.g., Issing, 2006;
Goodhart, 2007) often point to the absence of multiple interest rates and of any role for financial interme-
diaries as a ground for suspecting the empirical relevance of such models. Goodhart, in particular, proposes
that the absence of financial frictions in such models may account for the absence of an essential role for
money: “by basing their model on [frictionless financial markets], the Neo-Keynesians are turning their
model into an essentially non-monetary model. So it is no surprise that monetary variables are inessential
in it” (p. 11).


                                                    52
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


what matters about monetary policy is the intended reaction function for interest rates, and
not the adjustments of the supply of money that are required in order to achieve the interest-
rate targets, and that, under a plausible calibration of the size of monetary frictions, the
existence of such frictions is of negligible quantitative significance for the predicted evolution
of aggregate activity and inflation.71
     Yet while our results suggest that in the case of many types of aggregate disturbances
(both disturbances that are ordinarily thought of as “demand” disturbances, and others
that are considered “supply” disturbances), the effects of shocks on the evolution of output,
inflation and interest rates under a conventional specification of monetary policy are not too
greatly changed by the introduction of credit frictions, this is not uniformly the case. One
example is the effects of changes in the path of government debt owing to shifts in fiscal
policy. While the path of government debt has no effects on inflation, output or interest-rate
determination in the basic NK model (if distorting tax rates are assumed not to change, so
that the changed path of government borrowing corresponds only to a change in the time
path of net lump-sum transfers from the government) — that is, “Ricardian equivalence”
obtains — in the presence of credit frictions of the kind modeled here, this is no longer the
case (even under the special assumption about tax rates). This suggests that the integration
of fiscal variables into models used in central banks for monetary policy analysis may deserve
a higher place on the research agenda.
     Another important consequence of allowing for credit spreads, of course, is the possibility
of considering how a central bank should respond to observed variation in such spreads. It is
often argued that widening credit spreads provide a prima facie case for the appropriateness of
lowering the central bank’s policy rate. The argument commonly given is that when spreads
increase, the terms on which it is possible to borrow are tightened, even in the absence of any
increase in the policy rate. If it was not desired to tighten monetary conditions, it is therefore
necessary to lower the policy rate, to the extent required in order to preserve the original cost
  71
     Of course, our analysis here does not prove that it is not of value to model the evolution of a suitably
defined monetary aggregate. In the model proposed by Woodford (2015), for example, the quantity of
“money-like” liabilities issued by private intermediaries is an important state variable, because the amount
of funding of this kind determines the amount of assets that such intermediaries will be forced to liquidate
in the event that they are unable to roll over their short-term funding, and this in term determines the
extent to which asset prices will be depressed in such a crisis. Such a model allows for a type of financial
friction that we abstract from here. But even in the model of Woodford (2015), the relevant aggregate is not
a traditional monetary aggregate, but rather the quantity of privately issued short-term safe instruments,
such as repos or asset-backed commercial paper; and the reason it matters is not because of the ability of
such assets to substitute for some uses of government-supplied money, as in traditional monetarist theory,
but because of the consequences of the adjustment of the asset side of bank’s balance sheets that may be
required if the demand for such liabilities suddenly changes.



                                                     53
                 Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


of borrowing. Authors such as McCulley and Toloui (2008) suggest a one-for-one reduction
in the policy rate in response to increases in particular credit spreads.
    In our model, it is certainly right that the policy rate is not the only interest rate that
matters in assessing the degree to which financial conditions are expansionary. On the other
hand, it is not true (except in a rather special limiting case) that only the interest rate
faced by borrowers matters, either; so a full offset of the observed increase in credit spreads
would generally be a larger interest-rate reduction than is optimal. (A decline in the interest
rate received by savers, with no change in the interest rate faced by borrowers, represents
a loosening of financial conditions, insofar as saving decisions are also interest-elastic to
some extent.) Moreover, the justification of a reduction in the policy rate in response to
an increase in credit spreads depends on an expectation that the lower policy rate will be
passed through to the interest rates at which intermediaries are willing to lend; if such pass-
through is incomplete, this would further reduce the extent to which it is optimal for the
policy rate to adjust in response to a change in credit spreads. And even in the case of an
exogenous credit spread (so that changes in the policy rate are passed through one-for-one to
lending rates), the optimal adjustment of the policy rate to an increase in the credit spread
is generally less than the full size of the increase in the spread, and the optimal adjustment
is smaller the more persistent the increase in the credit spread is expected to be.
    Still less would our model justify the view, which sometimes appears to be assumed
in popular discussions of the appropriate response to strains in credit markets, that the
persistence of higher-than-average credit spreads means that interest rates have not been cut
enough. (This is evidently what is assumed when commentators seek to judge whether policy
rates have been cut by the right amount by looking at whether spreads remain unusually
large, rather than asking whether borrowing rates are actually high.)
    It is true that an increase in spreads is a source of deadweight loss in our model, so that
a reduction of spreads to normal levels, if this could be done without changing anything
else, would be desirable. But it is not necessarily true that monetary policy can do anything
to undo an increase in credit spreads — this is certainly the case in our simplest model,
where the credit spread is determined entirely by exogenous factors — and lowering interest
rates will instead certainly have collateral effects. Even if monetary policy can influence
spreads, it is not obvious that this will be beneficial. For example, in the case that spreads
are endogenous because they depend on the volume of bank lending, monetary policy can
lower spreads to the extent that it can lead to a contraction of bank lending; but that would
not necessarily increase efficiency, even if a reduction in the spread associated with a given
volume of lending would enhance efficiency (by allowing more lending). A better principle


                                              54
                  Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


may well be to use monetary policy to mitigate the distortions caused by an increase in credit
spreads, to the extent that this is possible, rather than seeking to use policy to influence the
level of spreads as such.
    A policy rule that directs the central bank to adjust its policy rate as necessary to satisfy a
“flexible inflation target” will automatically require the central bank to adjust the policy rate
to take account of changes in the severity of financial frictions, without any need to modify
the target criterion that the bank aims to conform with. In our model of the transmission
mechanism, it is the level and expected future path of the average interest rate, rather than
the policy rate, that determines whether the evolution of output and inflation should satisfy
the target criterion. When the relation between this average rate and the policy rate changes
owing to a change in the size of interest-rate spreads, the level and expected path of the policy
rate required for conformity with the target criterion will obviously change. The required
policy rate will similarly change as a result of the effects of changing credit spreads on the
“IS relation” and aggregate-supply relation discussed in section 2.
    When the policy rule is specified in terms of a target criterion, it is not obvious that the
target criterion that should be chosen depends much on the importance of credit frictions. In
a particularly simple case of a model with time-varying credit frictions, we have shown that
the optimal target criterion remains exactly the same as in the basic NK model: the central
bank should seek to stabilize a weighted average of the inflation rate and the rate of growth
of the output gap (or alternatively, to stabilize an output-gap-adjusted price level). Under
more general assumptions, this exact equivalence does not obtain. Nonetheless, the target
criterion that would be optimal in the case of the model without credit frictions seems still
to provide a fairly good approximation to optimal policy in the model with credit frictions,
when these are parameterized to be of an empirically realistic magnitude. Because of the
advantages (for example, from the point of view of communication) of commitment to a
simple criterion, and because of the degree to which any attempt to refine the rule would
depend on fine details of the specification of the financial frictions, about which there is
likely to be uncertainty in any event, our results suggest that maintaining a commitment to
the same target criterion as would be optimal in the absence of financial frictions is not a
bad idea.
    This suggests that a central bank should not change its target criterion — what it regards
as acceptable paths of inflation and real activity — at all in times of financial stress, but
instead should take account of those developments only as a result of the changes that they
imply for the links between the policy rate and the evolution of the target variables, and
hence for the path of the policy rate that is required to satisfy the target criterion. As we


                                                55
                    Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


have shown, this will generally mean lowering the policy rate in response to a disturbance
that increases credit spreads; but the exact size of the appropriate response will involve
balancing each of several economic effects of the change in the anticipated path of credit
spreads.
    The present analysis represents merely a first attempt at exploration of what is obviously
a very rich terrain. Among other obvious limitations of the present analysis, we have allowed
for only one, very simple form of possible endogeneity of credit spreads.72 Further analysis
will be necessary before we can judge how robust the conclusions of the present analysis are
to variations in this aspect of our model of the monetary transmission mechanism.




References
Araújo, Aloı́sio, Susan Schommer, and Michael Woodford. 2015. “Conventional
 and Unconventional Monetary Policy with Endogenous Collateral Constraints.” American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7: 1–43.

Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford. 2005. “Inflation Stabilization and Welfare:
 The Case of a Distorted Steady State.” Journal of the European Economic Association,
 3(6): 1185–1236.

Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford. 2012. “Linear-Quadratic Approximation
 of Optimal Policy Problems.” Journal of Economic Theory, 147(1): 1–42.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The Financial
 Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In Handbook of Macroeco-
 nomics. Vol. 1C, , ed. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, Chapter 21, 1341–93.
 Amsterdam:North-Holland.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2012.
 “Macroeconomics with Financial Frictions: A Survey.” NBER Working Paper No. 18102.
  72
    For example, we abstract from the possible dependence of loan rates on borrowers’ net worth stressed in
the “financial accelerator” model of Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999); from the stickiness of loan rates
stressed by Hulsewig, Mayer and Wollmershauser (2009), Teranishi (2008), Sudo and Teranishi (2008), and
Gerali, Neri and Signoretti (2008); and from endogenous variation in the extent to which collateral constraints
on borrowers bind, as emphasized by both Araújo, Schommer and Woodford (2015) and Woodford (2015).



                                                      56
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


Calvo, Guillermo. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 12.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Cosmin Ilut, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno.
 2008. “Monetary Policy and Stock-Market Boom-Bust Cycles.” ECB Working Paper No.
 955.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2003. “The
 Great Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis.” Journal of Money, Credit and
 Banking, 35: 1119–1198.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2010. “Financial
 Factors in Business Cycles.” ECB Working Paper No. 1192.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary
  Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37: 1661–1707.

Cúrdia, Vasco. 2008. “Optimal Monetary Policy under Sudden Stops.” FRBNY Staff Re-
  port No. 323.

Cúrdia, Vasco, and Michael Woodford. 2010. “Credit Spreads and Monetary Policy.”
  Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 42(s1): 3–35.

Cúrdia, Vasco, and Michael Woodford. 2011. “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an
  Instrument of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1): 54–79.

De Fiore, Fiorella, and Oreste Tristani. 2011. “Credit and the Natural Rate of Interest.”
 Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(2-3): 407–440.

Den Haan, Wouter, Steven W. Sumner, and Guy Yamashiro. 2010. “Bank Loan
 Components and the Time-Varying Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks.” Economica,
 78: 593–617.

Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. 2006. “Monetary Policy, Expectations and
 Commitment.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 108: 15–38.

Faia, Ester, and Tommaso Monacelli. 2007. “Optimal Interest-Rate Rules, Asset Prices,
  and Credit Frictions.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31: 3228–3254.

Fuerst, Timothy S. 1992. “Liquidity, Loanable Funds, and Real Activity.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 29: 3–24.

                                           57
               Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


Gerali, Andrea, Stefano Neri, and Federico M. Signoretti. 2008. “Credit and Banking
 in a DSGE Model.” Unpublished.

Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit
 Policy in Business Cycle Analysis.” Unpublished.

Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2011. “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy.”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 58: 17–34.

Gertler, Mark, Simon Gilchrist, and Fabio Natalucci. 2007. “External Constraints on
 Monetary Policy and the Financial Accelerator.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
 39: 295–330.

Goodfriend, Marvin. 2005. “Narrow Money, Broad Money, and the Transmission of Mon-
 etary Policy.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Goodfriend, Marvin, and Bennett T. McCallum. 2007. “Banking and Interest Rates in
 Monetary Policy Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
 54: 1480–1507.

Goodhart, Charles A.E. 2007. “Whatever Became of the Monetary Aggregates?” LSE
 Financial Markets Group Special Paper 172.

Hulsewig, Oliver, Eric Mayer, and Timo Wollmershauser. 2009. “Bank Behavior,
 Incomplete Interest-Rate Pass-Through, and the Cost Channel of Monetary Policy Trans-
 mission.” Economic Modelling, 26(6): 1310–1327.

Iacoviello, Matteo. 2005. “Housing Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy
  in the Business Cycle.” American Economic Review, 95: 739–764.

Issing, Otmar. 2006. “The ECB’s Monetary Policy Strategy: Why Did We Choose a Two
  Pillar Approach?” Speech at the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference “The Role of
  Money: Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century”.

Jermann, Urban, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2012. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Fi-
  nancial Shocks.” American Economic Review, 102(1): 238–71.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 2012. “Liquidity, Business Cycles, and Monetary
 Policy.” NBER Working Paper No. 17934.



                                         58
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


Lagos, Ricardo, and Randall Wright. 2005. “A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory
  and Policy Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, 113: 463–484.

Lown, Cara S., and Donald P. Morgan. 2002. “Credit Effects in the Monetary Mecha-
  nism.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 8(1): 217–235.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1990. “Liquidity and Interest Rates.” Journal of Economic Theory,
 50: 237–264.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Nancy Stokey. 1987. “Money and Interest in a Cash-in-
 Advance Economy.” Econometrica, 55: 491–513.

McCulley, Paul, and Ramin Toloui. 2008. “Chasing the Neutral Rate Down: Financial
 Conditions, Monetary Policy, and the Taylor Rule.” PIMCO Global Central Bank Focus
 February 20.

Meh, Césaire, and Kevin Moran. 2010. “The Role of Bank Capital in the Propagation
 of Shocks.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(3): 555–576.

Mehra, Rajnish, Facundo Piguillem, and Edward C. Prescott. 2008. “Intermediated
 Quantities and Returns.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report No. 405.

Meyer, Laurence H., and Brian P. Sack. 2008. “Updated Monetary Policy Rules: Why
 Don’t They Explain Recent Monetary Policy?” Monetary Policy Insights. Macroeconomic
 Advisors, March 7.

Preston, Bruce. 2008. “Adaptive Learning and the Use of Forecasts in Monetary Policy.”
 Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32(11): 3661–3681.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1997. “An Optimization-Based Econo-
 metric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
 12: 297–346.

Smets, Frank R., and Raf Wouters. 2003. “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General
 Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area.” Journal of the European Economics Association,
 5: 1123–1175.

Smets, Frank R., and Raf Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
 A Bayesian DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review, 97: 586–606.



                                          59
               Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy


Sudo, Nao, and Yuki Teranishi. 2008. “Optimal Monetary Policy under Heterogeneous
  Banks.” Unpublished, Bank of Japan.

Taylor, John B. 2008. “Monetary Policy and the State of the Economy.” Testimony before
  the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, February 26.

Teranishi, Yuki. 2008. “Optimal Monetary Policy under Staggered Loan Contracts.” Un-
  published, Columbia University.

Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
 Policy. Princeton:Princeton University Press.

Woodford, Michael. 2015. “Quantitative Easing and Financial Stability.” Unpublished,
 Columbia University.




                                         60
                     Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




           5




           4




           3


                                                                                b
                                                                               uc (c)
   −
   λ
       b
           2
   −
   λ
       s



           1
                                                                               us(c)
                                                                                c




           0
               0   0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8        1    1.2     1.4     1.6     1.8       2
                                −     −
                                cs    cb


Figure 1: Marginal utilities of consumption for households of the two types. The values
c̄s and c̄b indicate steady-state consumption levels of the two types, and λ̄s and λ̄b their
corresponding steady-state marginal utilities.




                                            61
                 Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                         Y                                             π
       0                                                0

    −0.2                                             −0.05

    −0.4                                              −0.1

    −0.6                                             −0.15
           0     4       8        12      16                 0   4     8        12      16

                         id                                            ω
                                                      0.01
    0.06
                                                     0.005
    0.04
                                                        0
    0.02
                                                    −0.005
       0
                                                     −0.01
           0     4       8        12      16                 0   4     8        12      16

                         b
    0.01
       0
                                                                        FF
   −0.01
                                                                        NoFF
   −0.02                                                                RepHH
   −0.03
   −0.04
           0     4       8        12      16

Figure 2: Impulse responses to a 1 percent (annualized) shock to m
                                                                  t , in three different models
with a linear intermediation technology.




                                               62
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                          π
                                                    0
     1

                                                  −0.5
    0.5

                                                   −1
     0
          0    4        8      12      16                0   4     8       12      16
                        d
                        i                                         ω
     0                                            0.01

                                                 0.005
   −0.5                                             0

                                             −0.005
    −1
                                                 −0.01
          0    4        8      12      16                0   4     8       12      16

                        b
     1

                                                                   FF
    0.5                                                            NoFF
                                                                   RepHH

     0
          0    4        8      12      16

Figure 3: Impulse responses to a 1 percent shock to Zt , in three different models with a
linear intermediation technology.




                                            63
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                           π
    0.15                                              0
                                                   −0.02
     0.1
                                                   −0.04
    0.05                                           −0.06
                                                   −0.08
      0
           0    4       8       12      16                 0   4    8       12      16

                        id                                         ω
    0.01                                            0.01

      0                                            0.005

   −0.01                                              0

   −0.02                                          −0.005

                                                   −0.01
           0    4       8       12      16                 0   4    8       12      16

                        b
      0

                                                                    FF
    −0.2
                                                                    NoFF
    −0.4                                                            RepHH


    −0.6
           0    4       8       12      16

Figure 4: Impulse responses to a shock to Gt equal to 1 percent of steady-state output, in
three different models with a linear intermediation technology.




                                             64
                 Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                         Y                                             π
       0                                               0

    −0.2                                            −0.05

    −0.4                                             −0.1

    −0.6                                            −0.15
           0     4       8        12      16                0   4      8        12      16

                         id                                            ω
                                                     0.01
    0.08
    0.06                                               0
    0.04
                                                    −0.01
    0.02
       0                                            −0.02
           0     4       8        12      16                0   4      8        12      16

                         b
    0.01
       0
                                                                        FF
   −0.01
                                                                        NoFF
   −0.02                                                                RepHH
   −0.03
   −0.04
           0     4       8        12      16

Figure 5: Impulse responses to a 1 percent (annualized) shock to m
                                                                  t , in three different models
with a convex intermediation technology.




                                               65
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                          π
                                                   0
     1

                                                 −0.5
    0.5

                                                  −1
     0
          0    4        8      12      16               0   4      8       12      16
                        d
                        i                                         ω
     0                                            0.2
                                                 0.15
   −0.5
                                                  0.1
                                                 0.05
    −1
                                                   0
          0    4        8      12      16               0   4      8       12      16

                        b
     1

                                                                   FF
    0.5                                                            NoFF
                                                                   RepHH

     0
          0    4        8      12      16

Figure 6: Impulse responses to a 1 percent shock to Zt , in three different models with a
convex intermediation technology.




                                            66
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                           π
                                                     0
    0.15

     0.1                                          −0.05
    0.05

      0                                            −0.1
           0    4       8       12      16                0   4     8       12      16

                        id                                         ω
    0.01                                           0.01

      0                                              0

   −0.01                                          −0.01
                                                  −0.02
   −0.02
                                                  −0.03
           0    4       8       12      16                0   4     8       12      16

                        b
      0

                                                                    FF
    −0.2
                                                                    NoFF
    −0.4                                                            RepHH


    −0.6
           0    4       8       12      16

Figure 7: Impulse responses to a shock to Gt equal to 1 percent of steady-state output, in
three different models with a convex intermediation technology.




                                             67
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                         Y                                          π
                                                    0.01
     0.06                                             0

     0.04                                          −0.01
                                                   −0.02
     0.02
                                                   −0.03
       0                                           −0.04
            0   4        8      12       16                0   4    8        12     16
                         d
                         i                                          ω
                                                    0.01
     0.01
                                                      0
    0.005
                                                   −0.01
       0
   −0.005                                          −0.02

    −0.01                                          −0.03
            0   4        8      12       16                0   4    8        12     16

                         b
       0

                                                                     FF
     −0.2                                                            NoFF
                                                                     RepHH
     −0.4

            0   4        8      12       16

Figure 8: Impulse responses to a 1 percent shock to type s expenditure, in three different
models with a convex intermediation technology.




                                              68
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                           π
                                                  0.04
    0.2
                                                  0.02
    0.1

                                                    0
      0
          0    4        8      12       16               0   4      8        12     16
                        d
                        i                                           ω

    0.3                                             0
                                                  −0.1
    0.2
                                                  −0.2
    0.1                                           −0.3

      0                                           −0.4
          0    4        8      12       16               0   4      8        12     16

                        b
      0

   −0.2                                                              FF
                                                                     NoFF
   −0.4                                                              RepHH

   −0.6
          0    4        8      12       16

Figure 9: Impulse responses to a shock to bgt equal to 1 percent of steady-state output, in
three different models with a convex intermediation technology.




                                             69
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                          π
                                                   0
     2

                                                 −0.5
     1


     0                                            −1
          0    4        8      12      16               0   4      8           12   16
                        d
                        i                                         ω
     0                                            0.2
                                                 0.15
   −0.5
                                                  0.1
                                                 0.05
    −1
                                                   0
          0    4        8      12      16               0   4      8           12   16

                        b
    0.2
                                                                  Optimal
   0.15
                                                                  PiStab
    0.1                                                           Taylor
   0.05                                                           FlexTarget

     0
          0    4        8      12      16

Figure 10: Impulse responses to a 1 percent shock to Zt , under four alternative monetary
policies.




                                            70
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                          π
      0
                                                    0.6
    −0.5
                                                    0.4
     −1                                             0.2

    −1.5                                             0
           0    4       8      12       16                0   4    8           12   16

                        id                                         ω
     0.8                                             0
     0.6
                                                  −0.05
     0.4
     0.2                                           −0.1
      0
           0    4       8      12       16                0   4    8           12   16

                        b
      0
                                                                  Optimal
   −0.05                                                          PiStab
                                                                  Taylor
    −0.1                                                          FlexTarget


           0    4       8      12       16

Figure 11: Impulse responses to a 1 percent shock to µw
                                                      t , under four alternative monetary
policies.




                                             71
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                       Y                                          π
     0.3                                            0

     0.2
                                                 −0.05
     0.1

      0                                           −0.1
           0   4       8       12      16                0   4    8            12   16

                       id                                         ω
                                                  0.01
     0.1
                                                    0
    0.05                                         −0.01
                                                 −0.02
      0
                                                 −0.03
           0   4       8       12      16                0   4    8            12   16

                       b
    0.01
      0                                                           Optimal
                                                                  PiStab
   −0.01
                                                                  Taylor
   −0.02                                                          FlexTarget
   −0.03
           0   4       8       12      16

Figure 12: Impulse responses to a shock to Gt equal to 1 percent of steady-state output,
under four alternative monetary policies.




                                            72
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                           π
                                                   0.01

     0.1                                             0
                                                  −0.01
    0.05                                          −0.02
                                                  −0.03
      0                                           −0.04
           0    4       8       12      16                0   4     8           12   16

                        id                                         ω
                                                   0.01
    0.06
                                                     0
    0.04
                                                  −0.01
    0.02
                                                  −0.02
      0
                                                  −0.03
           0    4       8       12      16                0   4     8           12   16

                        b
    0.01

      0                                                            Optimal
                                                                   PiStab
   −0.01                                                           Taylor
   −0.02                                                           FlexTarget

   −0.03
           0    4       8       12      16

Figure 13: Impulse responses to a 1 percent shock to type s expenditure, under four alter-
native monetary policies.




                                             73
                Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                         Y                                          π
                                                     0.01
      0.1
                                                       0

     0.05                                           −0.01

                                                    −0.02
       0                                            −0.03
            0   4        8      12       16                 0   4   8            12   16
                         d
                         i                                          ω

                                                     0.01
     0.01
                                                    0.005
       0                                               0

    −0.01                                          −0.005
                                                    −0.01
            0   4        8      12       16                 0   4   8            12   16

                         b

     0.01                                                           Optimal
    0.005                                                           PiStab
       0                                                            Taylor
                                                                    FlexTarget
   −0.005
    −0.01
            0   4        8      12       16

Figure 14: Impulse responses to a 1 percent shock to type b expenditure, under four alter-
native monetary policies.




                                              74
                   Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy




                        Y                                           π
                                                   0.1
      0
                                                    0
   −0.5
                                                  −0.1
     −1
                                                  −0.2
   −1.5
          0    4        8      12       16               0   4      8            12   16
                        d
                        i                                           ω
      0
   −0.5                                             2
     −1
   −1.5                                             1
     −2
                                                    0
          0    4        8      12       16               0   4      8            12   16

                        b
      0
   −0.5                                                             Optimal
                                                                    PiStab
     −1
                                                                    Taylor
   −1.5                                                             FlexTarget
     −2

          0    4        8      12       16

Figure 15: Impulse responses to a shock to χ̃t that increases ωt (b) by 4 percentage points
(annualized) for each value of b, under four alternative monetary policies.




                                             75
