NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCREENING AND ADVERSE SELECTION IN FRICTIONAL MARKETS
Benjamin Lester
Ali Shourideh
Venky Venkateswaran
Ariel Zetlin-Jones
Working Paper 21833
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21833

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2015
Revised January 2017

We thank Gadi Barlevy, Hanming Fang, Mike Golosov, Piero Gottardi, Veronica Guerrieri, Ali
Hortacsu, Alessandro Lizzeri, Guido Menzio, Derek Stacey, Robert Townsend, Randy Wright,
and Pierre Yared, along with seminar participants at the Spring 2015 Search and Matching
Workshop, 2015 CIGS Conference on Macroeconomic Theory and Policy, 2015 SED (Warsaw),
2015 SAET (Cambridge), 2015 Norges Bank Conference on Financial Stability, 4th Rome Junior
Conference on Macroeconomics (EIEF), 2015 Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, Payments
and Finance at FRB St. Louis, 2015 West Coast Search and Matching, 2015 Vienna Macro
Workshop, NYU Search Theory Workshop, European University Institute, Toulouse School of
Economics, UPenn, Columbia, FRB Cleveland, and Banque de France for useful discussions and
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
or the Federal Reserve system.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Benjamin Lester, Ali Shourideh, Venky Venkateswaran, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Screening and Adverse Selection in Frictional Markets
Benjamin Lester, Ali Shourideh, Venky Venkateswaran, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 21833
December 2015, Revised January 2017
JEL No. D41,D42,D43,D82,D83,D86,L13
ABSTRACT
We incorporate a search-theoretic model of imperfect competition into an otherwise standard model
of asymmetric information with unrestricted contracts. We develop a methodology that allows for
a sharp analytical characterization of the unique equilibrium, and then use this characterization to explore
the interaction between adverse selection, screening, and imperfect competition. We show how the
structure of equilibrium contracts—and hence the relationship between an agent’s type, the quantity
he trades, and the corresponding price—is jointly determined by the severity of adverse selection and
the concentration of market power. This suggests that quantifying the effects of adverse selection requires
controlling for the market structure. We also show that increasing competition and reducing informational
asymmetries can be detrimental to welfare. This suggests that recent attempts to increase competition
and reduce opacity in markets that suffer from adverse selection could potentially have negative, unforeseen
consequences.

Benjamin Lester
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Benjamin.Lester@phil.frb.org
Ali Shourideh
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
shouride@wharton.upenn.edu

Venky Venkateswaran
Stern School of Business
New York University
7-81 44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
vvenkate@stern.nyu.edu
Ariel Zetlin-Jones
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
azj@cmu.edu

1

Introduction

Many large and important markets suffer from adverse selection, including the markets for insurance,
credit, and certain financial securities. There is mounting evidence that many of these markets also
feature some degree of imperfect competition.1 And yet, perhaps surprisingly, the effect of imperfect competition on prices, allocations, and welfare in markets with adverse selection remains an open question.
Answering this question is important for several reasons. For one, many empirical studies attempt
to quantify the effects of adverse selection in the markets mentioned above.2 A natural question is to
what extent these estimates—and the conclusions that follow—are sensitive to the assumptions being imposed on the market structure. There has also been a recent push by policymakers to make several of the
markets mentioned above more competitive and less opaque.3 Again, a crucial, but seemingly underexplored question is whether these attempts to promote competition and reduce information asymmetries
are necessarily welfare-improving.
Unfortunately, the ability to answer these questions has been constrained by a shortage of appropriate theoretical frameworks.4 A key challenge is to incorporate nonlinear pricing schedules—which
are routinely used to screen different types of agents—into a model with asymmetric information and
imperfect competition. This paper delivers such a model: we develop a novel, tractable framework of
adverse selection, screening, and imperfect competition.
The key innovation is to introduce a search-theoretic model of imperfect competition (a la Burdett and
Judd, 1983) into an otherwise standard model with asymmetric information and nonlinear contracts.
Within this environment, we provide a full analytical characterization of the unique equilibrium, and
then use this characterization to study both the positive and normative issues highlighted above.
First, we show how the structure of equilibrium contracts—and hence the relationship between an
agent’s type, the quantity that he trades, and the corresponding price—is jointly determined by the
severity of the adverse selection problem and the degree of imperfect competition. In particular, we
1 For

evidence of market power in insurance markets, see Brown and Goolsbee (2002), Dafny (2010), and Cabral et al.
(2014); Einav and Levin (2015) provide additional references, along with a general discussion. For evidence of market power
in various credit markets, see, e.g., Ausubel (1991), Calem and Mester (1995), Petersen and Rajan (1994), Scharfstein and
Sunderam (2013), and Crawford et al. (2015). In over-the-counter financial markets, a variety of data suggests that dealers
extract significant rents; indeed, this finding is hard-wired into the workhorse models of this market, such as Duffie et al.
(2005) and Lagos and Rocheteau (2009).
2 See the seminal paper by Chiappori and Salanie (2000), and Einav et al. (2010a) for a comprehensive survey.
3 Increasing competition and transparency in health insurance markets is a cornerstone of the Affordable Care Act, while
the Dodd-Frank legislation addresses similar issues in over-the-counter financial markets. In credit markets, on the other hand,
legislation has recently focused on restricting how much information lenders can demand or use from borrowers.
4 As Chiappori et al. (2006) put it, “there is a crying need for [a model] devoted to the interaction between imperfect
competition and adverse selection.”

2

show that equilibrium offers separate different types of agents when competition is relatively intense or
adverse selection is relatively severe, while they typically pool different types of agents in markets where
principals have sufficient market power and adverse selection is sufficiently mild. Second, we explore
how total trading volume—which, in our environment, corresponds to the utilitarian welfare measure—
responds to changes in the degree of competition and the severity of adverse selection. We show that
increasing competition or reducing informational asymmetries is only welfare-improving in markets in
which both market power is sufficiently concentrated and adverse selection is sufficiently severe.
Before explaining these results in greater detail, it is helpful to lay out the basic building blocks of
the model. The agents in our model, whom we call “sellers,” are endowed with a perfectly divisible
good of either low or high quality, which is the seller’s private information. The principals, whom we
call “buyers,” offer menus containing price-quantity combinations to potentially screen high and lowquality sellers.5 Sellers can accept at most one contract, i.e., contracts are exclusive. To this otherwise
canonical model of trade under asymmetric information, we introduce imperfect competition by endowing the buyers with some degree of market power. The key assumption is that each seller receives a
stochastic number of offers, with a positive probability of receiving only one. This implies that, when
a buyer formulates an offer, he understands that it will be compared to an alternative offer with some
probability—which we denote by π—and it will be the seller’s only option with probability 1 − π. This
formulation allows us to capture the perfectly competitive case (a la Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976)) by
setting π = 1, the monopsony case (a la Stiglitz (1977)) by setting π = 0, and everything in between.
For the general case of imperfect competition, with π ∈ (0, 1), the equilibrium involves buyers mixing
over menus according to a nondegenerate distribution function.6 Since each menu is comprised of two
price-quantity pairs (one for each type), this implies that the main equilibrium object is a probability
distribution over four-dimensional offers. A key contribution of our paper is developing a methodology
that allows for a complete, yet tractable, characterization of this complicated equilibrium object.
We begin by showing that any menu can be summarized by the indirect utilities it offers to sellers of
each type, which reduces the dimensionality of the distribution from four to two. Next, we establish an
important property: in any equilibrium, all menus that are offered by buyers are ranked in exactly the
5 The use of the labels “buyers” and “sellers” is merely for concreteness and corresponds most clearly with an asset market
interpretation. These monikers can simply be switched in the context of an insurance market, so that the “buyers” of insurance
are the agents with private information and the “sellers” of insurance are the principals.
6 Mixing is to be expected for at least two reasons. First, this is a robust feature of nearly all models in which buyers are
both monopsonists and Bertrand competitors with some probability, even without adverse selection or non-linear contracts.
Second, even in perfectly competitive markets, it is well known that pure strategy equilibria may not exist in an environment
with both adverse selection and non-linear contracts.

3

same way by both low- and high-quality sellers. This property, which we call “strictly rank-preserving,”
implies that all equilibrium menus can be ranked along a single dimension. The equilibrium, then, can
be described by a distribution function over a unidimensional variable—say, the indirect utility offered
to low-quality sellers—along with a strictly monotonic function mapping this variable to the indirect
utility offered to the high-quality seller. We show how to solve for these two functions, obtaining a full
analytical characterization of all equilibrium objects of interest, and then establish that the equilibrium is
unique. Interestingly, our approach not only avoids the well-known problems with existence of equilibria
in models of adverse selection and screening, but also requires no assumptions on off-path beliefs to get
uniqueness. We then use this characterization to explore the implications of imperfect competition in
markets suffering from adverse selection.
First, we show that the structure of menus offered in equilibrium depends on both the degree of
competition, captured by π, and the severity of the adverse selection problem, which is succinctly summarized by a single statistic that is largest (i.e., adverse selection is most severe) when: (i) the fraction
of low-quality sellers is large; (ii) the potential surplus from trading with high-quality sellers is small;
and (iii) the information cost of separating the two types of sellers, as captured by the difference in their
reservation values, is large. Given these summary statistics, we show that separating menus are more
prevalent when competition is relatively strong or when adverse selection is relatively severe, while
pooling menus are more prevalent when competition is relatively weak and adverse selection is relatively mild. Interestingly, holding constant the severity of adverse selection, the equilibrium may involve
all pooling menus, all separating menus, or a mixture of the two, depending on the degree of competition. This finding suggests that attempts to infer the severity of adverse selection from the distribution
of contracts that are traded should take into account the extent to which the market is competitive.
Next, we examine our model’s implications for welfare, defined as the objective of a utilitarian social
planner. In our context, this objective maps one-for-one to the expected quantity of high-quality goods
traded. We first study the relationship between welfare and the degree of competition. Our main finding
is that competition can worsen the distortions related to asymmetric information and, therefore, can be
detrimental to welfare. When adverse selection is mild, these negative effects are particularly stark:
welfare is actually (weakly) maximized under monopsony, or π = 0. When adverse selection is severe,
however, welfare is inverse U-shaped in π, i.e., an interior level of competition maximizes welfare.
To understand the hump-shape in welfare under severe adverse selection, note that an increase in
competition induces buyers to allocate more of the surplus to sellers (of both types) in an attempt to

4

retain market share. All else equal, increasing the utility offered to low-quality sellers is good for welfare:
by relaxing the low-quality seller’s incentive compatibility constraint, the buyer is able to exchange a
larger quantity with high-quality sellers. However, ceteris paribus, increasing the utility offered to highquality sellers is bad for welfare: it tightens the incentive constraint and forces buyers to trade less with
high-quality sellers. Hence, the net effect of an increase in competition on the quantity of high-quality
goods traded depends on whether the share of the surplus offered to high-quality sellers rises faster or
slower than that offered to low-quality sellers.
When competition is low, buyers earn a disproportionate fraction of their profits from low-quality
sellers. Therefore, when buyers have lots of market power, an increase in competition leads to a faster
increase in the utility offered to low-quality sellers, since buyers care relatively more about retaining
these sellers. As a result, the quantity traded with high-quality sellers and welfare rise with competition.
When competition is sufficiently high, profits come disproportionately from high-quality sellers. In this
case, increasing competition induces a faster increase in the utility offered to high-quality sellers and,
therefore, a decrease in expected trade and welfare. These results suggest that promoting competition—
or policies that have similar effects, such as price supports or minimum quantity restrictions—can have
adverse effects on welfare in markets that are sufficiently competitive and face severe adverse selection.
Next, we study the welfare effects of providing buyers with more information—specifically, a noisy
signal—about the seller’s type. As in the case of increasing competition, the welfare effects of this
perturbation depend on the severity of the two main frictions in the model: imperfect competition and
adverse selection. When adverse selection is relatively mild or competition relatively strong, reducing
informational asymmetries can actually be detrimental to welfare. The opposite is true when adverse
selection and trading frictions are relatively severe. In sum, these normative results highlight how
the interaction between these two frictions can have surprising implications for changes in policy (or
technological innovations), underscoring the need for a theoretical framework such as ours.
Our baseline model was designed to be as simple as possible in order to focus on the novel interactions between adverse selection and imperfect competition. In Sections 6–8, we analyze several relevant
extensions and variants of our model to explore these interactions more deeply and to ensure that our results are robust to alternative specifications, many of which could make our framework more amenable
to applied work. In Section 6, we endogenize the level of competition by letting buyers choose the intensity with which they “advertise” their offers, so that the distribution over the number of offers that
each seller receives is an outcome rather than a primitive. This allows us to study how the severity of

5

adverse selection can influence the market structure, and the ensuing welfare implications. In Section 7,
we consider a more general market setting with an arbitrary meeting technology, where sellers can meet
any number of buyers (including zero). We show how to derive the equilibrium in this setting, using
the techniques from our benchmark model, and confirm that our main welfare results hold for certain
popular meeting technologies. Finally, in Section 8, we explore a number of additional extensions: we
relax the assumption of linear utility to analyze the canonical model of insurance under private information; we allow the degree of competition to differ across sellers of different quality; and we show how
to incorporate additional dimensions of heterogeneity, including horizontal and vertical differentiation.
Literature Review.

Our paper contributes to an extensive body of literature on adverse selection. Our

focus on contracts as screening devices puts us in the tradition of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), in
contrast to the branch of the literature that restricts attention to single price contracts, as in the original
model of Akerlof (1970). Most of the literature that studies adverse selection and screening has either
assumed a monopolistic or perfectly competitive market structure.7
The main novelty of our analysis is to synthesize a standard model of adverse selection and unrestricted contracts with the search-theoretic model of imperfect competition developed by Butters (1977),
Varian (1980), and, in particular, Burdett and Judd (1983). While this model of imperfect competition
has been used extensively in both theoretical and empirical work,8 to the best of our knowledge none of
these papers address adverse selection and screening.9 A recent paper by Garrett et al. (2014) exploits
the Burdett and Judd (1983) model in an environment with screening contracts and asymmetric information, but the asymmetric information is over the agents’ private values. This key difference implies
that the role of screening—and how it interacts with imperfect competition—is ultimately very different
in our paper and theirs.10
More closely related to our work is the literature that studies adverse selection and nonlinear contracts in an environment with competitive search—most notably the influential paper by Guerrieri et al.
(2010).11 In that paper, principals post contracts and match bilaterally with agents who direct their search
7 For

recent contributions to this literature that assume perfectly competitive markets, see, e.g., Bisin and Gottardi (2006),
Chari et al. (2014), and Azevedo and Gottlieb (2015).
8 For recent examples, see, e.g., Sorensen (2000) and Kaplan and Menzio (2015).
9 Carrillo-Tudela and Kaas (2015) analyze a related labor market setting with adverse selection using the on-the-job search
model of Burdett and Mortensen (1998), but their focus is quite different from ours.
10 In particular, with private values, screening is useful only for rent extraction. Competition reduces (and ultimately, eliminates) these rents and, along with them, incentives to screen. In contrast, with common values, screening plays a central role
in mitigating the adverse selection problem. As a result, it disappears only when that problem is sufficiently mild; increased
competition serves to strengthen incentives to separate. This interaction is also the source of non-monotonic effects on welfare
from increased competition. With private values, on the other hand, welfare unambiguously increases with competition.
11 Other papers studying adverse selection with competitive search include Michelacci and Suarez (2006), Kim (2012), Chang

6

toward specific contracts. A matching technology determines the probability that each agent trades (or
is rationed) in equilibrium, as a function of the relative measures of principals offering a specific contract
and agents searching for it. As in our paper, Guerrieri et al. (2010) present an explicit model of trade
without placing any restrictions on contracts, beyond those arising from the primitive frictions. There
are, however, several important differences. The first relates to the role of search frictions. We focus
on how perturbations to the search technology affect market power, and study the interaction between
the resulting distortions and the underlying adverse selection problem, while Guerrieri et al. (2010) and
others focus on the role of search frictions in providing incentives (through the probability of trade) and
not on market power per se. Second, depending on parameters, our equilibrium menus can be pooling,
separating or a combination of both; the approach in Guerrieri et al. (2010), on the other hand, always
leads to separating equilibria. In this sense, our approach has the potential to speak to a richer set of
observed outcomes. Finally, we obtain a unique equilibrium without additional assumptions or refinements, whereas uniqueness in Guerrieri et al. (2010) relies on a restriction on off-equilibrium beliefs.12
An alternative approach to modeling imperfect competition is through product differentiation, as in
Villas-Boas and Schmidt-Mohr (1999) and, more recently, Benabou and Tirole (2015), Veiga and Weyl
(2012), Mahoney and Weyl (2014), and Townsend and Zhorin (2014).13 Identical contracts offered by
principals are valued differently by agents because of an orthogonal attribute, which is interpreted as
“distance” in a Hotelling interpretation or “taste” in a random utility, discrete choice framework. This
additional dimension of heterogeneity is the source of market power, and changes in competition are
induced by varying the importance of this alternative attribute, i.e., by altering preferences. We take
a different approach to modeling (and varying) competition, which holds constant preferences and,
therefore, the potential social surplus. It is also worth pointing out a few key differences in substantive
results, particularly about the desirability of competition. In Benabou and Tirole (2015), a tradeoff from
increased competition arises not because of adverse selection per se, but from the need to provide incentives to allocate effort between multiple, imperfectly observable or contractible tasks. In fact, without
multi-tasking, competition improves welfare even with asymmetric information. This is also the case
in Mahoney and Weyl (2014), where attention is restricted to single-price contracts. Veiga and Weyl
(2012) also restrict attention to a single contract, but with endogenous “quality,” and find that welfare is
(2012), and Guerrieri and Shimer (2014a,b).
12 Another related literature studies adverse selection in dynamic models with search frictions, where separation occurs
because agents of different types trade at different points in time. See, e.g., Inderst (2005), Moreno and Wooders (2010),
Camargo and Lester (2014), and the references therein. In all of these papers, agents are assumed to trade linear contracts.
13 Also see Fang and Wu (2016), who propose a slightly different model of imperfect competition.

7

maximized under monopoly. In our setting, depending on parameters, competition can be beneficial or
harmful. Though there are a number of differences between their setup and ours (e.g., multidimensional
heterogeneity, the contract space, the equilibrium concept), which precludes a direct comparison, we
interpret their results as providing a distinct but complementary insight about the interaction between
competition and adverse selection.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our model. Section 3 proves key
properties of the equilibrium, followed by its construction in section 4. Section 5 contains implications
for welfare and policy. Sections 6–8 explore the extensions discussed above. Section 9 concludes, and all
proofs can be found in the Appendix.

2

Model

Agents and Preferences.

We consider an economy with two buyers and a unit measure of sellers. Each

seller is endowed with a single unit of a perfectly divisible good. Buyers have no capacity constraints,
i.e., they can trade with many sellers. A fraction µl ∈ (0, 1) of sellers possess a low (l) quality good,
while the remaining fraction µh = 1 − µl possess a high (h) quality good.14 Buyers and sellers derive
utility vi and ci , respectively, from consuming each unit of a quality i ∈ {l, h} good, with vl < vh and
cl < ch . We assume that there are gains from trading both high- and low-quality goods, i.e., that
vi > ci for i ∈ {l, h}.
Frictions.

(1)

There are two types of frictions in the market. First, there is asymmetric information: sellers

observe the quality of the good they possess while buyers do not, though the probability µi that a
randomly selected good is quality i ∈ {l, h} is common knowledge. In order to generate the standard
“lemons problem,” we focus on the case in which
vl < ch .

(2)

The second type of friction is a search friction: as we describe in detail below, the buyers in our model
will make offers, but the sellers will not necessarily sample (or have access to) all offers. In particular, we
assume that a fraction 1 − p of sellers will be matched with—and hence receive an offer from—a single
buyer, which we assume is equally likely to be either buyer. The remaining fraction of sellers, p, will be
matched with both buyers. A seller can only trade with a buyer if they are matched. Throughout the
14 We

consider the case where there are N > 2 types of sellers in Appendix D.

8

paper, we refer to sellers who are matched with one buyer as “captive,” since they only have one option
for trade, and we refer to those who are matched with two buyers as “noncaptive.”
Given these search frictions, a buyer understands that, conditional on being matched with a particular
seller, this seller will be captive with probability 1 − π and noncaptive with probability π, where
π=

p
1
2 (1 − p) + p

=

2p
.
1+p

(3)

This formalization of search frictions is helpful for deriving and explaining our key results in the simplest
possible manner. For one, it allows us to vary the degree of competition with a single parameter, π,
nesting monoposony and perfect competition as special cases.15 Second, since the current formulation
ensures that all sellers are matched with at least one buyer, a change in π varies the degree of competition
without changing the potential gains from trade or “coverage” in the market; this is particularly helpful
in isolating the effects of competition on welfare. However, it is important to stress that our equilibrium
characterization and the ensuing results extend to markets with an arbitrary number of buyers and more
general meeting technologies; see Section 7.

Offers.

We model the interaction between a seller and the buyer(s) that she meets as a game in which

the buyer(s) choose a mechanism and the seller chooses a message to send to each buyer she meets. A
buyer’s mechanism is a function that maps the seller’s message into an offer, which specifies a quantity
of numeraire to be exchanged for a certain fraction of the seller’s good.16 The seller’s message space
can be arbitrarily large: it could include the quality of her good, whether or not she is in contact with
the other buyer, the details of the other buyer’s mechanism, and any other (even not payoff-relevant)
information. Importantly, we assume that mechanisms are exclusive, in the sense that a seller can choose
to accept the offer generated by only one buyer’s mechanism, even when two offers are available.
In Appendix B, we apply insights from the delegation principle (Peters, 2001; Martimort and Stole,
2002) to show that, in our environment, it is sufficient to restrict attention to menu games where buyers
offer a menu of two contracts.17 In particular, letting x denote the quantity of good to be exchanged for

2
t units of numeraire, a buyer’s offer can be summarized by the menu {(xl , tl ), (xh , th )} ∈ [0, 1] × R+ ,
where (xi , ti ) is the contract intended for a seller of type i ∈ {l, h}.
15 Given the relationship in (3), it turns out that varying p or π is equivalent for all of our results below. We choose π because
it simplifies some of the equations.
16 Note that the mechanisms we consider are assumed to be deterministic, but otherwise unrestricted. Stochastic mechanisms,
or lotteries over menus, present considerable technical challenges and raise other conceptual issues that are, in our view,
tangential to the paper’s main message.
17 To be more precise, we show that the (distribution of) equilibrium allocations in any game where buyers offer the general
mechanisms described above coincide with those in another game in which buyers only offer a menu of two contracts.

9

Payoffs.

A seller who owns a quality i good and accepts a contract (x, t) receives a payoff
t + (1 − x)ci

while a buyer who acquires a quality i good at terms (x, t) receives a payoff
−t + xvi .
Meanwhile, a seller with a quality i good who does not trade receives a payoff ci , while a buyer who
does not trade receives zero payoff.

Strategies and Definition of Equilibrium. Let zi = (xi , ti ) denote the contract that is intended for a
seller of type i ∈ {l, h}, and let z = (zl , zh ). A buyer’s strategy, then, is a distribution across menus,

Φ ∈ ∆ ([0, 1] × R+ )2 . A seller’s strategy is much simpler: given the available menus, a seller should
choose the menu with the contract that maximizes her payoffs or mix between menus if she is indifferent.
Of course, conditional on a menu, the seller chooses the contract that maximizes her payoffs. In what
follows, we will take the seller’s optimal behavior as given.
A symmetric equilibrium is thus a distribution Φ? (z) such that:
1. Incentive compatibility: for almost all z = {(xl , tl ), (xh , th )} in the support of Φ? (z),
tl + cl (1 − xl ) > th + cl (1 − xh )

(4)

th + ch (1 − xh ) > tl + ch (1 − xl ).

(5)

2. Buyer’s optimize: for almost all z = {(xl , tl ), (xh , th )} in the support of Φ? (z),
z ∈ arg max
z

where
χi (z, z0 ) =

X


µi (vi xi − ti ) 1 − π + π

i∈{l,h}

 
 0 


1
2

1



if

Z
z0

0

?

0



χi (z, z )Φ (dz ) ,



 < 
=
ti + ci (1 − xi )
t0 + ci (1 − x0i ).

 i
>

(6)

(7)

The function χi reflects the seller’s optimal choice. We have assumed that if the seller is indifferent
between menus, then she chooses among menus with equal probability. Within a given menu, we
have assumed that sellers do not randomize; for any incentive compatible contract, sellers choose the
contract intended for their type, as in most of the mechanism design literature (see, e.g., Myerson (1985a),
Dasgupta et al. (1979)).
10

3

Properties of Equilibria

Characterizing the equilibrium described above requires solving for a distribution over four-dimensional
menus. In this section, we establish a series of results that reduce the dimensionality of the equilibrium
characterization. First, we show that each menu offered by a buyer can be summarized by the indirect
utilities that it delivers to each type of seller, so that equilibrium strategies can in fact be defined by a
joint distribution over two-dimensional objects, i.e., pairs of indirect utilities. Then, we establish that the
marginal distributions of offers intended for each type of seller are well-behaved, i.e., that they have fully
connected support and no mass points. Finally, we establish that there is a very precise link between
the two contracts offered by any buyer, which imposes even more structure on the joint distribution of
offers. In particular, we show that any two menus that are offered in equilibrium are ranked in exactly
the same way by both low- and high-type sellers; that is, one menu is strictly preferred by a low-type
seller if and only if it is also preferred by a high-type seller. This property of equilibria, which we
call “strictly rank-preserving,” simplifies the characterization even more, as the marginal distribution of
offers for high-quality sellers can be expressed as a strictly monotonic transformation of the marginal
distribution of offers for low-quality sellers.

3.1

Utility Representation

As a first step, we establish two results that imply any menu can be summarized by two numbers,
(ul , uh ), where
ui = ti + ci (1 − xi )

(8)

denotes the utility received by a type i ∈ {l, h} seller from accepting a contract zi .
Lemma 1. In any equilibrium, for almost all z ∈ supp(Φ? ), it must be that xl = 1 and tl = th + cl (1 − xh ).
In words, Lemma 1 states that all equilibrium menus require that low-quality sellers trade their
entire endowment, and that their incentive compatibility constraint always binds. This is reminiscent of
the “no-distortion-at-the-top” result in the taxation literature, or that of full insurance for the high-risk
agents in Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976).

2
Corollary 1. In equilibrium, any menu of contracts {(xl , tl ), (xh , th )} ∈ [0, 1] × R+ can be summarized by a
pair (ul , uh ) with xl = 1, tl = ul ,
uh − ul
, and
ch − cl
ul ch − uh cl
.
ch − cl

xh = 1 −
th =

11

(9)
(10)

Notice that, since 0 6 xh 6 1, feasibility requires that the pair (ul , uh ) satisfies
ch − cl > uh − ul > 0.

(11)

In what follows, we will often refer to the requirement uh > ul as a “monotonicity constraint.” Note
that, when this constraint binds, Corollary 1 implies that xh = 1 and th = tl .

3.2

Recasting the Buyer’s Problem and Equilibrium

Buyer’s Problem.

Lemma 1 and Corollary 1 allow us to recast the problem of a buyer as choosing a

menu of indirect utilities, (ul , uh ), taking as given the distribution of indirect utilities offered by the
other buyer. For any menu (ul , uh ), a buyer must infer the probability that the menu will be accepted
by a type i ∈ {l, h} seller. In order to calculate these probabilities, let us define the marginal distributions
Z




Fi (ui ) =
1 t0i + ci 1 − x0i 6 ui Φ dz0i
z0i

for i ∈ {l, h}. In words, Fl (ul ) and Fh (uh ) are the probability distributions of indirect utilities arising
from each buyer’s mixed strategy. When these distributions are continuous and have no mass points,
the probability that a contract intended for a type i seller is accepted is simply 1 − π + πFi (ui ), i.e.,
the probability that the seller is captive plus the probability that he is noncaptive but receives another
offer less than ui . However, if Fi (·) has a mass point at ui , then the fraction of noncaptive sellers of
type i attracted to a contract with value ui is given by F̃i (ui ) =

1 −
2 Fi (ui )

+ 21 Fi (ui ), where F−
i (ui ) =

limu%ui Fi (u) is the left limit of Fi at ui . Given F̃i (·), a buyer solves
max

ul >cl , uh >ch

s. t.



µl 1 − π + πF̃l (ul ) Πl (ul , uh ) + µh 1 − π + πF̃h (uh ) Πh (ul , uh )

(12)

ch − cl > uh − ul > 0,

(13)

with
Πl (ul , uh ) ≡ vl xl − tl = vl − ul
Πh (ul , uh ) ≡ vh xh − th = vh − uh

(14)
vh − ch
v h − cl
+ ul
.
ch − cl
ch − cl

(15)

In words, Πi (ul , uh ) is the buyer’s payoff conditional on the offer ui being accepted by a type i seller.
We refer to the objective in (12) as Π (ul , uh ).
Before proceeding, note that Πh (ul , uh ) is increasing in ul : by offering more utility to low-quality
sellers, the buyer relaxes the incentive constraint and can earn more profits when he trades with highquality sellers. As a result, one can easily show that the profit function Π (ul , uh ) is (at least) weakly
supermodular. This property will be important in several of the results we establish below.
12

Equilibrium.

Using the optimization problem described above, we can redefine the equilibrium in

terms of the distributions of indirect utilities. In particular, for each ul , let
Π ul , u0h

Uh (ul ) = arg max
0

uh >ch



ch − cl > u0h − ul > 0.

s.t.

The equilibrium can then be described by the marginal distributions {Fi (ui )}i∈{l,h} together with the
requirement that a joint distribution function must exist. In other words, a probability measure Φ over
the set of feasible (ul , uh )’s must exist such that, for each ul > u0l and uh > u0h
1 = Φ ({(ûl , ûh ) ; ûh ∈ Uh (ûl )} , ûl ∈ [cl , vh ])
 


0
F−
,
= Φ (ûl , ûh ) ; ûh ∈ Uh (ûl ) , ûl ∈ u0l , ul
l (ul ) − Fl ul
 


0
F−
= Φ (ûl , ûh ) ; ûh ∈ Uh (ûl ) , ûh ∈ u0h , uh
.
h (uh ) − Fh uh

(16)
(17)

Note that this definition of equilibrium imposes two different requirements. The first is that buyers
behave optimally: for each ul , the joint probability measure puts a positive weight only on uh ∈ Uh (ul ).
The second is aggregate consistency: the fact that Fl and Fh are marginal distributions associated with a
joint measure of menus.

3.3

Basic Properties of Equilibrium Distributions

In this section, we establish that, in equilibrium, the distributions Fl (ul ) and Fh (uh ) are continuous and
have connected support, i.e., there are neither mass points nor gaps in either distribution.
Proposition 1. The marginal distributions Fl and Fh have connected support. They are also continuous, with the
possible exception of a mass point in Fl at vl .
As in Burdett and Judd (1983), the proof of Proposition 1 rules out gaps and mass points in the
distribution by constructing profitable deviations. A complication that arises in our model, which does
not arise in Burdett and Judd (1983), is that payoffs are interdependent, e.g., a change in the utility
offered to low-quality sellers changes the contract—and hence the profits—that a buyer receives from
high-quality sellers. We prove the properties of Fl and Fh described in Proposition 1 sequentially: we
first show that Fh is continuous and strictly increasing, and then apply an inductive argument to prove
that Fl has connected support and is continuous, with a possible exception at the lower bound of the
support. An important step in the induction argument, which we later use more generally, is to show
that the objective function Π (ul , uh ) is strictly supermodular. We state this here as a lemma.
13

Lemma 2. The profit function is strictly supermodular, i.e.,
Π (ul1 , uh1 ) + Π (ul2 , uh2 ) > Π (ul2 , uh1 ) + Π (ul1 , uh2 ) , ∀ui1 > ui2 , i ∈ {l, h}
with strict inequality when ui1 > ui2 , i ∈ {l, h} .
As noted above, the supermodularity of the buyer’s profit function reflects a basic complementarity
between the indirect utilities offered to low- and high-quality sellers. An important implication of
this result is that the correspondence Uh (ul ) is weakly increasing. We use this property to construct
deviations to rule out gaps and mass points in the distribution Fl almost everywhere in its support; later,
in Section 4, we show that these mass points only occur in a knife-edge case. Hence, generically, the
marginal distribution Fl has connected support and no mass points everywhere in its support.

3.4

Strict rank-preserving

In this section, we establish that every equilibrium has the property that the menus being offered are
strictly rank-preserving—that is, low- and high-quality sellers share the same ranking over the set of
menus offered in equilibrium—with the possible exception of the knife-edge case discussed above. We
prove this result by showing that the mapping between a buyer’s optimal offer to low- and high-quality
sellers, Uh (ul ), is a well-defined, strictly increasing function. We start with the following definition.
Definition 1. For any subset Ul of Supp (Fl ), an equilibrium is strictly rank-preserving over Ul if the correspondence Uh (ul ) is a strictly increasing function of ul for all ul ∈ Ul . An equilibrium is strictly rankpreserving if it is strictly rank-preserving over Supp (Fl ).
Equivalently, an equilibrium is strictly rank-preserving when, for any two points in the equilibrium

support (ul , uh ) and u0l , u0h , ul > u0l if and only if uh > u0h . Given this terminology, we can now
establish one of our key results.
Theorem 1. All equilibria are strictly rank-preserving over the set Supp (Fl ) \ {vl }.
Theorem 1 follows from the facts established above. In particular, the strict supermodularity of
Π(ul , uh ) implies that Uh (ul ) is a weakly increasing correspondence. However, since Fl (·) and Fh (·)
are strictly increasing and continuous, we show that Uh (ul ) can neither be multi-valued nor have flats.
Intuitively, if there exists a ul > ul and u0h > uh such that uh , u0h ∈ Uh (ul ), then the supermodularity of Π(ul , uh ) implies that [uh , u0h ] ⊂ Uh (ul ). Since Fh (·) has connected support, if Uh were a
correspondence for some ul , then this would imply that Fl (·) must have a mass point at ul , which
14

contradicts Proposition 1. Similarly, if there exists uh and u0l > ul offered in equilibrium such that
Uh (u0l ) = Uh (ul ) = uh , then Fh would feature a mass point, in contradiction with Proposition 1. Hence,
Uh (ul ) must be a strictly increasing function for all ul > ul .
Notice that, if Fl (·) is continuous everywhere, then every menu offered in equilibrium is accepted by
exactly the same fraction of low- and high-quality noncaptive sellers. We state this result in the following
Corollary to Theorem 1.
Corollary 2. If Fl and Fh are continuous, then Fh (Uh (ul )) = Fl (ul ).
Taken together, Theorem 1 and Corollary 2 simplify the construction of an equilibrium, which we undertake in the next section. Specifically, when an equilibrium exists in which the marginal distributions
Fl and Fh are continuous, then the equilibrium can be described compactly by the marginal distribution
Fl and the policy function Uh (ul ).

4

Construction of Equilibrium

In this section, we use the properties established above to help construct equilibria. Then, we show
that the equilibrium we construct is unique. In this sense, we characterize the entire set of equilibrium
outcomes in our model.

4.1

Special Cases: Monopsony and Perfect Competition

To fix ideas, we first characterize equilibria in the well-known special cases of π = 0 and π = 1, i.e.,
when sellers face a monopsonist and when they face two buyers in Bertrand competition, respectively.
As we will see, several features of the equilibrium in these two extreme cases guide our construction of
equilibria for the general case of π ∈ (0, 1).
Monopsony.

When each seller meets with at most one buyer, the buyers solve

max

(ul ,uh )

µl (vl − ul ) + µh


v h − cl
v h − ch
+ ul
,
vh − u h
ch − cl
ch − cl

subject to the monotonicity and feasibility constraints in (13). The solution to this problem, summarized
in Lemma 3 below, is standard and, hence, we omit the proof.
Lemma 3. Suppose π = 0, and let
µh
φl ≡ 1 −
µl



15

v h − ch
ch − cl


.

(18)

If φl > 0, then the unique equilibrium has ul = cl with xl = 1 and uh = ch with xh = 0; if φl < 0, then
ul = uh = ch with xl = xh = 1; and if φl = 0, then ul ∈ [cl , ch ] with xl = 1 and uh = ch with xh ∈ [0, 1].
The parameter φl is a summary statistic for the adverse selection problem: it represents the net
marginal cost (to the buyer) of delivering an additional unit of utility to a low-quality seller. It is strictly
less than 1 because the direct cost of an additional unit of transfer to a low-quality seller is partially
offset by the indirect benefit of relaxing this seller’s incentive constraint, which allows the buyer to trade
more with a high-quality seller. This indirect benefit is captured by the second term on the right-hand
side: when this term is large, φl is small, the cost of trading with high-quality sellers is low, and adverse
selection is mild. Conversely, when this term is small, φl is large, it is costly to trade with high-quality
sellers, and therefore adverse selection is relatively severe. According to this measure, adverse selection
is thus severe when the relative fraction of high-quality sellers, µh /µl , is small; the gains from trading
with high-quality sellers, vh − ch , are relatively small; and/or the information rents associated with
separating high- and low-quality sellers, ch − cl , are large.
When φl > 0, the net cost to a buyer of increasing ul is positive, so she sets ul as low as possible,
i.e., ul = cl . This implies that the high-quality seller is entirely shut out, i.e., xh = 0. Otherwise, when
φl < 0, increasing ul yields a net benefit to the buyer. As a result, a buyer raises ul until the monotonicity
constraint in (13) binds, i.e., she pools high- and low-quality sellers, offering uh = ul = ch .
Before proceeding to the perfectly competitive case, we highlight two features of the equilibrium
under monopsony. First, buyers offer separating menus (uh > ul ) when φl is positive and pooling menus
(uh = ul ) when φl is negative. Second, they make non-negative payoffs on both types when φl > 0,
but lose money on low-quality sellers when φl < 0. In other words, the equilibrium features crosssubsidization when φl is negative, but not when φl is positive.

Bertrand Competition.

When competition is perfect, i.e., when π = 1, our setup becomes the same as

that in Rosenthal and Weiss (1984), and similar to that of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976). In this case,
when φl > 0, the unique equilibrium is in pure strategies, with buyers offering the standard “least-cost
separating” contract; type l sellers earn ul = vl and type h sellers trade a fraction of their endowment
at a unit price of vh , such that the incentive constraint of the low-quality seller binds. However, when
φl < 0, there is no pure strategy equilibrium.18 In this case, an equilibrium in mixed strategies emerges,
18 All buyers offering the least-cost separating contract cannot be an equilibrium, as a pooling offer attracts both types and
yields positive profits to the buyer. All buyers offering pooling cannot be an equilibrium either, since it is vulnerable to a
cream-skimming deviation, wherein a competing buyer can draw away the high-quality seller by offering a contract with x < 1
but at a higher price.

16

as in Rosenthal and Weiss (1984) and Dasgupta and Maskin (1986).19 Each buyer mixes over menus, all
of which involve negative profits from low-quality sellers, offset exactly by positive profits from highquality sellers, leading to zero profits. The marginal distribution Fl (·) is such that profitable deviations
are ruled out. The following lemma summarizes these results.
Lemma 4. When π = 1, the unique equilibrium is as follows: (i) if φl > 0, then ul = vl with xl = 1 and
uh =

vh (ch −cl )+vl (vh −ch )
vh −cl

with xh =

vl −cl
vh −cl ;

(ii) if φl < 0, then the symmetric equilibrium is described by the

distribution

Fl (ul ) =

ul − vl
µh (vh − vl )

−φl
,

(19)

with Supp (Fl ) = [vl , v̄] and Fh (uh ) = Fl (Uh (ul )), where v̄ = µh vh + µl vl and Uh (ul ) satisfies
µh Πh (ul , Uh (ul )) + µl Πl (ul , Uh (ul )) = 0.

(20)

As with π = 0, equilibrium when π = 1 features no cross-subsidization when φl > 0 and crosssubsidization when φl < 0. However, unlike the case with π = 0, equilibrium with π = 1 features
separating contracts for all values of φl . These properties guide our construction of equilibria in the
next section, when we study the general case of π ∈ (0, 1).

4.2

General Case: Imperfect Competition

We now describe how to construct equilibria when π ∈ (0, 1). Recall that an equilibrium is summarized
by a distribution Fl (ul ) and a strictly increasing function Uh (ul ). A key determinant of the structure of
equilibrium menus is whether the monotonicity constraint in (13) is binding. When it is slack, the local
optimality (or first-order) condition for ul , along with the strict rank-preserving condition that relates
Fh (Uh (ul )) = Fl (ul ) together characterize the equilibrium distribution Fl (ul ). The function Uh (ul ) then
follows from the requirement that all menus (ul , Uh (ul )) must yield the buyer equal profits. When the
monotonicity constraint is binding, the policy function is, by definition, Uh (ul ) = ul .20
Our analysis of π = 0 and π = 1 points to the importance of φl . Recall that when φl > 0, the
monotonicity constraint was always slack. When φl < 0, on the other hand, the monotonicity constraint
was binding only when π = 0 and slack at π = 1. Guided by these results, we discuss our construction
separately for the φl > 0 and the φl < 0 cases.21
19 Luz

(2014) shows that the equilibrium is unique.
course, uh = Uh (ul ) must be locally optimal as well, but this condition is implied by the joint requirements on ul and
Uh (ul ) described above.
21 The equilibrium when φ = 0 has a slightly different structure and, for the sake of brevity, we relegate analysis of this
l
knife-edge case to Appendix C.
20 Of

17

Case 1: φl > 0. Given the analysis of π = 0 and π = 1, we conjecture that, for any π ∈ (0, 1), the
monotonicity constraint is slack, i.e., that Uh (ul ) > ul for all ul ∈ Supp(Fl ). Proposition 2 establishes
that this is indeed the case.
Proposition 2. For any π ∈ (0, 1) and φl > 0, there exists an equilibrium where Fl and Uh satisfy the following
properties:
1. Fl solves the differential equation
πfl (ul )
(vl − ul ) = φl ,
1 − π + πFl (ul )

(21)

with the boundary condition Fl (cl ) = 0.
2. Uh (ul ) > ul and satisfies the equal profit condition:
(1 − π + πFl (ul )) [µh Πh (ul , Uh (ul )) + µl (vl − ul )] = µl (1 − π) (vl − cl ) .

(22)

Equation (21) is derived by taking the first-order condition of (12) with respect to ul —holding uh
fixed—and then imposing the strict rank-preserving property.22 This necessary condition is familiar from
basic production theory. The left-hand side is the marginal benefit to the buyer of increasing ul , i.e., the
product of the semi-elasticity of demand and the profit per trade. The right-hand side, φl , represents the
marginal cost of increasing the utility of the low-quality seller, taking into account the fact that increasing
ul relaxes the incentive constraint.23 Note that, even though (21) ensures that local deviations by a buyer
from an equilibrium menu are not profitable, completing the proof requires ensuring that there are no
profitable global deviations as well; we establish that this is true in Appendix A.2.1.
The boundary condition requires that the lowest utility offered to the low-quality seller is cl . From
(22), and the fact that Fl (cl ) = 0, we find Uh (cl ) = ch , so that the worst menu offered in equilibrium
coincides with the monopsony outcome. Intuitively, if the worst menu offers more utility to low-quality
sellers than cl , the buyer could profit by decreasing ul and uh ; the gains associated with trading at
better terms with the low types would exceed the losses associated from trading less quantity with high
types, precisely because φl > 0. Given that ul = cl , if the worst equilibrium menu offers more utility to
high-quality sellers than ch , then a buyer offering this menu could profit by decreasing uh ; his payoff
from trading with high types would increase without changing the payoffs from trading with low types.
22 As

we discuss in the proof of Proposition 2, this first-order condition requires three assumptions: that uh > ul for all
menus; that there is no mass point at the lower bound of the support of Fl (ul ); and that the implied quantity traded by the
high-quality seller is interior in all trades, i.e., 0 < xh = (uh − ul ) /(ch − cl ) < 1, except possibly at the boundary of the
support of Fl . All of these assumptions are confirmed in equilibrium.
23 It is straightforward to derive a closed-form solution for F (u ) from (21); see equation (48) in the Appendix.
l l

18

The final equilibrium object, Uh (ul ), is characterized by the equal profit condtion: the left side of
(22) defines the buyer’s payoff from the menu (ul , Uh (ul )), while the right side is the profit earned from
the worst contract offered in equilibrium. Figure 1 plots the two equilibrium functions in this region.

Uh (ul )

Fl (ul )

uh
1

ch
cl

ul

vl

ul

cl

ul

vl

ul

Figure 1: Equilibrium for π ∈ (0, 1), φl > 0. The left panel plots the CDF Fl (ul ) and the right panel plots the mapping Uh (ul ).

Notice from (21) that, since φl > 0, our equilibrium has vl > ul for all menus in equilibrium, so that
buyers earn strictly positive profits from trading with low-quality sellers. It is straightforward to show
that buyers also earn strictly positive profits from trading with high-quality sellers. Hence, in this region,
the equilibrium features no cross-subsidization, as was the case for π = 0 and π = 1. Finally, it is also
worth noting that the equilibrium distribution of offers converges to the limiting cases as π converges to
both 0 and 1; in the former case, the distribution converges to a mass point at the monopsony outcome,
while in the latter case, the distribution converges to a mass point at the least-cost separating outcome.
Case 2: φl < 0.

In this region of the parameter space, the equilibrium features a pooling menu when

π = 0 and a distribution of separating menus when π = 1. This leads us to conjecture that the equilibrium
for π ∈ (0, 1) can feature pooling, separating, or a mixture of the two, depending on the value of π. The
following lemma formalizes this conjecture and shows the existence of a threshold utility for the offer
to low-quality sellers, such that all offers with ul below this threshold are pooling menus, while all
offers above the threshold are separating menus.24 Depending on whether this threshold lies at the
lower bound, the upper bound, or in the interior of the support of Fl (ul ), there are three possible
cases, respectively: all equilibrium offers are separating menus, all are pooling menus, or there is a
mixture with some pooling menus (offering relatively low utility to the seller) and some separating
24 At this point, it may seem arbitrary to conjecture that pooling occurs at the bottom of the distribution and separation at the
top. As we will discuss later in the text, the reason this is ultimately true is that the cream-skimming deviation—which makes
the pooling offer suboptimal—becomes more attractive as the indirect utility being offered increases.

19

menus (offering higher utility). Later, in Proposition 4, we provide conditions on φl and π under which
each case obtains.
Proposition 3. For any π ∈ (0, 1) and φl < 0, there exists an equilibrium where Fl and Uh satisfy the following
properties:
1. There exists a threshold ûl such that, for any ul in the interior of Supp(Fl ):
(a) if ul 6 ûl , Uh (ul ) = ul and Fl satisfies
πfl (ul )
(µh vh + µl vl − ul ) = 1 ,
1 − π + πFl (ul )

(23)

(b) if ul > ûl , Uh (ul ) > ul and Fl satisfies (21).
2. Uh (ul ) = ch and Uh (ul ) = ul .
To understand the first set of (necessary) conditions in Proposition 3, consider the region where the
buyers offer pooling menus. Here, buyers trade off profit per trade against the probability of trade, with
no interaction between offers and incentive constraints. As a result, the equilibrium in this pooling region
behaves as in the canonical Burdett and Judd (1983) single-quality model, with the buyer’s payoff equal
to the average value µh vh + (1 − µh )vl . This yields (23). In the region where buyers offer separating
menus, Fl (ul ) is characterized by the local optimality condition (21), exactly as in the φl > 0 case. Recall
from our discussion that this differential equation accounts explicitly for the effect of an offer ul on the
seller’s incentive constraint. In this region, Uh (ul ) is determined by the equal profit condition.
The second part of the result describes boundary conditions for the worst and best menus offered
in equilibrium. The first condition requires that the worst menu yields utility ch to high-quality sellers.
To see why, suppose the worst menu is a pooling menu with Uh (ul ) = ul > ch . Then, lowering both
uh and ul leads to strictly higher profits. If the worst menu is separating with Uh (ul ) > ch , then a
downward deviation in only uh is feasible and strictly increases profits. The second condition requires
that the best menu offered in equilibrium is a pooling menu. Intuitively, if the best menu offered in
equilibrium were a separating menu, then xh < 1. This cannot be optimal when φl < 0: the buyer can
trade more with the high-quality seller by increasing the utility offered to low-quality sellers. Since this
is already the best menu in equilibrium, this deviation has no impact on the number of sellers the buyer
attracts but yields strictly higher profits.
Given these properties, we now establish two critical values—φ1 (π) and φ2 (π), with φ2 (π) < φ1 (π) <
0—that determine which of the three cases described above emerge in equilibrium. When φl < φ2 (π),
20

Uh(ul )

Uh(ul )

uh

Uh(ul )

uh

ch

uh

ch

ch

45◦

ul

45◦

ul

ul

45◦

ul

ul

ul

ul

ul

ul

Figure 2: The mapping Uh (ul ) for all pooling, all separating, and mixed equilibria when φl < 0

the threshold ûl = ul and there is an all pooling equilibrium. When φl > φ1 (π), the monotonicity
constraint is slack almost everywhere, so that ûl = ul , and the equilibrium features all separating menus.
Finally, if φl lies between these two critical values, we have a mixed equilibrium, with an intermediate
threshold ûl ∈ (ul , ul ). Figure 2 illustrates Uh (ul ) for all three possibilities.
Proposition 4. For any π ∈ (0, 1), there exist two cutoffs φ2 (π) < φ1 (π) < 0 such that an all pooling equilibrium
exists for all φl 6 φ2 (π), a mixed equilibrium exists for all φl ∈ (φ2 (π), φ1 (π)), and an all separating equilibrium
exists for all φl ∈ (φ1 (π), 0).
Intuitively, for a pooling menu (ul , ul ) to be offered in equilibrium, the cream-skimming deviation
(ul − ε, ul ) for some ε > 0 cannot yield strictly higher profits. To see how incentives to cream-skim vary
with φl and π, notice that there are two sources of higher profits from the menu (ul − ε, ul ), relative to
the candidate pooling menu. First, it decreases the loss conditional on trading with a low-quality seller.
Second, it reduces the probability of trading with a noncaptive low-quality seller; since the buyer loses
money on these sellers, this reduction in trading probability raises profits. The cost of cream-skimming
is that the buyer earns lower profits on high-quality sellers. Therefore, incentives to cream-skim are
weak—and thus pooling is easier to sustain—when high-quality sellers are relatively abundant (φl very
negative) and/or there are relatively few noncaptive sellers (π is small).
The higher the level of utility being offered in a pooling menu, the more vulnerable it is to creamskimming. Hence, if such a deviation is profitable at the lowest candidate value, ch , then pooling cannot
be sustained at all: this is the condition that determines the cutoff φ1 (π). Similarly, the cutoff φ2 (π)
defines the boundary at which cream-skimming is not profitable even at the best pooling menu, ul . We
derive these thresholds formally and provide a full equilibrium characterization in Appendix A.2.2.
Notice that, in all three cases, ul > vl (since ul > ch > vl ) so that buyers always suffer losses
21

when trading with low-quality sellers. Hence, as in the extreme cases of π = 0 and π = 1, there is
cross-subsidization in every equilibrium when φl < 0. Finally, as in the case of φl > 0, the equilibrium
distribution converges to the limiting cases as π converges to both 0 and 1.
Figure 3 summarizes the various types of equilibria and the regions in which each one obtains. The
x- and y-axes represent the intensity of competition and severity of adverse selection, respectively. Recall
that the latter is summarized by φl , which is a function of µh , the fraction of high-quality goods, as well
as the valuations vh , ch , cl . For concreteness, we use µh to vary φl on the y-axis—a higher fraction of
high-quality goods implies a lower φl and, therefore, milder adverse selection.25

Fraction of high types, µh

1

0

All Pooling

µ2 (π)
Mix

µ1 (π)
All Separating
µ0 (π)
All Separating

Degree of Competition, π

1

Figure 3: Equilibrium regions

4.3

Uniqueness

In the previous section, we constructed equilibria for all π ∈ (0, 1) and φl 6 1. In Theorem 2, below, we
establish that these equilibria are unique. For intuition, we sketch the arguments here for φl 6= 0.26 First,
we show that for all φl 6= 0, no equilibrium features a mass point, even at vl . Next, when φl > 0, we
prove that no equilibrium features pooling menus on a positive measure subset of Fl . In this case, since
equilibria have no mass points and must be separating almost everywhere, the equilibrium we construct
in Proposition 2 describes the unique equilibrium.
b l in steps. First, we
When φl < 0, we demonstrate uniqueness of the equilibrium with a threshold u
show that any equilibrium features pooling at the upper bound of the support of Fl . Second, we prove
that any equilibrium features at most one interval of pooling menus followed by at most one interval
25 The

boundaries are also redefined accordingly: µh 6 µ0 if and only if φl > 0 and µh 6 µj (π) if and only if φl > φj (π) for
j ∈ {1, 2}.
26 In Appendix C, we also prove uniqueness for the knife-edge case of φ = 0.
l

22

of separating menus. Third, we prove that the equilibria characterized in Proposition 4 are mutually
exclusive, so that equilibria without mass points are unique. Since no equilibrium features mass points
when φl < 0, these results establish the uniqueness of the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 4.
We summarize these results in the following theorem.
Theorem 2. For any π ∈ (0, 1) and φl ∈ R, there exists an equilibrium and it is unique.
Note that we obtain a unique equilibrium without any refinements or other restrictions on off-path
behavior. This is because buyers’ payoffs are well-defined for any offer. In particular, since buyers are
not capacity-constrained, the fraction of type i ∈ {l, h} sellers who accept any offer (ul , uh ) is uniquely
determined by the (exogenous) meeting technology and the (endogenous) distribution of offers Fl and
Fh .27

4.4

Discussion

The equilibrium characterized above has a number of testable implications for transaction prices and
quantities. The first set of predictions pertains to properties of equilibrium menus. We highlight three
robust predictions. First, the strict rank-preserving property suggests a positive correlation between
the contracts that buyers offer to different types of sellers: those buyers who make attractive offers to
low-quality sellers will also make attractive offers to high-quality sellers. Hence, in equilibrium, buyers
do not specialize in trading with a particular type of seller, but rather trade with equal frequency across
all types. Second, whether buyers pool different types of sellers or separate them (using a menu of
options) depends crucially on the severity of the two frictions.28 Pooling is more likely in markets where
competition among buyers is relatively weak and adverse selection is relatively mild. Alternatively,
separation is more likely when adverse selection is relatively severe—so that the information costs of
trading with high-quality sellers are large relative to the benefits—and competition is relatively strong—
so that the payoffs from cream-skimming are relatively high.29 Third, the theory also predicts that menus
that are less attractive from the perspective of sellers are more likely to be pooling. In other words, those
who are posting offers with relatively unattractive terms should be offering fewer options and should
account for a smaller share of observed transactions.
27 Refinements

are often necessary in models with capacity-constrained buyers, when two types of sellers would like to accept
an off-path offer, and the probability that each type is able to execute the trade is not pinned down.
28 This result stands in stark contrast to, e.g., Guerrieri et al. (2010). In that model, and many like it, the quantity traded with
high-quality sellers is independent of the distribution of types in the market; trade with high-quality sellers is distorted even if
the fraction of low-quality goods in the market is arbitrarily small.
29 Consistent with our findings, Decarolis and Guglielmo (2015) find evidence of greater cream-skimming by health insurance
providers when the market is more competitive.

23

The second set of implications pertains to dispersion. Note that, in the region with separating menus,
the model predicts dispersion within and across types. This is true both for quantities traded (coverage
in an insurance context or loan size in a credit market context) as well as prices (premia or interest
rates, respectively). The extent of dispersion—both the support and the standard deviation of the quantity/price distributions—is determined by the interaction of competition (measured by π) and adverse
selection (measured by φl ). This joint dependence calls into question the practice of identifying imperfect competition or asymmetric information in isolation using cross-sectional dispersion. For example,
a common empirical strategy to identify adverse selection is to test the correlation between the quantity
an agent trades and her type, as measured by ex-post outcomes.30 In our equilibrium, there is a negative
correlation between the seller’s quality and the quantity she sells, but the quantitative strength of this
relationship is also a function of the market structure. As a result, using the relationship between quantity and type without accounting for the imperfect nature of competition is likely to yield misleading
conclusions. A similar concern applies to the strategy of identifying search frictions from price dispersion.31 In markets where adverse selection is a concern, the extent of cross-sectional variation in terms
of trade is also a function of selection-related parameters. Obtaining an accurate assessment of trading
frictions in such settings thus requires controlling for the underlying distribution of types.

5

Increasing Competition and Reducing Information Asymmetries

Many markets in which adverse selection is a first-order concern are experiencing dramatic changes.
Some of these changes are regulatory in nature; for example, as we describe in greater detail below,
there are several recent policy initiatives to make health insurance markets and over-the-counter markets
for financial securities more competitive and transparent. Other changes derive from technological
improvements; for example, advances in credit scoring reduce information asymmetries in loan markets.
In this section, we use the framework developed above to examine the likely effects of these types
of changes on economic activity. Our metric for economic activity is the utilitarian welfare function,
which measures the expected gains from trade that are realized in equilibrium. We show that increasing
competition or reducing information asymmetries can worsen the distortions from adverse selection—
thereby decreasing the expected gains from trade—when markets are relatively competitive. As a result,
initiatives to make these markets more competitive or transparent are only welfare-improving when both
30 This technique for identifying adverse selection has been applied to a number of markets, following the seminal paper by
Chiappori and Salanie (2000); recent examples include Ivashina (2009), Einav et al. (2010b), and Crawford et al. (2015).
31 Using dispersion in prices to help identify search frictions is standard practice in the IO literature; for a recent example,
see Gavazza (2015).

24

frictions are relatively severe, i.e., when buyers have a lot of market power (i.e., when π is low) and the
adverse selection problem is relatively severe (i.e., when φl is high).
While these comparative statics are certainly informative, one may be concerned that they reflect an
inefficiency in the particular game we postulate between buyers and sellers. At the end of this section,
we derive a constrained efficient benchmark, taking the search and information frictions as given. We
show that, in the region of the parameter space where φl > 0, equilibrium gains from trade coincide
with those in the constrained efficient benchmark. This suggests that the comparative statics results that
we described above are not a consequence of the particular game we have modeled, but rather a more
fundamental feature of markets with adverse selection and imperfect competition.

5.1

Utilitarian Welfare

As noted above, our metric for economic activity will be the objective of a utilitarian planner, defined as
the expected gains from trade realized between buyers and sellers, or
Z
2 − 2π
[xh (ul ) (vh − ch )] dFl (ul )
W(π, µh ) = (1 − µh )(vl − cl ) + µh
2−π
Z


π
µh [xh (ul ) (vh − ch )] d Fl (ul )2
,
+
2−π

(24)

where, in a slight abuse of notation, we let
xh (ul ) = 1 −

Uh (ul ) − ul
.
ch − cl

(25)

The first term in (24) represents the gains from trade generated by low quality goods; since all sellers
receive at least one offer and xl = 1 in every trade, all low-quality goods are transferred to the buyer. The
second term captures the expected gains from trade between buyers and captive high-quality sellers. In
particular, from equation (3), we can write the measure of captive sellers as 1 − p =

2−2π
2−π .

A randomly

selected captive high-quality seller transfers xh (ul ) to the buyer and consumes the remaining 1 − xh (ul )
herself, where ul is drawn from Fl (ul ). Finally, the last term in (24) captures the expected gains from
trade between buyers and noncaptive high-quality sellers. A measure p =

π
2−π

of sellers are noncaptive

and, since noncaptive sellers choose the maximum indirect utility among the two offers they receive,
they trade an amount xh (ul ) where ul is drawn from Fl (ul )2 .

25

5.2

Increasing Competition

We first study the effects of increasing competition, which has been a common policy response to address
perceived failures in markets for insurance, credit, and certain types of financial securities.32 We do so
by examining the relationship between welfare and competition, as captured by π. In Proposition 5,
we establish that welfare is maximized at π = 0 when the adverse selection problem is relatively mild.
However, when the adverse selection problem is severe, we show that W is hump-shaped in π; i.e., there
is an interior level of competition that maximizes welfare in this region of the parameter space.
Proposition 5. If φl 6 0, welfare is maximized at π = 0. Otherwise, it is maximized at a π ∈ (0, 1).
The first result is straightforward. Since a monopsonist offers a pooling contract in this region of
the parameter space, all gains from trade are realized. Competition only serves to increase incentives to
cream-skim. When these incentives are sufficiently strong, equilibrium menus offer high-quality sellers
a higher price but a lower quantity to trade in order to ensure that such a deviation is not profitable,
causing a decline in welfare.
The second result—that welfare is maximized at an interior value of π when φl > 0—is less obvious.
To see the intuition for this result, first note that, as π increases, Fl (ul ) increases in the sense of firstorder stochastic dominance: Fl (ul ) shifts to the right and ul increases. Intuitively, in equilibrium, more
competition forces buyers to allocate more surplus to sellers. Second, and crucially, xh (ul ) is humpshaped in ul : it increases near the monopsony offer cl , and decreases when ul is sufficiently close to
the competitive offer, vl . When π is close to zero, ul is relatively small and the distribution of offers
is clustered near the monopsony contract; a small increase in π causes a rightward shift in the density
of offers to values of ul associated with higher values of xh , increasing the gains from trade realized
between buyers and high-quality sellers. In contrast, when π is close to 1, ul is close to vl , and the
distribution of offers is clustered near the competitive contract; in this case, a small increase in π causes
a shift toward values of ul associated with lower values of xh .
Therefore, understanding why welfare is hump-shaped in π ultimately requires understanding why
xh (ul ) is hump-shaped in ul . Note that, ceteris paribus, an increase in ul relaxes the type l seller’s
32 For

example, a recent report by the Congressional Budget Office (2014) argues for “fostering greater competition” in
health insurance plans by developing “policies that would increase the average number of sponsors per region,” which would
then “increase the likelihood that beneficiaries would select low-cost plans.” Similarly, the U.S. Treasury (2010) argued that
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau “will make consumer financial markets more transparent – and that’s good for
everyone: The agency will give Americans [...] the tools they need to comparison shop for the best prices and the best loans,
which will [...] increase competition and innovations that benefit borrowers.” A similar rationale underlies the Core Principles
and Other Requirements for Swap Execution Facilities (Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2013)), issued under the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which requires that a swap facility sends a buyer’s request for
price quotes to a minimum number of sellers before a trade can be executed.

26

incentive compatibility constraint, allowing buyers to raise xh . In contrast, ceteris paribus, an increase in
uh tightens the type l seller’s incentive compatibility constraint, requiring buyers to lower xh . Thus, as
offers to both types increase, the net effect on xh depends on which one rises faster—formally, whether
Uh0 (ul ) is greater or less than 1. Figure 4 illustrates this relationship between the quantity traded with
high types, xh , and the rate at which uh and ul increase within the set of equilibrium menus being
offered. The figure reveals that ul rises faster than uh for smaller values of ul , so that xh is increasing
in this region. However, as ul nears vl , uh rises faster and thus xh is decreasing in this region.

Uh (ul )
uh

xh

ch
cl

u

∗

vl

ul

45◦

cl

u∗

vl

ul

Figure 4: Trade (xh ) and Utility (Uh ) of high-quality seller as functions of ul when π > 0.

To explain the hump-shape of welfare, then, we need to understand why Uh0 (ul ) < 1 for low levels of
ul and Uh0 (ul ) > 1 for high levels of ul . While this slope is a complicated equilibrium object, determined
by the interaction of an individual buyer’s optimal strategy and the equilibrium distribution of offers,
the basic intuition can be understood through two opposing forces. First, it is cheaper for buyers to
provide utility to the low type (relative to the high type) because doing so has the additional benefit of
relaxing the incentive constraints; we call this the “incentive effect” and this force tends to reduce the
slope, Uh0 (ul ). Second, as ul rises, buyers have more incentive to attract type h sellers, relative to type l
sellers; formally, one can show that Πh (ul , Uh (ul ))/Πl (ul , uh ) is increasing in ul . This effect, which we
call the “composition effect,” leads them to increase uh at faster rates at higher ul .
To illustrate these two forces more clearly, consider the following optimality condition that any

27

equilibrium menu (ul , Uh (ul )) must satisfy:33
φl
Πh (ul , Uh (ul ))
φ
Πl (ul )
| {zh } |
{z
}

Uh0 (ul ) =

(26)

incentive effect composition effect

where φh = (vh − cl )/(ch − cl ) is the marginal cost of providing an additional unit of utility to type
h sellers—i.e., φh =

dΠh
duh —and

for notational convenience Πl (ul ) ≡ Πl (ul , uh ). The first term, the

incentive effect, is the ratio of the marginal costs of providing utility to the two types of sellers. Since
this term is strictly less than 1, all else equal, the incentive effect leads to more aggressive competition
for the low type and, therefore, to uh rising more slowly than ul .
The second term, the ratio of profits, can be larger or smaller than 1, depending on ul . When ul
is close to the monopsony outcome, Πh ≈ 0, so the composition effect is also less than 1 and we have
Uh0 (ul ) < 1. However, as ul approaches the upper bound vl , this second term overwhelms the incentive
effect, resulting in Uh0 (ul ) > 1. In fact, one can show that limul →vl

Πh
Πl

= limul →vl

Uh0 = ∞. To see

why, note that (applying l’Hôpital’s rule) reveals
lim

ul →vl

Πh (ul , Uh (ul ))
= lim
ul →vl
Πl (ul )

dΠh (ul ,Uh (ul ))
dul
dΠl (ul )
dul

= lim φh Uh0 (ul ) −
ul →vl

vh − ch
.
ch − cl

(27)

If this limit were finite, then
lim

ul →vl

φ l v h − ch
φl Πh (ul , Uh (ul ))
= φl Uh0 (vl ) −
< Uh0 (vl ) ,
φh
Πl (ul )
φ h ch − cl

(28)

which implies that (26) cannot hold. In words, if the ratio of profits is finite in the limit, buyers have
incentive to offer a lower uh . The only way to discourage such deviations is to make high types more
profitable—in the limit, infinitely so. This is why xh0 (ul ) < 0 close to the Bertrand outcome.

5.3

Reducing Information Asymmetries

We now study the welfare consequences of reducing informational asymmetries. This exercise sheds
light on the implications of certain policy initiatives, as well as the effects of various technological
innovations. For example, an important debate in insurance, credit, and financial markets centers around
information that the informed party (the seller in our context) is required to disclose and the extent to
33 This

equation combines the optimality condition (21) for ul , the corresponding optimality condition for uh ,
πfh
Π = φh ,
1 − π + πFh h

0 (u ).
and the strict rank-preserving property Fl (ul ) = Fh (Uh (ul )), which implies fl = fh Uh
l

28

which such information can be used by the uninformed party (the buyers in our model) to discriminate.34
Moreover, technological developments in these markets also have the potential to decrease informational
asymmetries, as advanced record-keeping and more sophisticated scoring systems (e.g., credit scores)
provide buyers with more and/or better information about sellers’ intrinsic types.35
To study the effects of these changes, we introduce a noisy public signal s ∈ {0, 1} about the quality of
each seller.36 The signal is informative, so that Pr(s = 1|h) = Pr(s = 0|l) > 0.5. Since the signal is publicly
observed, the buyers may condition their offers on it, i.e., they offer separate menus for sellers with s = 0
and s = 1. Thus, the economy now has two subgroups, j ∈ {0, 1}, with the fraction of high-quality sellers
in subgroup j given by
µhj =

µh

µh Pr(s = j | h )
.
Pr(s = j | h ) + µl (1 − Pr(s = j | l ))

Note that the average across subgroups is equal to the unconditional fraction of high types, i.e., E[µhj ] =
µh . The equilibrium outcome for each subgroup can be constructed using the procedure in Section 4 with
the appropriate µhj . Welfare is then given by the average welfare across subgroups, i.e., E[W(π, µhj )].
When buyers do not observe a signal (or, equivalently, are not permitted to condition their offers on it),
welfare is simply W(π, E[µhj ]). Hence, whether the signal increases or decreases welfare, respectively,
depends on whether W(π, µh ) is convex or concave in µh in the relevant region.
Before proceeding, two comments are in order. First, our focus is on the effect of a small increase
in the information available to buyers; that is, we are interested in signals that induce a local meanpreserving spread around µh . Very informative signals always improve welfare—for example, if buyers
receive a perfect signal about sellers’ types, then all gains from trade are realized —but this is not a very
interesting or realistic experiment. Second, we focus on the region with µh < µ0 , so that φl > 0, which
is more tractable and shows interesting interactions between competition and additional information.37
Moreover, in this region, W is linear in µh when π = 0 or π = 1. Hence, imposing monopsony or perfect
competition would lead us to the conclusion that additional information has no effect on welfare.
34 In insurance markets, these questions typically concern an individual’s health factors, both observable (e.g., age or gender)
and unobservable (e.g., pre-existing conditions) to the insurance provider. In credit markets, similar questions arise with respect
to observable characteristics that can legally be used in determining a borrower’s creditworthiness, as well as the amount of
information about a borrower’s credit history that should be available to lenders (e.g., how long a delinquency stays on an
individual’s credit history). In financial markets, the relevant issue is not only whether a seller discloses relevant information
about an asset to a buyer, but also whether the payoff structure of the asset is sufficiently transparent for sellers to distinguish
good from bad assets. For example, in order to support “sustainable securitisation markets,” the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision and the International Organization of Securities Commissions established a joint task force to identify criteria for
“simple, transparent, and comparable” securitized assets. See http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d304.pdf.
35 See, e.g., Chatterjee et al. (2011) and Einav et al. (2013) for a description of how the emergence of standardized scoring
systems in credit markets have radically changed lenders’ ability to assess a borrower’s creditworthiness.
36 The restriction to a binary signal is only for simplicity. It is easy to introduce richer information structures.
37 Numerical simulations suggest that additional information always reduces welfare when µ > µ .
h
0

29

Proposition 6 shows that W has a strictly convex region when π is sufficiently low, implying that more
information is beneficial when markets are close to (but not at) the monopsony benchmark. Alternatively,
when markets are relatively (but not perfectly) competitive, W has a strictly concave region, implying
that more information actually reduces welfare.
Proposition 6. There exist π, π ∈ (0, 1) such that: (i) for all π ∈ (0, π), there exists 0 < µh < µh < µ0 such that
W is strictly convex on the interval [µh , µh ]; and (ii) for all π ∈ (π, 1), there exists 0 < µh0 < µh0 < µ0 such that
W is strictly concave on the interval [µh0 , µh0 ].
To see the intuition behind Proposition 6, recall from the previous subsection that trade with the highquality seller (and thus welfare) is governed by the interaction of the incentive effect and the relative
profit (or composition) effect. The consequences of more information can be understood in terms of these
two forces, too, which depend on the severity of adverse selection. In particular, a lower φl drives down
the first term in (26), which encourages more competition for low-quality sellers and, hence, boosts
trade and welfare. Now, from (18), we see that φl is a concave function of µh . Since the additional
signal induces a mean-preserving spread of µh , it results in a lower φl on average, which, ceteris paribus,
increases trade. This mechanism makes more information desirable. The effect from relative profits goes
in the opposite direction. In equilibrium, milder adverse selection raises profits from high types relative
to low types, which increases Uh0 and hence decreases trade. Close to monopsony, since the incentive
effect dominates, more information raises welfare. The opposite happens when π is close to 1 and the
effect on relative profits dominates.

5.4

Constrained Efficiency

The analysis above establishes that, for the case of φl > 0, increasing competition and reducing information asymmetries can have non-monotonic effects on the equilibrium volume of trade, and hence on the
(utilitarian) welfare measure. However, one might be concerned that this non-monotonicity is an artifact
of the particular game we study, as opposed to a robust feature of markets with asymmetric information. To address this concern, we now derive a constrained efficient benchmark, taking as given both
the information and search frictions, and show that the expected volume of trade in our equilibrium
coincides with that of the constrained efficient allocation when adverse selection is severe.
Though much of the formal analysis is relegated to the Appendix, we sketch the key features of our
constrained efficient benchmark here. The type of a seller i ∈ [0, 1], which is private information, can
be summarized by a tuple θi ∈ Θ ≡ {l, h} × {0, 1} × {0, 1}, where the first element indicates the quality
30

of the seller’s good, while the second and third elements equal 1 if the seller is matched with buyer 1
and buyer 2, respectively, and equal 0 otherwise. The type of buyer k ∈ {1, 2} can be summarized by a
function mk : [0, 1] 7→ {0, 1}, such that mk (i) = 1 if buyer k is matched with seller i and 0 otherwise.
Given this specification, a direct mechanism prescribes a transfer of numeraire, tk
i ∈ R, and a transfer
38 These transfers have
of goods, xk
i ∈ [0, 1], for each i ∈ [0, 1] and k ∈ {1, 2} based on the reported types.

to satisfy a number of constraints. The first is feasibility: given our assumption that trade can only occur
k
k
between agents who are matched, it must be that xk
i = ti = 0 if m (i) = 0. The second is individual

rationality: we assume that agents always have the option to play the game we analyze in Sections 2–4,
should one of them reject the proposed mechanism, so that that their expected payoffs have to be at
least as good as the payoffs they receive in the equilibrium. The third constraint is incentive compatibility:
allocations have to induce sellers to truthfully reveal both the quality of their good and the buyers with
whom they are matched. The final constraint is exclusivity: consistent with our benchmark model, we
assume that x1i x2i = 0 for all i ∈ [0, 1], so that sellers may not transfer some of their good to both buyers.
A constrained efficient allocation maximizes a pareto-weighted sum of utilities (of buyers and each
type of seller) subject to the constraints described above. We say that an equilibrium is constrained efficient if the associated expected utilities coincide with those induced by a constrained efficient allocation.
Proposition 7. If φl > 0 or φl < φ2 , then the equilibrium is constrained efficient. If φl ∈ [φ2 , 0], then the
equilibrium is constrained inefficient.
Proposition 7 establishes that the equilibrium yields the same gains from trade and welfare as a
constrained efficient mechanism when φl > 0, but not necessarily when φl 6 0. In particular, when
φl ∈ [φ2 , 0] and expected trading volume of high-quality goods is less than 1, a benevolent planner
can improve upon equilibrium allocations by inducing a greater degree of cross-subsidization from
high- to low-quality sellers. The source of this inefficiency—that buyers’ incentives to cream skim high
quality sellers limits equilibrium cross-subsidization—is similar to that which arises in many models
with adverse selection and competition (see, e.g., Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976; Guerrieri et al., 2010).
Most importantly, Proposition 7 reveals that a benevolent planner cannot propose a trading mechanism that would strictly increase trading volume or welfare, relative to our equilibrium allocation, given
φl > 0 and π ∈ [0, 1]. This is true despite the fact that the planner faces a weaker set of incentive
constraints than the buyer: since seller i is matched with buyer k if and only if buyer k is matched with
38 The

Revelation Principle applies immediately to this environment, so that restricting attention to direct mechanisms is
without loss of generality.

31

seller i, the planner can easily design a mechanism that costlessly induces sellers to truthfully reveal the
buyers with whom they are matched. Hence, the only relevant incentive constraints are those which
induce sellers to truthfully reveal their quality.
Finally, Proposition 7 reports efficiency properties of equilibrium allocations for any degree of adverse selection and competition. However, while information frictions are often considered a primitive,
one could argue that the degree of competition in a market is instead an outcome. A natural question,
then, is whether the optimal level of competition arises in an environment where this level is determined by the choices of market participants. In the next section, we extend our analysis to study an
environment where the market structure—summarized by π—is endogenous. We study the relationship
between π and the severity of adverse selection, and we ask whether a benevolent planner could increase
welfare by influencing the degree of competition.39

6

Endogenous Market Structure

In this section, we allow buyers a choice over how intensely they advertise their offers to sellers. This
exercise has two benefits: the degree of competition will be endogenously determined; and the measure of
sellers who are contacted by at least one buyer, or what is often called coverage, will also be endogenously
determined. This allows us to study which features of the environment determine the market structure
and the corresponding welfare implications.
Setting. Suppose that, in addition to choosing a menu of contracts to offer, each buyer k ∈ {1, 2} must
also choose the effort or intensity with which their offer will be advertised to sellers; exerting effort
is costly, but increases the likelihood that each seller observes their offer. We can model this choice
formally by assuming that buyer k can choose the probability π̂k that each seller observes his offer by
incurring a cost C(π̂k ), which is a continuously differentiable, strictly increasing, and strictly convex
function with C(0) = C 0 (0) = 0 and C 0 (1) = ∞.40 Note that π̂k represents a slightly different object than
39 A

related exercise is to consider interventions that mimic the effects of increasing or decreasing competition. In the
working paper version, Lester et al. (2015b), we study what happens when the government enters a market suffering from
adverse selection as a “large buyer,” as it has in, e.g., the markets for student loans, health insurance (where the government
offers a “public option”), or certain financial assets (where the government considered using money from the Troubled Asset
Relief Program to purchase asset-backed securities). We show that, by offering to buy any quantity at a fixed price, the
government can increase sellers’ outside option and promote more competition, which recreates the effects of increasing π.
Such an intervention can increase our measure of welfare only when both market power and the distortions arising from
adverse selection are severe. Otherwise, in stark contrast to existing studies of such interventions in competitive environments
(see, e.g., Tirole, 2012; Guerrieri and Shimer, 2014a), we show that such programs can be detrimental to welfare even if, in
principle, the intervention makes non-negative
 profits.
40 Note that this implies a fraction 1 − π̂1 1 − π̂2 of sellers receive zero offers. This is the sense in which coverage is
endogenous in the current setup, whereas we fixed this fraction (to zero) in our benchmark model.

32

π represented in our benchmark model, since it affects both competition and coverage. However, what
is crucial is that—just like π in our earlier analysis—π̂−k is the conditional probability that a seller who
buyer k meets has a second offer. Hence, in a symmetric Nash equilibrium, π̂k = π̂−k ≡ π̂ remains the
key determinant of the level of competition.

The buyer’s problem.

Taking as given the other buyer’s advertising intensity, π̂−k , and the distribution

−k
of offers that he makes to sellers of type i ∈ {l, h}, which we denote F−k
i (ui ), buyer k chooses a tuple
k
(π̂k , uk
l , uh ) to maximize

X





k
µi π̂k 1 − π̂−k + π̂k π̂−k F−k
uk
Πi u k
i
l , uh ,
i

(29)

i∈{l,h}

subject to the same participation and incentive constraints described in the benchmark model, with
Πi (·, ·) defined in (14)–(15).
k
Factoring out π̂k from (29), one can immediately see that the choice of π̂k and (uk
l , uh ) are separable.
k
Hence, given π̂−k , the first order conditions on uk
l and uh are exactly as they were before (replacing π

with π̂−k ), while the first order condition determining the optimal choice of π̂k is
X




k
C 0 π̂k =
µi 1 − π̂−k + π̂−k F−k
uk
Πi u k
i
l , uh .
i

(30)

i∈{l,h}

In a symmetric equilibrium, where π̂1 = π̂2 ≡ π̂, equation (30) implies that the marginal cost of increasing
π̂ is equal to the equilibrium profits characterized in Propositions 2 and 3. Since these profits are
decreasing in π̂, the next result follows almost immediately.
Proposition 8. For any φl < 1, there exists a unique symmetric equilibrium, with π̂? ∈ (0, 1) and {F?i (ui )}i∈{l,h}
as described in Propositions 2 and 3.
In Lemma 5, below, we offer comparative statics with respect to the fraction of high quality sellers,
µh .41 Recall that there exists a µ0 such that φl > 0 if and only if µh 6 µ0 . We show that the equilibrium
π̂? is U-shaped in µh , achieving a minimum at µh = µ0 .
Lemma 5. The equilibrium advertising intensity π̂? is decreasing in µh when µh < µ0 and increasing in µh
when µh > µ0 .
To understand the intuition, consider first the case of “severe adverse selection,” i.e., when µh < µ0
or, equivalently, when φl > 0. In this region, once information rents are taken into account, the buyer’s
41 The

same techniques we use to derive these results can be applied equally easily for other parameters, as well.

33

payoff from trading with low-quality sellers is larger than the payoff from trading with high-quality
sellers (even if vh − ch > vl − cl ). Thus, from the buyer’s perspective, an increase in µh in this region
actually worsens the pool of potential sellers and, as a result, buyers optimally choose a lower π̂. The
opposite is true when µh > µ0 , where we say adverse selection is “mild.” In this region, after adjusting
for information rents, it is relatively more profitable to trade with high quality sellers, and thus buyers
optimally choose larger values of π̂ as the fraction of high quality sellers increases.
Lemma 5 has implications for the relationship between the composition of high- and low-quality
sellers in a market and the (endogenous) level of competition that prevails. In particular, this result
suggests that competition for customers should be strongest in markets with less uncertainty about
sellers’ types (i.e., extreme values of µh ), and weakest in markets with more uncertainty about sellers’
types (i.e., intermediate values of µh ).
The model with endogenous π̂ also allows us to connect some of our welfare results to more concrete
implications for policy. To see this, suppose C(π̂k ) = Ac(π̂k ) for some positive constant A > 0, and
consider the effect of taxing buyers’ advertising intensities according to a proportional tax, τπ̂. For
simplicity, suppose all tax proceeds are then simply rebated to the agents. In Lemma 6, below, we
establish that welfare is increasing in τ in some regions of the parameter space. That is, a policy making
it more costly for buyers to contact sellers can improve welfare.
e > 0 such that welfare is increasing in τ for all A < A.
e
Lemma 6. Suppose φl > 0. There exists an A
The result in Lemma 6 follows closely from the fact that welfare is hump-shaped in π̂, even taking
into account that an increase in π̂ increases coverage. As a result, when A is sufficiently small, π̂? is large
and a decrease in π̂? —brought about by an increase in τ—causes welfare to rise.

7

Large Markets and Meeting Technologies

In this section, we show how our analysis and results extend to a more general environment in which
there are an arbitrarily large number of buyers and sellers, and a more general meeting technology. In
particular, suppose there is a measure b of buyers and a measure s of sellers. As in our benchmark
model, buyers send out offers and sellers receive these offers. The meeting technology dictates the
number of offers each buyer gets to send, and where these offers end up.
Formally, let η denote the (expected) number of offers that each buyer sends, and let
λ=

ηb
s

34

denote the ratio of offers to sellers. In addition, let Pn denote the probability that each seller receives
n ∈ {0} ∪ N offers. A meeting technology, then, can be succinctly summarized by a pair (λ, Pn ).42 From
a buyer’s perspective, a meeting technology implies that an offer he sends is received by a seller with
n − 1 other offers with probability Qn , where
nPn = λQn for all n ∈ N.
Following the convention in the literature, we let Q0 = 1 −

P∞

n=1 Qn

(31)
denote the probability that an offer

doesn’t reach a seller.
In what follows, we first show how to characterize the equilibrium for any meeting technology
using the tools we developed in the two-buyer case. Then, we define the utilitarian welfare measure
in this generalized environment, and study what happens when the meeting technology becomes “less
frictional,” i.e., when sellers receive more offers (in a sense to be made precise). We show that there are
two effects. First, as in our benchmark model, fewer frictions imply more competition, which can cause
welfare to fall when the market is sufficiently close to perfect competition. Second, fewer frictions imply
that more sellers receive at least one offer—i.e., that market coverage increases—which causes welfare to
go up. Using several examples, we show that welfare continues to be maximized at an interior level of
frictions, so long as the latter effect is not too strong.

7.1

Characterizing Equilibrium

As in our benchmark model, we restrict attention to symmetric equilibria, where {Fi (ui )}i∈{l,h} summarizes the distribution of menus being offered by buyers. Taking this distribution as given, an individual
buyer makes an offer (ul , uh ) that solves
X

max

ul ,uh

"
µi

i∈{l,h}

∞
X

#
Qn Fn−1
(ui )
i

Πi (ul , uh ),

(32)

n=1

where, again, Πi (ul , uh ) is defined in (14)–(15). Importantly, the objective in (32) can be re-written
#
!
"
∞
∞
X
X
X
00 −1
Qn 00
Q1
n
P∞
+
Fi
(ui ) Πi (ul , uh )
Qn
µi P∞
n 0 =1 Qn 0
n 0 =1 Qn 0
00
n=1

n =2

i∈{l,h}

or, equivalently,
[1 − Q0 ]

X

µi [1 − π̃ + π̃Gi (ui )] Πi (ul , uh )

(33)

i∈{l,h}
42 Note that this formulation of a meeting technology is slightly more general than what is commonly used in the existing
literature (see, e.g., Eeckhout and Kircher, 2010), in the sense that we allow the “queue length” λ to depend on the meeting
technology, whereas this is typically treated as a primitive.

35

where
π̃ = 1 −

Q1
1 − Q0

(34)

is the probability that an offer is received by a seller that has at least one other offer, conditional on being
received by a seller, and
Gi (ui ) =

∞
1 X Qn n−1
F
(ui )
π̃
1 − Q0 i

(35)

n=2

is the probability that the seller accepts the offer ui , given that they own an good of quality i ∈ {l, h}.
Notice immediately that (33) has the same form as our objective function in the two-buyer case—replacing
π with π̃ and Fi (ui ) with Gi (ui ). As a result, our characterization of equilibrium in Propositions 2 and
3 is preserved and the distribution Gi (ui ) is uniquely defined in all regions of the parameter space.
Moreover, from (35), it is easy to show that Gi (ui ) uniquely determines the distribution of offers made
by buyers, Fi (ui ). Hence, with a large number of buyers and an arbitrary meeting technology, one can
easily determine the type of contracts that are offered in equilibrium by comparing φl , which is unchanged in this general setting, to φ1 and φ2 , which are updated by replacing π with π̃; the distribution
of offers that are made to each type of seller, Fi (ui ), which is the solution to (35); and the prices and
quantities that are ultimately traded in equilibrium.

7.2

Competition, Coverage, and Equilibrium Gains from Trade

In our benchmark model, we studied the welfare effects of changing the probability that a seller received
two offers, π. In this section, we explore similar comparative statics within the context of a general
meeting technology. In particular, we let Pn and λ (and hence Qn ) depend on a parameter α. This
formulation is intentionally general: a change in α could correspond to a change in the measure of
buyers, a change in the expected number of offers per buyer, or a change in the technology that matches
offers to sellers.
As in Section 6, we focus on the case where φl > 0 and define the utilitarian welfare measure
W (α) =

∞
X

Z


Pn (α) µh (vh − ch )

xh (ul ) d (Fn
l (ul )) + µl (vl


− cl ) +

X

µi ci

i=l,h

n=1

As in our benchmark model, when φl > 0, the distribution Gl (ul ) solves the differential equation
φl
π̃gl (ul )
=
1 − π̃ + π̃Gl (ul )
vl − u l
with support [cl , ul (α)] such that Gl (cl ) = 0 and Gl (ul (α)) = 1.
36

(36)

Solving (36) and imposing equal profits implies that the mapping Uh (ul ) must satisfy


v l − cl
vl − u l

φl
[µl (vl − ul ) + µh Πh (ul , Uh (ul ))] = µl (vl − cl ) ,

exactly as in the case of two buyers. An immediate, and important, implication is that xh (ul ) is humpshaped in ul and independent of α. Hence, a change in α only affects the distribution of offers that are
made, summarized by Fl , and the distribution of offers that sellers receive, summarized by Pn .
As a result, the effects of a change in α can be decomposed as follows:


Z
∞
X
∂Pn (α)
n
µh (vh − ch ) xh (ul ) d (Fl (ul ; α)) + µl (vl − cl ) +
W (α) =
∂α
n=1
"
#
Z
∞
X
∂ ul (α)
n
Pn (α) µh (vh − ch )
xh (ul ) d (Fl (ul ; α)) ,
∂α cl
0

n=1

where, for the purpose of clarity, we’ve made the dependence of Fl on α explicit. The first term in
the equation above was absent in our benchmark model, but captures a standard effect in models with
frictions: the effect of a change in α on the set of sellers who are able to trade, or what we call the
coverage effect. The second term captures the effect that we focused on in our benchmark model: the
effect of a change in α on the distribution of offers, or what we call the competition effect.
For example, suppose increasing α leads to a first-order stochastic dominant (FOSD) shift in the
number of offers that sellers receive. In this case, the coverage effect would be positive, since fewer
sellers receive zero offers. However, the competition effect could be negative, since an increase in α
leads to a FOSD shift in the distribution of offers Fl . As in our benchmark model, when α is sufficiently
large, this shift puts more weight on the downward-sloping region of xh (ul ), thus reducing welfare.
Which of these two effects dominates typically depends on the details of the meeting technology. In
what follows, we utilize several examples to further illustrate these two opposing forces, and to confirm
that our results from the benchmark model—namely, that some frictions can increase welfare—remain
true for certain popular meeting technologies even after accounting for the coverage effect.

Examples of meeting technologies.

Consider first the Poisson meeting technology with λ(α) = α and
Pn (α) =

e−α αn
.
n!

This is perhaps the most popular meeting technology in the literature (see, e.g., Butters (1977) and Hall
(1977) for early examples, and Burdett et al. (2001) and Shimer (2005) for more recent examples), and
an increase in α clearly leads to a FOSD shift in the distribution of offers that sellers receive. We show
37

in the Appendix that when φl > 0, there exists an α∗ such that welfare is decreasing in α for all finite
α > α∗ . Therefore, as in our benchmark model, welfare is decreasing as the economy gets close to the
frictionless benchmark, and hence welfare is maximized at an interior value of α.
The same is not true, however, for all meeting technologies. For example, consider the Geometric
meeting technology with λ(α) = α/(1 − α) and
Pn (α) = αn (1 − α),
which was studied recently by, e.g., Lester et al. (2015a). Under this meeting technology, when φl > 0, we
show in the Appendix that the coverage effect always dominates the competition effect, so that welfare is
increasing in α. Intuitively, the coverage effect is relatively strong because the fraction of sellers who fail
to receive an offer, P0 , falls slowly in α as α → 1, whereas the competition effect vanishes more quickly.
Note, however, that one can augment the Geometric meeting technology to ensure full coverage by
setting λ(α) = α/(1 − α) and
Pn (α) = αn−1 (1 − α)
for n ∈ N, with P0 = 0. This specification removes the positive effects of increased coverage on welfare,
leaving only the negative competition effect as α approaches 1. Hence, as in our benchmark model, in
this case reducing frictions can again lead to welfare losses.

8

Additional Extensions and Robustness

In this section, we examine a few additional extensions of our framework, both to ensure the robustness
of our results and to demonstrate that our framework is amenable to more applied work. First, we
relax our assumption of linear utility to analyze the canonical model of insurance under private information. Second, we allow the degree of competition to differ across sellers of different quality. Last, we
incorporate additional dimensions of heterogeneity, including horizontal and vertical differentiation.

8.1

A Model of Insurance

To start, we analyze a canonical model of insurance under private information, along the lines of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), and show that our main results—in particular, the structure of equilibrium
menus and the non-monotonicity of welfare with respect to the degree of competition—extend beyond
the linear, transferable utility environment.

38

A unit measure of agents with strictly increasing, strictly concave utility functions w (c) face idiosyncratic income risk.43 Their income in normal times is y, but they also face the risk of an “accident,”
which reduces their income by d. The accident is observable and contractible, but the probability of its
occurrence, denoted θj , j ∈ {b, g} , is private information. A fraction µb of agents are of type b and
face a higher risk of accident than type g agents, i.e., θb > θg . Principals (the insurance providers) are
risk-neutral, which implies that gains from trade are strictly positive for both types. The competitive
structure is exactly the same as our baseline model: a fraction 1 − π of agents receive one offer and the
remainder receive two.
A contract consists of a premium and a transfer to the agent in the event of an accident. Since trading
is exclusive and the accident is observable, we can also think of the contract as directly offering a utility
level in the normal and accident states. As before, we consider menus with two contracts, one for each


a
n
a
type, i.e., z = un
b , ub , ug , ug such that incentive and participation constraints are satisfied:

 n
 n
a
ICj : θj ua
j + 1 − θj uj > θj u−j + 1 − θj u−j ,


 n
PCj : θj ua
j + 1 − θj uj > θj w (y − d) + 1 − θj w (y)

j ∈ {b, g}.

To solve for the equilibrium, we follow the same steps as in Section 4. The first step is to obtain the
utility representation. It is straightforward to prove that, in all equilibrium menus, type b agents are
fully insured and (ICb ) binds. This allows us to summarize equilibrium menus with a pair of expected
utilities, (ub , ug ), and allocations given by the solution to the following system of equations:
n
ub = ua
b = ub ,

n
ub = θb ua
g + (1 − θb ) ug ,

n
ug = θg ua
g + (1 − θg ) ug .

(37)

n
In a separating menu, the principal offers type g agents less than full insurance: ua
g < ug such that

(ICb ) binds. Define C (u) ≡ w−1 (u) to be the principal’s cost of providing a utility level u. Note that
C0 (u) , C00 (u) > 0. Then, the objective of the principal is described by (12), where the type-specific profit
functions satisfy
Πb (ub , ug ) = y − θb d − C (ub ) ,


n
Πg (ub , ug ) = y − θg d − θg C ua
g − (1 − θg ) C ug .
Since w is strictly increasing and concave, we can show that
dΠg (ub , ug )
> 0,
dub

and

43 Note

dΠg (ub , ug )
> 0.
dug dub

that, in this application, the “buyers” of insurance are the ones with private information. To avoid confusion, we
switch to a principal-agent description.

39

The first inequality shows the effect of incentives: more surplus to type b agents relaxes their incentive
constraint, allowing the principal to earn higher profits from type g agents. The second inequality shows
that the marginal benefit of increasing the utility of type g agents rises with the utility offered to type b
agents, implying the strict supermodularity of the profit function. In other words, the complementarity
that was at the heart of the strict rank-preserving property in the linear model is present in this version
as well. Using this property, we can extend the arguments in Proposition 1, implying that the marginal
distributions Fj , j ∈ {b, g} do not have any flat portions or mass points. Hence, Theorem 1 applies—
equilibria are strictly rank-preserving—and can therefore be described by a distribution over utilities to
type b agents, Fb (ub ), and a strictly increasing function Ug (ub ). In Appendix A.6.1, we use the methods
from Section 4 to derive the system of differential equations that characterize these functions.
Next, we consider the implications of competition for welfare. For brevity, we restrict attention to
the region where all menus are separating and do not involve cross-subsidization. In this case, the
consumption of type g agents necessarily varies with the state; this imperfect insurance is the analogue
of distortions in the quantity traded in the baseline model. The associated resource costs are thus a
natural measure of the efficiency losses (relative to a full information benchmark) in this setting. For a
menu offering ub to type b agents, this loss is given by



n
L(ub ) = C (Ug (ub )) − θg C Ua
,
g (ub ) + (1 − θg ) C Ug (ub )

(38)

n
where Ug , Ua
g , and Ug are equilibrium policy functions. Average losses in the economy are then

Z
Z
L(π) ≡ (1 − π) L(ub )dFb (ub , π) + π L(ub )dFb (ub , π)2 .

(39)

In Appendix A.6.1, we show, using a numerical example, that L is U-shaped in ub , which then implies
that L(π) is minimized at an interior value of π. Thus, in markets for insurance, increasing competition
among providers can be detrimental for welfare.

8.2

Differential Competition Across Types

In our baseline model, we assume that the probability a seller receives one or two offers is the same
for both types. In this subsection, we relax this assumption and allow π to vary across types, so that
the probability a type j seller is captive is given by 1 − πj . We will show that both the structure of
the equilibrium and its normative properties remain largely unchanged, with the caveat that, for some
parameter values, the equilibrium distribution has mass points. For brevity, we restrict attention to the
φl > 0 case, where all equilibrium menus are separating and cross-subsidization does not occur.
40

When πh > πl , the results in Proposition 1 go through unchanged, and thus the distribution functions
Fl and Fh have continuous support and no mass points. This implies that the equilibrium satisfies the
strict rank-preserving property and all menus attract the same fraction of noncaptive sellers. When
πl > πh , both distributions still have continuous supports, but Fl has a mass point if πl is sufficiently
large. The following proposition fully characterizes the unique equilibrium for both cases.
Proposition 9. If

1−πl
1−πh

< 1 − φl , then the unique equilibrium Fl has full mass at vl and Fh is characterized by
(1 − πh + πh Fh (uh )) Πh (vl , uh ) = (1 − πh ) Πh (vl , ch ) .

If

1−πl
1−πh

(40)

> 1 − φl , then the unique equilibrium Fl satisfies
πl fl (ul )
1 − πh + πh Fl (ul )
Πl (ul ) = 1 −
1 − πl + πl Fl (ul )
1 − πl + πl Fl (ul )



µh
µl



vh − ch
ch − cl

(41)

and Uh is determined by the equal profit condition.
Equation (41) is similar in structure to (21). The key difference is that the right-hand side, which
again measures the (net) marginal cost of providing a unit of surplus to the low type, has an additional
term that adjusts for the differential probability that an offer is accepted by high types relative to low
types. Naturally, this probability is small (i.e., the cost is large) when ul is small and πh is large.
The construction of equilibrium follows the strategy in Section 4. The ordinary differential equation
in (41), with the boundary condition Fl (cl ) = 0, can be solved for Fl . Given Fl , the equal profit condition
pins down Uh . The properties of the equilibrium—both positive and normative—are also similar to the
baseline model. In particular, xh is non-monotonic in ul which, as before, has interesting implications
for the relationship between welfare and competition.
Figure 5 illustrates the effects of varying competition for each type separately. The left panel varies
πh , holding πl fixed, and shows that more competition for high-quality sellers always reduces welfare;
intuitively, more surplus to high-quality sellers tightens the incentive constraints and reduces trade.
The right panel varies πl , holding πh fixed, which has two effects (exactly as in section 5.2). First, it
increases surplus to low-quality sellers, which relaxes incentive constraints and increases trade with
high-quality sellers. Second, it makes low-quality sellers relatively less attractive to buyers, inducing
them to compete more aggressively for the high-quality seller, reducing trade. These two competing
forces lead to a non-monotonic relationship between πl and welfare, provided πh is sufficiently high.44
44 When

πh is low, we enter the region with mass points before the second (negative) effect begins to dominate. Since a mass
point equilibrium puts full mass at vl , increasing πl beyond this point has no effect on welfare.

41

W

W

Low πh

High πl

High πh
Low πl
0

πh

1

0

πl

1

Figure 5: The effect of varying competition on welfare for high- (left panel) and low-quality (right panel) sellers

8.3

Differentiation and Multidimensional Heterogeneity

In this section, in order to enhance the applicability of our framework to applied work, we introduce
various types of additional heterogeneity: across buyers, across contracts, and across sellers. In various
ways, these generalizations break the stark relationship between a seller’s type, the offer she accepts, and
the rank of that offer within the distribution of all offers. The cost of these generalizations is some degree
of tractability, though we argue that, in most cases, the properties and characterization of equilibria are
very similar to the baseline framework. For brevity, we restrict attention to the region of the parameter
space where almost all equilibrium menus are separating and not cross-subsidizing.

Horizontal differentiation across buyers. Consider first the possibility that buyers are horizontally
differentiated. Specifically, as in the discrete choice model of McFadden (1974), we assume that the
payoff to a seller of type i from a contract (x, t) offered by buyer k is
uik = (1 − x) ci + t + k = ui + k ,
where k is a buyer-specific preference shock drawn from a continuous distribution H with support
[, ].
¯ Note that  is the same for both seller types, so it has no effect on the incentive constraints. Hence,
we may once again represent each equilibrium menu by a utility pair (ul , uh ). A captive seller accepts
this menu if uik is greater than her outside option, ci , which occurs with probability
F̃ci (ui )

Z ¯
dH() = 1 − H (ci − ui ) .

=
ci −ui

42

(42)

A noncaptive seller of type i accepts this menu if ui +  > max(u0i + 0 , ci ), which occurs with probability
!
Z ūi Z ¯
Z ui +−u0
i


dH 0
dH () dFi u0i
(43)
F̃nc
i (ui ) =
ui

ci −ui


¯

where Fi is the marginal distribution of utilities offered to type i sellers in equilibrium. Setting Mi (ui ) =


(1 − π) F̃ci ui0 + πF̃nc
ui0 , we can write the buyer’s problem as
i
max
0
0

ul , uh

X



Mi ui0 Πi u0l , u0h .

(44)

i∈{l,h}

In a separating equilibrium, optimality with respect to ul requires
ml (ul )
(vl − ul ) = φl .
Ml (ul )

(45)

In other words, the link between the trading probability and the utility offered to the low-quality seller is
exactly the same as in our baseline framework, and all of our results go through with respect to the key
equilibrium objects Ml and Mh . The only caveat is that recovering the underlying distribution of offers
Fl and Fh , which are informative about prices and allocations, typically requires numerical methods.45
Horizontal differentiation across contracts. The extension above allows for the possibility that a seller
accepts a contract from the “wrong” buyer, i.e., accepts ui even though a contract u0i > ui was available.
In this section, we allow for the possibility that a seller accepts the “wrong” contract within a menu, i.e.,
accepts u−i even though her type is i. In particular, suppose that a fraction δ of low-quality sellers accept
the contract intended for a high-quality seller. It is possible to microfound this as a form of “tremble,”
or as arising from other unmodeled contract features that cause some low-quality sellers to prefer the
contract with lower quantity and higher price.46 For example, the high price contract might carry other
benefits, such as better customer service, that are valued by some low-quality sellers (but not others).
Let ṽh ≡

µh vh +µl δvl
µh +µl δ

be the average value (to the buyer) of goods held by agents who take the contract

intended for the high type. We assume that δ is sufficiently small so that ṽh > ch . The expected profits




−cl
ṽh −ch
of the buyer, conditional on trade, are then given by Π̃h (ul , uh ) = ṽh − ṽchh −c
u
+
h
ch −cl ul . As in
l
our baseline model, the FOC for ul and the equal profit condition pin down Fl and Uh :


πfl (ul )
µh + µl δ ṽh − ch
(vl − ul ) = 1 −
≡ φ̃l ,
(46)
1 − π + πFl (ul )
µl (1 − δ) ch − cl


(1 − π) µl δ (vl − cl ) = (1 − π + πFl (ul )) µl (1 − δ) (vl − ul ) + (µh + µl δ) Π̃h (ul , uh ) . (47)
45 The

differential equation in (45), along with the equal profit condition and the system of integral equations in (42) − − (43)
must be solved jointly for Fi , and this system is only analytically tractable under special assumptions on the distribution H.
46 For simplicity, we make two additional assumptions. First, a captive low-quality seller still chooses the more attractive
menu, even when she takes the contract intended for the high-quality seller. Second, we assume that the buyer does not (or
cannot) try to use contract terms to separate out these low-quality sellers.

43

Note that these equations are very similar to (21)–(22), with Π̃h and φ̃l replacing Πh and φl . Accordingly, the characterization and other results in the preceding sections directly extend.

Vertical differentiation across buyers. Suppose now that sellers attach a higher value to trading with
certain buyers, i.e., that the utility of a type i seller from accepting a contract (x, t) from buyer k ∈ {1, 2}
is given by ci (1 − x) + t + Bk , where B1 ≡ B > 0 and B2 is normalized to zero.47 This implies that the
cost of delivering utility to sellers is lower for buyer 1 or, equivalently, his profits are higher than those
of buyer 2, i.e., Π1i (ul , uh ) = Π2i (ul , uh ) + B. Not surprisingly, in this environment, the equilibrium
distribution of menus is also asymmetric. Let Fk
i (ui ) , k ∈ {1, 2} denote the marginal distribution of
utilities offered by buyer k to type j sellers. In Appendix A.6.4, we characterize an equilibrium in which
these distributions satisfy the strict rank-preserving property, except at the lower bound of the support,
where F2i has a mass point.48
Multidimensional seller heterogeneity.

Finally, our baseline framework posits a tight connection be-

tween the valuations of the seller and the buyer. While this is a natural assumption when sellers are
heterogeneous along a single dimension—asset quality—it is also natural to consider the case in which
sellers have heterogenenous preferences as well.49 A simple way to incorporate this additional heterogeneity into our analysis is to assume that a seller’s type is a tuple (c, ṽ) , with c ∈ {ch , cl } denoting
the seller’s valuation for her asset and ṽ ∈ {ṽh , ṽl } denoting the buyer’s valuation. This allows for the
possibility that some high (low) quality assets are held by sellers who, for idiosyncratic reasons, have a
low (high) valuation for them. In an asset market interpretation, for example, this could arise from het
erogeneity in discount rates or liquidity needs. Let µij denote the proportion of sellers of type ci , ṽj .
We can show that it is not possible for buyers to separate sellers with the same c but different ṽ0 s. Let
P
P
µ ṽ
µi = j µij denote the fraction of sellers with valuation ci , i ∈ {h, l} and vi = j µiij j denote the average
value (to the buyer) of the assets held by sellers of type i. Assuming that gains from trade are positive,
so that ci < vi , it is easy to see that our analysis of the baseline model goes through exactly. In other
words, additional preference heterogeneity changes the interpretation of buyer values in our baseline
model, but otherwise leaves the analysis unchanged.
47 Equivalently, and more consistent with our earlier interpretation, one could imagine a measure of buyers, with a fraction
of each type k ∈ {1, 2}. The simplification here implies that a noncaptive seller will always have one offer from a type 1 buyer
and one from a type 2 buyer, though this could be relaxed.
48 Our analysis requires one additional assumption: a seller who is indifferent between two menus chooses the one offered
by buyer 1. The resulting system of differential equations can be solved numerically to obtain the equilibrium distributions.
49 See, for example, Finkelstein and McGarry (2006), Chang (2012), and Guerrieri and Shimer (2014b).

44

9

Conclusion

In their survey of the literature on insurance markets, Einav et al. (2010a) note that, despite substantial
progress in understanding the effects of adverse selection,
“there has been much less progress on empirical models of insurance market competition, or
on empirical models of insurance contracting that incorporate realistic market frictions. One
challenge is to develop an appropriate conceptual framework. Even in stylized models of
insurance markets with asymmetric information, characterizing competitive equilibrium can
be challenging, and the challenge is compounded if one wants to allow for realistic consumer
heterogeneity and market imperfections.”
In this paper, we overcome this challenge and develop a tractable, unified framework to study adverse
selection, screening, and imperfect competition. We provide a full analytical characterization of the
unique equilibrium, and use it to study both positive and normative issues.
Going forward, our framework can be exploited and extended to address a variety of important
issues, both applied and theoretical. On the applied side, our equilibrium provides a new structural
framework that can be used to jointly identify the extent of adverse selection and imperfect competition
in various markets, and to study how the interaction of these two frictions affects the distribution of contracts, prices, and quantities that are traded. On the theoretical side, there are several obvious extensions
to pursue. For example, one natural extension is to study the analog of our model with nonexclusive
contracts; though this would complicate the analysis considerably, it would also make our framework
suitable to analyze certain markets where exclusivity is hard to enforce. Finally, while we focus on
screening as a mechanism for coping with adverse selection, of course there are other mechanisms as
well, such signalling and reputation.50 It would be interesting to study how these mechanisms interact
with competition. We leave these exercises for future work.

50 See,

e.g., Bagwell and Ramey (1993).

45

References
Akerlof, G. A. (1970): “The Market for ’Lemons:’ Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 488–500. 6
Ausubel, L. M. (1991): “The failure of competition in the credit card market,” American Economic Review,
81, 50–81. 2
Azevedo, E. M. and D. Gottlieb (2015): “Perfect Competition in Markets with Adverse Selection,” The
Wharton School Research Paper. 6
Bagwell, K. and G. Ramey (1993): “Advertising as information: Matching products to buyers,” Journal
of Economics & Management Strategy, 2, 199–243. 45
Benabou, R. and J. Tirole (2015): “Bonus Culture: Competitive Pay, Screening, and Multitasking,”
Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming. 7
Bisin, A. and P. Gottardi (2006): “Efficient Competitive Equilibria with Adverse Selection,” Journal of
Political Economy, 114, 485–516. 6
Brown, J. R. and A. Goolsbee (2002): “Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive? Evidence
from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 481–507. 2
Burdett, K. and K. L. Judd (1983): “Equilibrium Price Dispersion,” Econometrica, 51, 955–969. 2, 6, 13,
20
Burdett, K. and D. T. Mortensen (1998): “Wage differentials, employer size, and unemployment,”
International Economic Review, 39, 257–273. 6
Burdett, K., S. Shi, and R. Wright (2001): “Pricing and Matching with Frictions,” Journal of Political
Economy, 109, 1060–1085. 37
Butters, G. R. (1977): “Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices.” Review of Economic
Studies, 44, 465–491. 6, 37
Cabral, M., M. Geruso, and N. Mahoney (2014): “Does Privatized Health Insurance Benefit Patients
or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage,” Tech. Rep. 20470, National Bureau of Economic
Research. 2
Calem, P. S. and L. J. Mester (1995): “Consumer behavior and the stickiness of credit-card interest
rates,” American Economic Review, 85, 1327–1336. 2
Camargo, B. and B. Lester (2014): “Trading dynamics in decentralized markets with adverse selection,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 153, 534–568. 7
Carrillo-Tudela, C. and L. Kaas (2015): “Worker mobility in a search model with adverse selection,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 160, 340–386. 6
Chang, B. (2012): “Adverse selection and liquidity distortion,” Society for Economic Dynamics. 6, 44
Chari, V., A. Shourideh, and A. Zetlin-Jones (2014): “Reputation and persistence of adverse selection
in secondary loan markets,” American Economic Review, 104, 4027–4070. 6
Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2011): “A theory of credit scoring and competitive
pricing of default risk,” Unpublished paper, University of Minnesota. 29

46

Chiappori, P.-A., B. Jullien, B. Salanié, and F. Salanié (2006): “Asymmetric information in insurance:
General testable implications,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 37, 783–798. 2
Chiappori, P.-A. and B. Salanie (2000): “Testing for asymmetric information in insurance markets,”
Journal of Political Economy, 108, 56–78. 2, 24
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2013): “Core Principles and Other Requirements for Swap
Execution Facilities,” Federal Register, 78, 33476–33604. 26
Congressional Budget Office (2014): “Competition and the Cost of Medicare’s Prescription Drug
Program,” . 26
Crawford, G. S., N. Pavanini, and F. Schivardi (2015): “Asymmetric information and imperfect competition in lending markets,” . 2, 24
Dafny, L. S. (2010): “Are Health Insurance Markets Competitive?” American Economic Review, 100, 1399–
1431. 2
Dasgupta, P., P. Hammond, and E. Maskin (1979): “The Implementation of Social Choice Rules: Some
General Results on Incentive Compatibility,” The Review of Economic Studies, 46, 185–216. 10
Dasgupta, P. and E. Maskin (1986): “The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontinuous Economic Games,
I: Theory,” The Review of Economic Studies, 53, 1–26. 17, 51
Decarolis, F. and A. Guglielmo (2015): “Insurers Response to Selection Risk: Evidence from Medicare
Enrollment Reforms,” Boston University sIEPR Discussion Paper. 23
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2005): “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econometrica, 73,
1815–1847. 2
Eeckhout, J. and P. Kircher (2010): “Sorting and decentralized price competition,” Econometrica, 78,
539–574. 35
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and J. Levin (2010a): “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance Markets,” Annu. Rev. Econ, 2, 311–36. 2, 45
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2010b): “Optimal mandates and the welfare cost of asymmetric information: Evidence from the uk annuity market,” Econometrica, 78, 1031–1092. 24
Einav, L., M. Jenkins, and J. Levin (2013): “The impact of credit scoring on consumer lending,” The
RAND Journal of Economics, 44, 249–274. 29
Einav, L. and J. Levin (2015): “Managed Competition in Health Insurance!” Journal of European Economic
Association, 13, 998–1021. 2
Fang, H. and Z. Wu (2016): “Multidimensional Private Information, Market Structure and Insurance
Markets,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 7
Finkelstein, A. and K. McGarry (2006): “Multiple dimensions of private information: evidence from
the long-term care insurance market,” American Economic Review, 96, 938–958. 44
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole (1991): Game Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 87
Garrett, D. F., R. D. Gomes, and L. Maestri (2014): “Competitive Screening Under Heterogeneous
Information,” . 6
Gavazza, A. (2015): “An Empirical Equilibrium Model of a Decentralized Asset Market,” Tech. Rep.
DP10546, CEPR Discussion Paper. 24
47

Guerrieri, V. and R. Shimer (2014a): “Dynamic Adverse Selection: A Theory of Illiquidity, Fire Sales,
and Flight to Quality,” American Economic Review, 104, 1875–1908. 7, 32
——— (2014b): “Markets with multidimensional private information,” Tech. Rep. 20623, National Bureau of Economic Research. 7, 44
Guerrieri, V., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2010): “Adverse selection in competitive search equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 78, 1823–1862. 6, 7, 23, 31
Hall, R. (1977): Microeconomic Foundations of Macroeconomics, Macmillan, London, chap. An Aspect of
the Economic Role of Unemployment. 37
Inderst, R. (2005): “Matching markets with adverse selection,” Journal of Economic Theory, 121, 145–166.
7
Ivashina, V. (2009): “Asymmetric information effects on loan spreads,” Journal of Financial Economics, 92,
300–319. 24
Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2015): “Shopping externalities and self-fulfilling unemployment fluctuations,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming. 6
Kim, K. (2012): “Endogenous market segmentation for lemons,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 43,
562–576. 6
Lagos, R. and G. Rocheteau (2009): “Liquidity in Asset Markets with Search Frictions,” Econometrica,
77, 403–426. 2
Lester, B., L. Visschers, and R. Wolthoff (2015a): “Meeting technologies and optimal trading mechanisms in competitive search markets,” Journal of Economic Theory, 155, 1–15. 38
Lester, B. R., A. Shourideh, V. Venkateswaran, and A. Zetlin-Jones (2015b): “Screening and Adverse
Selection in Frictional Markets,” NBER Working Paper Series. 32
Luz, V. F. (2014): “Characterization and Uniqueness of Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance,” . 17
Mahoney, N. and E. G. Weyl (2014): “Imperfect Competition in Selection Markets,” Tech. Rep. 20411,
National Bureau of Economic Research. 7
Martimort, D. and L. Stole (2002): “The revelation and delegation principles in common agency
games,” Econometrica, 70, 1659–1673. 9, 83
McFadden, D. i. P. e. (1974): “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” Frontiers in
Econometrics, 105–142. 42
Michelacci, C. and J. Suarez (2006): “Incomplete Wage Posting,” Journal of Political Economy, 114,
1098–1123. 6
Moreno, D. A. and J. Wooders (2010): “Decentralized Trade Mitigates the Lemons Problem,” International Economic Review, 51, 383–399. 7
Myerson, R. B. (1985a): “Incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica, 47, 61–74.
10
Myerson, R. i. A. R. e. (1985b): “Analysis of two bargaining problems with incomplete information,”
Game Theoretic Models of Bargaining, 59–69. 93
Peters, M. (2001): “Common agency and the revelation principle,” Econometrica, 69, 1349–1372. 9
48

Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1994): “The benefits of lending relationships: Evidence from small
business data,” The Journal of Finance, 49, 3–37. 2
Rosenthal, R. W. and A. M. Weiss (1984): “Mixed Strategy Equilibrium in a Market with Asymmetric
Information,” Review of Economic Studies, 51, 333–342. 16, 17
Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz (1976): “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on
the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 630–649. 3, 6, 11, 16, 31,
38
Samuelson, W. (1984): “Bargaining under Asymmetric Information,” Econometrica, 52, 995–1005. 93
Scharfstein, D. S. and A. Sunderam (2013): “Concentration in Mortgage Lending, Refinancing Activity
and Mortgage Rates,” Tech. Rep. 19156, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper. 2
Shimer, R. (2005): “The Assignment of Workers to Jobs in an Economy with Coordination Frictions,”
Journal of Political Economy, 113, 996–1025. 37
Sorensen, A. T. (2000): “Equilibrium price dispersion in retail markets for prescription drugs,” Journal
of Political Economy, 108, 833–850. 6
Stiglitz, J. E. (1977): “Monopoly, non-linear pricing and imperfect information: the insurance market,”
The Review of Economic Studies, 44, 407–430. 3
the U.S. Treasury (2010): “The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act is Good
for America’s Small Businesses,” https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/Documents. 26
Tirole, J. (2012): “Overcoming Adverse Selection: How Public Intervention Can Restore Market Functioning,” American Economic Review, 102, 29–59. 32
Townsend, R. M. and V. V. Zhorin (2014): “Spatial competition among financial service providers and
optimal contract design,” . 7
Uhlig, H. (1996): “A law of large numbers for large economies,” Economic Theory, 8, 41–50. 71
Varian, H. R. (1980): “A Model of Sales,” American Economic Review, 70, 651–659. 6
Veiga, A. and E. G. Weyl (2012): “Multidimensional product design,” University of Chicago mimeo. 7
Villas-Boas, J. M. and U. Schmidt-Mohr (1999): “Oligopoly with asymmetric information: differentiation in credit markets,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 30, 375–396. 7

49

Appendices
A Omitted Proofs
A.1 Proofs from Section 3
A.2 Proofs from Section 4
A.3 Proofs from Section 5
A.4 Proofs from Section 6
A.5 Proofs from Section 7
A.6 Proofs from Section 8

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

51
51
54
66
74
76
79

B General Trading Mechanisms

83

C Masspoint Equilibria: The Case of φl = 0

85

D The Model with Many Types
D.1 Environment and Construction of Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.2 Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

86
86
90

50

A

Omitted Proofs

This section contains proofs of the results presented in the main text.

A.1
A.1.1

Proofs from Section 3
Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. Both results are similar to existing results (see, for example, Dasgupta and Maskin (1986)), and
thus we keep the exposition brief. To establish that xl = 1 in all equilibrium menus, suppose by way
of contradiction that some equilibrium menu z = (zl , zh ) has xl < 1 and tl ∈ R+ , yielding a lowquality seller utility ul . Now, consider a deviation z0 = (z0l , zh ) with x0l = xl +  for  ∈ (0, 1 − xl ] and
t0l = tl + cl . Note that u0l = ul , so that zl and z0l are accepted with the same probability, but
xl vl − tl < xl vl − tl + (vl − cl ) = x0l vl − t0l ,
so that z0l earns the buyer a higher payoff when it is accepted, implying existence of a profitable deviation.
Therefore, no equilibrium menu features xl < 1.
To establish that a low-quality seller’s incentive compatibility constraint binds in all equilibrium
menus, suppose by way of contradiction that some equilibrium menu z = (zl , zh ) has tl > th +
cl (1 − xh ). Now,i consider a deviation z0 = (zl , z0h ) with x0h = xh +  and t0h = th + ch for  ∈
l (1−xh )
0, tl −thc−c
, which is a nonempty interval by assumption. The upper bound on  ensures that
h −cl

the incentive compatibility constraint on type l sellers is not violated. In addition, note that u0h = uh , so
that zh and z0h are accepted with the same probability, but
xh vh − th < xh vh − th + (vh − ch ) = x0h vh − t0h ,

so that z0h earns the buyer a higher payoff when it is accepted, implying existence of a profitable deviation. Therefore, in all equilibrium menus, the type l seller’s incentive constraint binds.

A.1.2

Proof of Proposition 1 and Lemma 2

We prove the proposition through the following sequence of lemmas.
Lemma 7. Fh (·) has no flats.
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that Fh (·) is flat in an interval (uh1 , uh2 ). In other words,
there exists (ul2 , uh2 ) ∈ Supp (Fl ) × Supp (Fh ) such that, for some ε̄ > 0, the distribution Fh satisfies
Fh (uh2 ) = Fh (uh2 − ε) for all  ∈ [0, ε̄]. We prove that there must exist a profitable deviation. The
particular deviation we construct depends on whether ul2 < uh2 or ul2 = uh2 and whether Fl is flat on
an interval containing ul2 or not. We consider each relevant case in turn:
1. Suppose that ul2 < uh2 . In this case, a deviation to (ul2 , uh2 − ε0 ) with ε0 < ε is feasible and must
be profitable because such a deviation increases profits earned from trading with h types but does
not change the fraction of h types attracted.
2. Suppose that ul2 = uh2 and Fl is flat below ul2 . In this case, a deviation of the form (ul2 − ε0 , uh2 − ε0 )
for a small but positive ε0 is profitable since it increases profits per trade (from both l and h type
sellers) but does not change the fraction of either type attracted.
3. Suppose ul2 = uh2 and Fl is not flat below ul2 . Such a situation is depicted in Figure 6. Point
A represents the contract (ul2 , uh2 ). Since Fh is flat by assumption, the area between the two red
dashed lines must not contain any equilibrium menu. Since Fl is not flat below ul2 by assumption
51

and there are no menus in the area between the red dashed lines, an equilibrium contract must
exist in the region where the point D is located; recall, since uh > ul , the point D cannot lie
below the lower red dashed line. Let point D represent such an equilibrium menu. In addition,
let B represent a menu with the same offer to the low type as D but offers uh2 to the high type.
Similarly, let C represent a menu with the same offer to the low type as A and the same offer to
the high type as D.
For any distributions, Fl and Fh , the profit function, Π(ul , uh ) is weakly supermodular so that
ΠA + ΠD 6 Π C + Π B .
Since both D and A are offered in equilibrium, we must have that ΠA = ΠD > ΠC , ΠB . This implies
that ΠA = ΠB . Additionally, since Fh is flat between B and E (and these menus offer the same ul ),
it must be that ΠE > ΠB . Therefore, this is a profitable deviation.


uh
b

b

D

uh2

C
b

b

B

A

b

E

uh1
45◦

ul

Figure 6: A graphical illustration of why Fh cannot be flat.

Lemma 8. Fl (·) has no flats.
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that Fl is flat in an interval (ul1 , ul2 ). Without loss of generality,
we can complete the measure Φ to include menus with first element given by ul1 and ul2 . Since the
profit function is weakly supermodular, then the policy correspondence must be weakly increasing. Now
consider the policy correspondences Uh (ul1 ) and Uh (ul2 ). Note that Cl (Uh (ul1 )) and Cl (Uh (ul2 ))
cannot be disjoint—if they were, then there would be a flat in the support of Fh , which contradicts
Lemma 7. Let ûh be a common value in the two sets. We present a depiction of such a situation in
Figure 7 below.
Holding ûh fixed, the profit function must be linear over the set (ul1 , ul2 ) since Fl (·) is flat by
assumption. Therefore, all the menus on the line AB must also deliver profits equal to equilibrium
profits. However, since profits earned from trading with h types are increasing in ul , the marginal
benefit of a change in uh is changing along the line AB. As a result, it is possible to construct an upward
or downward deviation along AB that increases profits, implying existence of a profitable deviation. 
Lemma 9. Φ has no mass point.

52

uh
ûh

A

b

b

B

b

45◦

ul1

ul2

ul

Figure 7: A graphical illustration of why Fl cannot be flat.

Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that Φ has a mass point at the menu (ul , uh ). Let m denote
the mass at this menu. Since for any such menu, a deviation of the form (ul + ε1 , uh + ε2 ) for small ε1 , ε2
(one of which is positive or negative) must be feasible, profits earned from the mass of sellers attracted
to such deviation must be zero:
µl π

m
m
Πl (ul ) + µh π Πh (ul , uh ) = 0.
2
2

If the menu (ul , uh ) is interior to the constraint set—that is, if ch − cl > uh − ul > 0—then a simple
deviation along ul or uh will be feasible and profitable. However, it is possible that (ul , uh ) is on the
boundary of the set and, as a result, not all deviations are feasible. There are two relevant possibilities:
1. Suppose that the menu with mass, (ul , uh ), satisfies uh = ul + ch − cl . In such a case, the menu
features no trade with the high type. Therefore, it must be that Πh 6 0. Since equilibrium profits
are strictly positive, it must be that Πl > 0 . Hence, an infinitesimal increase in ul , which is feasible,
increases profits.
2. Suppose that the menu with mass, (ul , uh ) satisfies uh = ul . Then (ul , uh ) is a pooling menu.
Therefore, the profits from the high type must be positive. As a result, the buyer offering this
contract could increase profits with an infinitesimal increase in uh (which would attract a mass of
high types), while holding ul constant.

Lemma 10. Fh (·) does not have a mass point.
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that Fh has a mass point. From Lemma 9, we know that this
mass point could not have been created from a mass point in Φ. Therefore, if Fh has a mass point at ûh ,
it must be that a positive measure set of the form {(ul , ûh )} exists. Figure 8, depicts this possibility.
Note that at one of the points on the line, profits from the h type, Πh (ul , ûh ) must be non-zero since
Πh is strictly increasing in ul . Therefore, a small deviation upward or downward increases profits; this
implies existence of a profitable deviation and yields the necessary contradiction.

To show that Fl has no mass points, we make use of the strict supermodularity of the profit function,
which only relies on the continuity of Fh . We therefore provide a proof of the strict supermodularity of
the profit function here.
53

uh
ûh
b

b

b

45◦

b

b

b

ul

Figure 8: A graphical illustration of why Fh cannot have a mass point.

Proof of Lemma 2.
0,

Suppose ul2 > ul1 and uh2 > uh1 . Then, letting ξ1 ≡

vh −ch
ch −cl

> 0 and ξ2 ≡

vh −cl
ch −cl

>

Π (ul1 , uh2 ) − Π (ul1 , uh1 )
= µh {[1 − π + πFh (uh2 )]Πh (ul1 , uh2 ) − [1 − π + πFh (uh1 )]Πh (ul1 , uh1 )}
= µh {[1 − π + πFh (uh2 )] [vh + ξ1 ul1 − ξ2 uh2 ] − [1 − π + πFh (uh1 )] [vh + ξ1 ul1 − ξ2 uh1 ]}
< µh {[1 − π + πFh (uh2 )] [vh + ξ1 ul2 − ξ2 uh2 ] − [1 − π + πFh (uh1 )] [vh + ξ1 ul2 − ξ2 uh1 ]}
= Π (ul2 , uh2 ) − Π (ul2 , uh1 ) ,
where the inequality follows from the fact that Fh is strictly increasing, and hence
πξ1 (ul2 − ul1 )[Fh (uh2 ) − Fh (uh1 )] > 0.

Lemma 11. Fl is continuous except possibly at vl .
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that Fl is not continuous and thus has a mass point at some
ûl . Again, by Lemma 9, it must be that a positive measure set of the form S = {(ûl , uh )} exists. It is
immediate that Πl (ûl ) = 0; otherwise, it would be profitable to increase or decrease ul by ε if Πl (ûl ) > 0
or Πl (ûl ) < 0, respectively. If Πl (ûl ) = 0, then it must be ûl = vl .


A.2
A.2.1

Proofs from Section 4
Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. We first show that the equilibrium allocations constructed in (21) and (22) are indeed separating
and interior. Our construction ensures that local deviations are not profitable. Below we prove that the
global deviations are not profitable as well.
Verifying Allocations are Separating and Interior. Note that the solution to the differential equation in
(22), together with boundary condition Fl (cl ) = 0, must satisfy
1 − π + πFl (ul ) = (1 − π) (vl − cl )φl (vl − ul )−φl .
54

(48)

Therefore, from (22), Uh (ul ) must satisfy
Uh (ul ) =

1
−cl
µh vchh −c
l

h
i
µh vh + µl vl − µl φl ul − µl (vl − cl )1−φl (vl − ul )φl .

For the allocation to be separating, we must verify that
ul + ch − cl > Uh (ul ) > ul , ∀ul ∈ Supp (Fl )
where

(49)

i
h
1
Supp (Fl ) = cl , vl − (1 − π) φl (vl − cl ) .

The second inequality in (49), Uh (ul ) > ul , is satisfied if and only if
µh vh + µl vl > µl (vl − cl )1−φl (vl − ul )φl + ul

(50)

for all ul ∈ Supp(Fl ). Let H(ul ) denote the right-hand side of (50). We argue that H(·) is strictly concave
and attains its maximum at a value u∗l ∈ [cl , vl ] with H(u∗l ) < µh vh + µl vl , implying that (50) is satisfied
for all ul ∈ Supp(Fl ). To see this, note that
H0 (ul ) = −φl µl (vl − cl )1−φl (vl − ul )φl −1 + 1
00

H (ul ) = φl (φl − 1)µl (vl − cl )

1−φl

(vl − ul )

φl −2

(51)
< 0,

(52)

where the inequality in (52) is implied by the fact that 0 < φl < 1. Also, since φl < 1, H0 (vl ) = −∞ and
H0 (cl ) = 1 − φl µl > 0, so that the maximum of H(ul ) is attained on the interior of [cl , vl ].
The function H(ul ) is maximized at u∗l given by
1

u∗l = vl − (φl µl ) 1−φl (vl − cl )
with
H(u∗l )

1
1−φl

= vl + (vl − cl ) µl

φl
1−φl

φl

[1 − φl ] .

Since ch > vl and φl < 1, it is immediate that
φl

(φl µl ) 1−φl < 1 6

(ch − cl ) (vh − vl )
,
(vl − cl ) (vh − ch )

which implies
φl

(vl − cl ) µl (φl µl ) 1−φl
Hence,

µ h v h − ch
< µh (vh − vl ) .
µ l ch − cl

φl

(vl − cl ) µl (φl µl ) 1−φl (1 − φl ) < µh (vh − vl )
and
max

φl

ul ∈[cl ,vl ]

H (ul ) = H(u∗l ) = vl + (vl − cl ) µl (φl µl ) 1−φl (1 − φl ) < µh (vh − vl ) + vl

as needed.
We now establish that the first inequality in (49) is true, which requires showing that
µh vh + µl vl − µl φl ul − µl (vl − cl )1−φl (vl − ul )φl
6 ul + ch − cl ,
−cl
µh vchh −c
l

55

or, equivalently,
µh cl + µl vl 6 ul + µl (vl − cl )1−φl (vl − ul )φl , ∀ul ∈ Supp (Fl ) ⊂ [cl , vl ] .

(53)

Since, the right side of (53) is a concave function, it takes its minimum values at the extremes of the
interval [vl , cl ]. These values are given by vl and µl vl + µh cl , both of which are at least as large as the
left side of (53). Hence, (53) must be satisfied for all ul ∈ [vl , cl ], as needed.
Global Deviations. Note that our conditions (21) and (22) imply that local
deviations
with respect to uh


and ul are not profitable. It, thus, remains to show that, for all u0l , u0h , Π u0l , u0h 6 µl (1 − π) (vl − cl ).
We consider two types of deviations:
1. Consider first deviation menuswith u0h > max Supp (Fh ) = ūh . Such deviations attract all type h
sellers, so that 1 − π + πFh u0h = 1. If u0l > max Supp (Fl ) = ūl , then the profits from this menu
are given by


µl vl − u0l + µh Πh u0l , u0h .
Since φl > 0, the above function is decreasing in u0l and u0h , and therefore


µl vl − u0l + µh Πh u0l , u0h < µl (vl − ūl ) + µh Πh (ūl , ūh ) = µl (1 − π) (vl − cl ) .

When u0l 6 ūl , the partial derivative of Π u0l , u0h with respect to u0l is
− µl 1 − π + πFl u0l




v h − ch
>
vl − u0l + µh
ch − cl



 vh − ch
u0l + µl πfl u0l vl − u0l + µh 1 − π + πFl u0l
= 0.
ch − cl

+ µl πfl u0l

−µl 1 − π + πFl



Thus, for a given value of u0h , we must have


Π u0l , u0h 6 Π ūl , u0h < Π (ūl , ūh ) = µl (1 − π) (vl − cl )
where the last inequality follows from the fact that Πh is decreasing in uh0 . Thus, such global
deviations are unprofitable.
2. Consider next deviations with u0h ∈ [ch , ūh ]. In this case, there must exist ũl such that u0h =
Uh (ũl ) and thus Fh u0h = Fl (ũl ). We can thus write the profits obtained from the deviation
menu (ul0 , uh0 ) as



µl 1 − π + πFl u0l
vl − u0l + µh (1 − π + πFl (ũl )) Πh u0l , u0h .
(54)
We show that the function defined by (54) is strictly concave in ul0 for values of u0l ∈ Supp (Fl )
and decreasing for values of u0l > ūl so that this function is maximized at the value of ul0 , which
equates its partial derivative with zero. By (21), this partial derivative is zero when evaluated at
ul0 = u˜l , which completes the proof.
Note that for u0l ∈ Supp (Fl ), since Πh is linear in u0l , the second derivative of (54) with respect to
u0l is given by


∂2
0
0
µ
1
−
π
+
πF
u
v
−
u
.

l
l
l
l
l
2
∂ u0l

56

Using the form of the distribution Fl given by (48), we may rewrite this second derivative as
∂2

0
 µl 1 − π + πFl ul
0 2



∂ ul

vl − u0l



∂2

 µl (1 − π) (vl − cl )
0 2

=

∂ ul

φl

vl − u0l

1−φl

= (φl − 1) φl µl (1 − π) (vl − cl )φl vl − u0l

−1−φl

<0


so that (54) is strictly concave in u0l for values of u0l ∈ Supp (Fl ). For values u0l > ūl , 1 − π + πFl u0l = 1
and thus (54) satisfies


µl vl − u0l + µh (1 − π + πFl (ũl )) Πh u0l , u0h .
The derivative of this function with respect to u0l is given by
−µl + µh (1 − π + πFl (ũl ))

v h − ch
v h − ch
< −µl + µh
= −µl φl < 0.
ch − cl
ch − cl

Therefore, (54) is maximized at a value of u0l , which equates the partial derivative of (54) with zero.
This value must satisfy
−µl 1 − π + πFl u0l



+ µl πfl u0l




vh − ch
= 0.
vl − u0l + µh (1 − π + πFl (ũl ))
ch − cl

Note that since (54) is strictly concave, at most one u0l exists that satisfies the above. The differential
equation (21) implies that u0l = ũl is a solution to the above equation. This implies that (54) must
be maximized at u0l = ũl .
A.2.2

Proofs of Propositions 3 and 4

We prove these propositions together. To begin, let φ1 be the value of φl that satisfies
ch > vl +

π(1 − µl ) (vh − vl )


1−φl
φl
(1 − π) (1 − π)
−1

(55)

with equality. Similarly, let φ2 be the value of φl that satisfies
1−π >

µh vh + µl vl − vl
(1 − φl )(µh vh + µl vl − ch )

(56)

with equality. We first argue that (55) represents a lower bound on φl and (56) represents an upper
bound on φl which lies below the lower bound defined by (55). In other words, the inequalities (55) and
(56) partition the set (−∞, 0]. We then prove that the equilibrium described in Proposition 4 exists—that
is, in each case, no profitable local or global deviations exist when buyers use the equilibrium strategies
defined jointly by Propositions 3 and 4.
Lemma 12. (55) is satisfied if and only if φ1 6 φl < 0 and (56) is satisfied if and only if φl 6 φ2 . Moreover,
φ2 < φ1 < 0.
Proof.

First, note that equation (55), which implicitly determines the threshold φ1 , can be rewritten as
(1 − π)

1−φl
φl

>

π vh − vl
µh + 1,
1 − π ch − v l

57

(57)

or, after taking logs and substituting for φl , can be rewritten as
µh (vh − ch )
log (1 − π) − log(µh π (vh − vl ) + (1 − π) (ch − vl )) − log [(1 − π) (ch − vl )] > 0.
ch − cl − µh (vh − cl )
(58)
We show that the left side of (58) is a decreasing function of µh , that (58) is strictly satisfied when µh is
such that φl = 0, and that (58) is weakly violated when µh = 1. Hence, there is a unique threshold µ1
(and implied threshold φ1 ) such that for all µh 6 µ1 such that φl < 0, the separating condition (55) is
satisfied. Differentiating the left side of (58) with respect to µh , we obtain
log (1 − π)

(vh − ch ) (ch − cl )
[ch − cl − µh (vh − cl )]

2

−

π (vh − vl )
,
µh π (vh − vl ) + (1 − π) (ch − vl )

which is negative for all π 6 1. Next, as φl → 0 from below, it is immediate that (57) is satisfied since
the left-hand side tends to infinity. As µh → 1, the term (1 − φl ) /φl → −1 and so (57) tends to the
requirement that
vh − vl
1>π
+ (1 − π),
ch − v l
which is violated since ch < vh .
Next, consider equation (56), which implicitly determines the threshold φ2 . Substituting for φl , one
can show the inequality (56) is equivalent to


v h − ch
v h − ch
µh (vh − vl ) 1 + (1 − π)
> vh − vl + (ch − vl ) (1 − π)
.
(59)
ch − cl
ch − cl
Clearly, (59) represents a lower bound on µh , or, equivalently, an upper bound on φl . Note that this
equation is necessarily satisfied at µh = 1. It is immediate that when µh is such that φl = 0, equation
(56) is violated since ch > vl .
We now establish that φ2 < φ1 by proving that φl 6 φ2 implies φl < φ1 . Suppose φl 6 φ2 and let
v̄ = µh vh + µl vl , so that we can write (56) as
1−π >

v̄ − vl
.
(1 − φl ) (v̄ − ch )

(60)

Below, we will use the fact that (60) implies
1 − φl >

v̄ − vl
v̄ − vl
>
(v̄ − ch ) (1 − π)
v̄ − ch

⇒

−φl >

ch − v l
.
v̄ − ch

To prove that (55) is violated when φl 6 φ2 , note that (55) can be rearranged as


1−φl
(1 − π) (1 − π) φl − 1 (ch − vl ) − πµh (vh − vl ) > 0
which can be simplified to
1

(1 − π) (v̄ − ch ) + (1 − π) φl (ch − vl ) > v̄ − vl .

(61)

We will show that (61) is violated if (60) holds. Towardsthis end, define a function
1

H(π) = (1 − π) (v̄ − ch ) + (1 − π) φl (ch − vl )
so that we must show H(π) < v̄ − vl . We argue that H(·) is a strictly convex function which is decreasing

58

at π = 0 and that, if π satisfies (60), then H(π) < H(0) = v̄ − vl , which completes the proof.
First, note that H(·) is strictly convex since φl < 0 and
1
1
−1
(1 − π) φl (ch − vl ) ,
H0 (π) = − (v̄ − ch ) −
φl


1
1
1
−2
00
H (π) =
− 1 (1 − π) φl (ch − vl ) > 0.
φl φl

Next, observe that H(0) = v̄ − vl , H0 (0) 6 0 when −φl > (ch − vl ) / (v̄ − ch ) and limπ→1 H(π) = ∞.
Thus, there is a unique value πs > 0 such that for all π < πs , H(π) 6 v̄ − vl .
Next, let π̂ denote the value of π such that (60) is satisfied with equality. We will prove that H(π̂) <
v̄ − vl , so that H(π) < v̄ − vl for all π 6 π̂.
Using the expression for H(π), we have
v̄ − vl
(v̄ − ch ) +
H (π̂) =
(1 − φl ) (v̄ − ch )



v̄ − vl
(1 − φl ) (v̄ − ch )

 φ1

l

(ch − vl ) .

(62)

Straightforward algebra can be applied to (62) to show that H(π̂) < v̄ − vl if and only if


ch − v l
v̄ − ch

φl 

v̄ − vl
v̄ − ch

1−φl

> (−φl )φl (1 − φl )1−φl .

(63)

Since (v̄ − vl ) / (v̄ − ch ) = 1 + (ch − vl ) / (v̄ − ch ), if we let B(x) = xφl (1 + x)1−φl , then (63) can be written
as the requirement that


ch − v l
B
> B (−φl ) .
v̄ − ch
It is straightforward to show that B 0 (x) < 0 when 0 < x < −φl , and since (60) implies −φl >
(ch − vl ) / (v̄ − ch ), (63) must hold. Consequently, H(π) < H(π̂) < v̄ − vl , which proves that φ1 > φ2 .
Definition of the Threshold, ûl . To prove Propositions 3 and 4, we first define the threshold ûl for
various values of φl < 0.
Case 1: φl 6 φ2 . The threshold satisfies ûl = ūl , the upper bound of Fl , where ūl satisfies
v̄ − ūl = (1 − π)(v̄ − ch ).

(64)

Case 2: φ2 < φl < φ1 . The threshold satisfies
1

vl + (ûl − vl ) [1 − π + πFl (ûl )] φl = v̄ − (1 − π)(v̄ − ch )

(65)

where Fl (ûl ) satisfies (23). As we will see below, in this case, the threshold will be such that Fl (ûl ) ∈
(0, 1) so that the equilibrium is indeed mixed.
Case 3: φ1 < φl < 0. The threshold is any value such that ûl < ul where the lower bound of the
support of Fl satisfies
h
i
1
(1 − π) [µl (vl − ul ) + µh Πh (ul , ch )] = v̄ − vl + (1 − π) φl (ul − vl ) .
(66)
This equation determines the lower bound as the value that equates profits from the worst (separating)
menu and the best (pooling) menu where the best menu is determined as the value of ul such that
Fl (ul ) = 1 when Fl is determined by (21).
We now prove that the conjectured equilibria defined implicitly by the thresholds above, in each case,
are indeed equilibria.
59

Lemma 13. Suppose φ1 6 φl < 0. There exists an equilibrium with only separating menus.
Proof. It suffices to ensure that global deviations are unprofitable for buyers since, by construction,
the distribution Fl (ul ) ensures no local deviations are profitable. To rule out global deviations, a proof
similar to that of Proposition 2 can be used. We show that for a given value of u0h , the profit function
u0h , since at this value the
is strictly concave in u0l and, therefore, it must be maximized at u0l = U−1
h
derivative of the profit function is equal to zero (by construction).
Profits from such a global deviation are given by




µl 1 − π + πFl u0l
vl − u0l + µh 1 − π + πFh u0h Πh u0l , u0h .
Since Πh is linear in u0l , the second derivative of the above function is equal to the second derivative
−φl

for some
of profits from l type sellers. Using (21), we know that 1 − π + πFl u0l = κ u0l − vl
non-negative constant κ. Therefore, we have
∂2

0
 µl 1 − π + πFl ul
0 2

∂ ul



vl − u0l



= −µl κ

∂2

0
 u l − vl
0 2

1−φl

∂ ul

= −µl κ (1 − φl ) (−φl ) u0l − vl

−1−φl

< 0.

Lemma 14. Suppose φl 6 φ2 . There exists an equilibrium with only pooling menus.
Proof. We first prove that no local deviations in the pooling equilibrium strictly improve profits. Below
we demonstrate global deviations are also unprofitable. Recall that in an equilibrium with only pooling
menus, the distribution Fl (ul ) satisfies
(1 − π + πFl (ul )) (v̄ − ul ) = (1 − π) (v̄ − ch )

(67)

where v̄ = µh vh + µl vl , Uh (ul ) = ul , Fh (ul ) = Fl (ul ), and Supp(Fl ) = [ch , v̄ − (1 − π) (v̄ − ch )] . Fix any
utility, ul , interior to the support of Fl and consider a local deviation to the menu (ul0 , uh0 ) = (ul , ul + ε).
Profits from such a local deviation satisfy
µl (1 − π + πFl (ul )) (vl − ul ) + µh (1 − π + πFl (ul + ε)) Πh (ul , ul + ε)


vh − cl
.
= µl (1 − π + πFl (ul )) (vl − ul ) + µh (1 − π + πFl (ul + ε)) vh − ul − ε
ch − cl
If local deviations are unprofitable, this function must be maximized at ε = 0, so that Fl must satisfy
µh πfl (ul ) [vh − ul ] − µh (1 − π + πFl (ul ))

vh − cl
6 0.
ch − cl

Totally differentiating (67) yields the following relationship between Fl and fl ,
πfl (ul ) (v̄ − ul ) = (1 − π + πFl (ul ))

(68)

so that local deviations are unprofitable if
µh πfl (ul ) [vh − ul ] − µh πfl (ul ) (v̄ − ul )

v h − cl
6 0.
ch − cl

Since Fl is continuous in our constructed equilibrium, we may simplify this condition using straightforward algebra as
ul (vh − ch ) 6 v̄ (vh − cl ) − vh (ch − cl ) .
60

Consequently, we see that it suffices to check that this deviation is unprofitable at max Supp(Fl ). Using
ul = v̄ − (1 − π) (v̄ − ch ) , simple algebraic manipulations show that this local deviation is unprofitable
as long as
v̄ − vl
6 1 − π,
(69)
(1 − φl ) (v̄ − ch )
which is guaranteed by Lemma 12 since φl 6 φ2 .
To rule out global deviations, we show that for any value of u0h ∈ Supp (Fl ), the profit function in
increasing in ul0 for all ul0 6 uh0 . Thus, profits are maximized at the pooling menu u0l = u0h so that there
are no profitable deviations.
Profits associated with any global deviation (ul0 , uh0 ) with ul0 6 uh0 and uh0 ∈ Supp(Fl ) are given by




µl 1 − π + πFl (u0l ) vl − u0l + µh 1 − π + πFl u0h Πh u0l , u0h .
Differentiating, we obtain


 vh − ch
vl − u0l − µl 1 − π + πFl (u0l ) + µh 1 − π + πFl u0h
>
ch − cl



 vh − ch
=
u0l vl − u0l − µl 1 − π + πFl (u0l ) + µh 1 − π + πFl u0l
ch − cl



u0l vl − u0l − µl φl 1 − π + πFl (u0l )

µl πfl u0l
µl πfl
µl πfl



(70)

where the inequality follows from the fact that ul0 6 uh0 so that Fl (uh0 ) > Fl (ul0 ). Using (68) to substitute
for πfl (ul0 ), we can write the last line of (70) as


vl − v̄
0
− φl .
µl (1 − π + πFl (ul )) 1 +
v̄ − u0l
Since u0l 6 u0h 6 max Supp (Fl ), the expression in brackets takes its minimum value at u0l = max Supp (Fl )
so that
vl − v̄
vl − v̄
− φl > 1 +
− φl > 0
1+
0
v̄ − ul
(1 − π) (v̄ − ch )
where the second inequality follows from (69). This implies that the expression in (70) is positive so that
profits are globally maximized at ul0 = uh0 for all uh0 ∈ Supp(Fl ).

Lemma 15. Suppose φ2 < φl < φ1 . There exists a mixed equilibrium.
Proof. Recall that the threshold ûl is such that the constructed equilibrium features pooling contracts
for ul ∈ [min Supp(Fl ), ûl ] and separating menus for ul ∈ (ûl , max Supp(Fl )). First, we claim that when
φ2 < φl < φ1 , then ûl is interior in the sense that ch < ûl < ū(ûl ). Second, we prove that no local or
global deviations are profitable.
To see that ûl is interior, conjecture that ûl > ch (we will verify it later), in which case ûl must
satisfy51

1 

v̄ − ch φl
− (1 − π) (v̄ − ch ) = 0.
(71)
v̄ − vl + (ûl − vl ) (1 − π)
v̄ − ûl
Let H(ûl ) denote the left-hand side of (71). We will prove that when φ2 < φl < φ1 , there are two
solutions to H(ûl ) = 0 with ûl > ch .
First, observe that one solution to H (ûl ) = 0 is given by
ûl = ū = v̄ − (1 − π) (v̄ − ch ) .
51 Recall

that equilibrium profits satisfy Π̄ = (1 − π)(v̄ − ch ) when the worst menu offered in equilibrium is the pooling,
monopsony menu.

61

This solution coincides with the conjecture that all menus are pooling and therefore ū (ûl ) = ûl .
We argue that there exists another solution ûl ∈ (ch , ū). We show this by proving that H(·) is convex,
H(ch ) > 0, and H 0 (ū) > 0 so that an additional solution in the interval (ch , ū) must exist.
Note that


v̄ − ch
H (u) = − (1 − π)
v̄ − u
0

 φ1

l


1
v̄ − ch φl −1
1
(1 − π)
(1 − π) (v̄ − ch ) (v̄ − u)−2 .
− (u − vl )
φl
v̄ − u

By differentiating H 0 (·) and applying extensive algebraic manipulations (available upon request), one
can show that H 00 (·) > 0. Recall that ū is defined so that H(ū) = 0 and


1 − φl
v̄ − vl
1 ū − vl
0
0
H (ū) = −1 −
= H (ū) =
1−
(1 − π) (1 − φl ) (v̄ − ch )
φl v̄ − ū
φl
where the second equality is obtained by substituting for ū and rearranging terms. When φl > φ2 , the
term in brackets is negative, by Lemma 12, so that H0 (ū) > 0. Finally, one can show that H(ch ) satisfies
"
#
π (v̄ − vl )
1
vl +
− ch .
H (ch ) =
1
1
(1 − π) φl − (1 − π)
(1 − π) φl − (1 − π)
From Lemma 12, since φl < φ1 < 0, the term in brackets is strictly positive, and, since the leading
fraction is also positive, we must have H(ch ) > 0.
Hence, when φ2 < φl < φ1 < 0, there must exist a solution to H(ûl ) = 0 with ûl ∈ (ch , ū). When
ûl < ū, one can show that Fl (ûl ) < 1 when Fl is determined by (23) on the interval [ch , ûl ], which
confirms the conjecture that ûl is the interior of the support of Fl .
We now show that buyers cannot improve their profits by deviating from the constructed mixed
allocation. As in Lemma 13 with only separation, the distribution Fl for ul ∈ [ûl , max Supp(Fl )] is
chosen to ensure local deviations are not profitable. It remains to show, then, that local deviations are
not profitable in the pooling region and that no global deviations are profitable. As in Lemma 14 with
only pooling menus, it suffices to ensure that at the upper bound of the pooling region, ûl , no local
deviations are profitable, or
ûl (vh − ch ) 6 v̄ (vh − cl ) − vh (ch − cl ) .

(72)

To prove that (72) holds, first note that since φ2 < φl < φ1 , we have ch < ûl < ū (ûl ). We now prove
that (72) is satisfied at ûl . Algebra (available upon request) shows that (72) may be written as
ûl 6

−φl
1
v̄ +
vl .
1 − φl
1 − φl



−φl
1
Since H(ûl ) = 0, if H 1−φ
v̄
+
v
1−φl l 6 0 then since H(·) is convex, (72) must be satisfied.
l
Using the form of H(·) implied by the left-hand side of (71), one can show that

H

1
−φl
v̄ +
vl
1 − φl
1 − φl



1

"

−1

1

1

(1 − φl ) φl (1 − π) φl (v̄ − ch ) φl
v̄ − vl − (1 − π) (v̄ − ch )
= (v̄ − vl )
+ φl
1
v̄ − vl
(v̄ − vl ) φl

#
.
(73)

We now show that the term in brackets on the right side of (73) is negative. To simplify notation, define
ξ = (1 − π) (v̄ − ch ) / (v̄ − vl ) so that the term in brackets can be written compactly as
1

1 − ξ + φl (1 − φl ) φl
62

−1

1

ξ φl .

1

Let G(ξ) = 1 − ξ + φl (1 − φl ) φl

−1

1

ξ φl and observe that for ξ 6 1/(1 − φl ), we have
1

G0 (ξ) = −1 + [(1 − φl ) ξ] φl

−1

>0

so that for low values of ξ, G(ξ) is an increasing function.
Since φl > φ2 , (60) implies that ξ < 1/(1 − φl ). Moreover, since G(1/(1 − φl )) = 0, it must be that
G(ξ) 6 G(1/(1 − φl )) 6 0, which ensures the term in brackets in (73) is indeed negative as desired.
To rule out global deviations, one can use the arguments provided in the proofs of Lemmas 13 and
14 in each region of the Supp (Fl ). Since the arguments are exact replicas of the arguments above, we
omit them here.

A.2.3

Proof of Theorem 2

We begin with a lemma which ensures that the marginal distribution Fl is continuous (i.e., it has no
mass points) when φl 6= 0. We then prove uniqueness of the equilibrium first for φl > 0 and then for
φl < 0. (In Appendix C, we demonstrate uniqueness for φl = 0.)
Lemma 16. If φl 6= 0, then Fl is continuous.
Proof. Recall from Lemma 11 that if Fl has a mass point, then it occurs at ûl = vl . As well, from
Lemma 9, there must exist a positive measure set S = {ûl , uh )} such that each equilibrium menu (ûl , uh )
has Πl = 0. Let uh denote the lowest value of uh for which (ûl , uh ) belongs to the closure of the set S
and let ūh denote the highest such value. Without loss of generality, we may assume that (ûl , ūh ) and
(ûl , uh ) belong to S and thus deliver the same profits to a buyer as the equilibrium level of profits.
Consider then the value of two different deviations, (ûl − ε, uh ) and (ûl + ε, ūh ), for a small value of
ε > 0, both of which must be feasible. The profits from these deviations are given by

Π (ûl − ε, uh ) = µh (1 − π + πFh (uh )) Πh (ûl − ε, uh ) + µl (1 − π + πFl (ûl − ε)) ε
Π (ûl + ε, ūh ) = µh (1 − π + πFh (ūh )) Πh (ûl + ε, ūh ) − µl (1 − π + πFl (ûl + ε)) ε.
These equalities are valid because Fh does not have a mass point and Fl does not have a mass point for
ul > vl or ul < vl . Since Fl is then left or right differentiable at ûl , we have that
d
Π (ûl − ε, uh )
dε
d
Π (ûl + ε, ūh )
dε


vh − ch
+ µl 1 − π + πF−
l (ûl )
ch − cl

v h − ch
= µh (1 − π + πFh (ūh ))
− µl 1 − π + πF+
l (ûl ) .
ch − cl

= −µh (1 − π + πFh (uh ))
ε=0

ε=0

The optimality of menus in S implies that the above expressions must both be non-positive. Since the
equilibrium distributions are well-behaved above and below vl , the equilibrium necessarily exhibits the
+
strict rank-preserving property by Theorem 1 and therefore, F−
l (ûl ) = Fh (uh ) and Fl (ûl ) = Fh (ūh ).
As a result, the above inequalities imply that
vh − ch
+ µl 6 0
ch − cl
vh − ch
µh
− µl 6 0.
ch − cl

−µh

When φl 6= 0, one of the above is violated. Hence, a profitable deviation exists yielding the necessary
contradiction.


63

Case 1: φl > 0. As we have shown, any separating equilibrium is uniquely determined. Thus, in
order to show the uniqueness of the equilibrium in this case, it remains to show that any equilibrium
is separating. To see this, suppose to the contrary that ul = uh for some menu offered in equilibrium.
Now, consider the following alternative menu (ul − , uh ) for a small and positive value of . This menu
is feasible and the change in the profits for a small value of  is given by
µl (1 − π + πFl (ul )) − µh (1 − π + πFh (uh )

v h − ch
 − µl πf−
l (ul )(vl − ul )
ch − cl

where f−
l is the left-derivative of Fl at ul ; recall from Appendix A.1.2 that Fl must be differentiable.
Using the definition of φl and strict rank preserving property, we can write the above as
µl φl (1 − π + πFl (ul )) − µl πf−
l (ul )(vl − ul ).
The above expression must be positive: φl > 0, Fl and f−
l (ul ) are weakly positive, and ul > vl since
ul = uh > ch > vl where ch > vl by the lemons assumption. Therefore, this alternative menu is a
profitable deviation which yields the necessary contradiction.
Case 2: φl < 0. To prove the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 4 is unique, we first prove
that in any equilibrium with φl < 0, if ū = max Supp(Fl ), then Uh (ū) = ū so that the best menu in
equilibrium is a pooling menu. Next, we prove that if the equilibrium has a pooling region, the region
begins at the lower bound of the support of Fl or ends at the upper bound of Fl . Additionally, if the
equilibrium features a separating region, this region must end at the upper bound of the support of Fl .
These results imply that any equilibrium must take one of the three forms described in Proposition 4:
only separating, only pooling, or mixed. Finally, we show that the necessary conditions for each type of
equilibrium to exist are mutually exclusive so that at most one type of equilibrium exists for each region
of the parameter space, ensuring our equilibrium is unique for all φl < 0. We prove these results in the
following sequence of lemmas.
Lemma 17. If φl < 0, then the best equilibrium menu is a pooling menu.
Proof. Let ū = max
 Supp(Fl ) and suppose for contradiction that Uh (ū) > ū. Consider a deviation
menu with ul0 ,uh0 = (ū + ε, Uh (ū)). Since Uh (ū) > ū, this menu is incentive compatible and has
Fl (ul0 ) = Fl uh0 = 1. This menu increases the buyer’s profits relative to the menu (ū, Uh (ū)) by the
amount
v h − ch
−µl ε + µh
= −µl φl ε > 0
ch − cl
where the inequality follows from φl < 0. This profitable deviation yields the necessary contradiction
so that we must have Uh (ū) = ū.

Lemma 18. If φl < 0 and an equilibrium features [u1 , u2 ] ⊆ Supp(Fl ) such that Uh (ul ) = ul for ul ∈ [u1 , u2 ],
then either u1 = min Supp(Fl ) or u2 = max Supp(Fl ).
Proof. Suppose towards a contradiction that a pooling interval with u1 > min Supp(Fl ) and u2 <
max Supp(Fl ) exists. Then there must exist intervals sufficiently close to and below u1 and above u2 ,
respectively, in which the equilibrium menus feature separation. Since in these intervals, Uh (ul ) > ul
but Uh (u1 ) = u1 and Uh (u2 ) = u2 , we must have limul %u1 U0h (ul ) 6 1 and limul &u2 U0h (ul ) > 1. In
any region with Uh (ul ) > ul , the distribution Fl must also satisfy
−φl
πfl (ul )
=
1 − π + πFl (ul )
u l − vl

64

since local deviations must be unprofitable. Moreover, in any such region, by the equal profit condition,
Uh must satisfy
v h − cl
v̄ − µl φl ul − µh
Uh (ul ) = Π̄ (1 − π + πFl (ul ))−1
ch − cl
where Π̄ denotes the level of equilibrium profits.
Using these features of the conjectured equilibrium, in the separating regions, U0h (ul ) satisfies
−µl φl − (1 − µl φl ) U0h (ul ) =

Π̄
φl
1 − π + πFl (ul ) ul − vl

and so Uh00 satisfies
− (1 − µl φl ) U00h (ul ) =

Π̄πfl (ul )

φl
−φl
Π̄
,
+
[1 − π + πFl (ul )] ul − vl 1 − π + πFl (ul ) [ul − vl ]2
2

which implies that Uh is concave when φl < 0. However, the existence of the pooling region implies
0−
that U0+
h (u2 ) > 1 > Uh (u1 ), which contradicts the concavity of Uh given that u1 < u2 . Hence, either
u1 = min Supp(Fl ) or u2 = max Supp(Fl ).

Lemma 19. If φl < 0 and an equilibrium features [u1 , u2 ] ⊆ Supp(Fl ) such that Uh (ul ) > ul for ul ∈ (u1 , u2 ),
then u2 = max Supp(Fl ).
Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that an equilibrium features separation (Uh (ul ) > ul ) on an
interval [u1 , u2 ] ⊆ Supp(Fl ) with u2 < max Supp(Fl ). Then there must exist a pooling interval [u2 , ū]
for some ū. Since u2 > min Supp(Fl ), Lemma 18 implies that ū = max Supp (Fl ). Since the conjectured
equilibrium features separation in [u1 , u2 ] with Uh (ul ) → ul as ul → u2 , we must have U0−
h (u2 ) 6 1.
As the conjectured equilibrium satisfies
πfl (ul )
−φl
=
1 − π + πFl (ul )
u l − vl
on the interval [u1 , u2 ], Uh0 (u2 ) 6 1 implies


−φl
1
Π̄
−µl φl +
61
1 − µl φ l
1 − π + πFl (u2 ) u2 − vl
or
−φl Π̄ 6 [1 − π + πFl (u2 )] (u2 − vl ) .
Since u2 < ū, F (u2 ) < 1 so that
− φl Π̄ < u2 − vl .

(74)

Moreover, Lemma 17 ensures that the best equilibrium menu is pooling with utility ū and, therefore,
equilibrium profits satisfy Π̄ = v̄ − ū. Using the fact that u2 < ū, substituting for Π̄ in (74), and
rearranging terms, we obtain
vl − ū
.
(75)
0 < φl −
v̄ − ū
We will show that (75) implies that a cream-skimming deviation must be a profitable deviation from
the best (pooling) menu, yielding the necessary contradiction. Since the conjectured equilibrium features
pooling in the interval [u2 , ū], for ul in this interval, the equilibrium satisfies
(1 − π + πFl (ul ))(v̄ − ul ) = (1 − π)(v̄ − ū)

65

so that
fl (ul ) =

1 − π + πFl (ul )
.
π(v̄ − ul )

(76)

Consider then a cream-skimming deviation of the form (ul0 , uh0 ) = (ū − ε, ū), which yields profits equal
to
(1 − π + πFl (ū − ε))µl (vl − ū + ε) + (1 − π + πFh (ū))µh Πh (ū − ε, ū).
(77)
Differentiating (77) with respect to ε and evaluating it at ε = 0, we obtain
(1 − π + πFl (ū))µl − πfl (ū)µl (vl − ū) − (1 − π + πFh (ū))µh

vh − ch
ch − cl

which, given that Fl (ū) = 1 and fl (ū) = 1/[π(v̄ − ū)], can be written as


vl − ū
µl φ l −
> 0,
v̄ − ū

(78)

where the inequality follows from (75). Hence, this cream-skimming deviation strictly increases the
buyers’ profits relative to the conjectured equilibrium level, a contradiction.

Since the only possible equilibria when φl < 0, then, are fully separating (except at the upper bound
of the support of Fl ), fully pooling, or mixed, we need only prove that only one of these equilibria may
exist for any value of φl . We have already shown in the proof of Proposition 4 that φ2 < φ1 < 0. Recall
that a necessary condition for a fully pooling equilibrium is that φl 6 φ2 . Hence, there is no fully
pooling equilibrium when φl > φ2 . Similarly, a necessary condition for a fully separating equilibrium
is that φl > φ1 so that when φl < φ1 , no fully separating equilibrium exists. This means that in the
interval φ2 < φl < φ1 , the only possible equilibrium is a mixed equilibrium. Moreover, the threshold in
the mixed equilibrium is interior to the support of Fl only if φl lies between φ2 and φ1 . Hence, at most
one of these types of equilibria may exist for any value of φl < 0, proving that the equilibrium described
in Proposition 13 is unique.


A.3
A.3.1

Proofs from Section 5
Proof of Proposition 5

In a slight abuse of notation, we write welfare as a function of p,
W(p, µh ) = (1 − µh )(vl − cl ) + µh [(1 − p)X1 (p) + pX2 (p)]
where

(79)

Z ū(π(p))
Xn (p) = (vh − ch )
cl

xh (ul )(vh − ch )d (Fn
l (ul , π(p))

and
π(p) =

2p
.
1+p

(80)

Several facts follow immediately from our characterization of equilibrium. First, note that X1 (0) =
X2 (0) = 1 when φl < 0, which implies immediately that welfare is (weakly) maximized at p = π(0) = 0
in this region of the parameter space. Second, note that X1 (0) = X2 (0) = 0 when φl > 0, while
Xn (p) > 0 for all p ∈ (0, 1]. Hence, welfare is minimized at p = π(0) = 0 in this region of the parameter
space. To show that welfare is maximized at an interior value of π when φl > 0, we will prove that
limp→1 Wp (p, µh ) < 0.

66

To this end, first note that
1
Wp (p, µh ) = X2 (p) − X1 (p) + pX20 (p) + (1 − p)X10 (p)
µh
In what follows, we will prove a sequence of results:
1. limp→1 X2 (p) − X1 (p) = 0;
2. limp→1 (1 − p)X10 (p) = 0;
3. limp→1 pX20 (p) < 0.
The first result follows immediately from the fact that Fl (ul ) converges to a degenerate distribution at
p = π(1) = 1. To prove the second result, we first integrate X10 (p) by parts:
1
d
(1 − p)X10 (p) = (1 − p)
v h − ch
dp

Z ū(π(p))
xh (ul )d (Fl (ul , π(p))
cl

"
#
Z ūl (π(p))
d
= (1 − p)
xh (ūl (π(p))) −
xh0 (ul )Fl (ul ; π(p))dul
dp
cl
Z ūl (π(p))
dFl (ul ; π(p)) dπ
dul .
= −(1 − p)
xh0 (ul )
dπ
dp
cl

From the definition of F(ul ) in (48), we have
dFl (ul ; π(p))
Fl (ul ; π)
=−
.
dπ
π(1 − π)
Therefore,
(1 − p) dπ(p)
1
(1 − p)X10 (p) =
v h − ch
π(1 − π) dp

Z ū(π(p))
cl

xh0 (ul )Fl (ul ; π)dul .

Using (80), we obtain
1
2
2
(1 − p)X10 (p) =
vh − ch
π(2 − π) (1 + p)2

Z ū(π(p))
cl

xh0 (ul )Fl (ul ; π)dul

"

2
2
=
xh (ū(π(p))) −
π(2 − π) (1 + p)2

Z ū(π(p))

#
xh (ul )dFl (ul ; π) .

cl

Since Fl becomes degenerate as π → 1 and limp→1 π = 1, this final results implies
lim (1 − p)X10 (p) = (vh − ch ) × 2 ×

p→1

This completes the proof of the second claim above.

67

1
× 0 = 0.
2

To prove the third result, we first integrate X20 (p) by parts and differentiate:
1
d
pX20 (p) = p
v h − ch
dp

Z ū(π(p))
xh (ul )d F2l (ul , π(p))

cl



#
Z ūl (π(p))

d
0
2
xh (ūl (π(p))) −
=p
xh (ul ) Fl (ul ; π(p)) dul
dp
cl
Z ūl (π(p))
dF2 (ul ; π(p)) dπ
= −p
xh0 (ul ) l
dul .
dπ
dp
cl
"

Since

dFl (ul ; π(p))
2
d 2
Fl (ul ; π) = 2Fl (ul ; π)
=−
F2 (ul ; π),
dπ
dπ
π(1 − π) l

(81)

we have
1
2p dπ(p)
pX20 (p) =
v h − ch
π(1 − π) dp
=

Z ūl (π(p))
cl

2
2
(2 − π)(1 − π) (1 + p)2

xh0 (ul )F2l (ul ; π(p))dul

Z ūl (π(p))
cl

xh0 (ul )F2l (ul ; π(p))dul

"

2
2
xh (ūl (π(p))) −
=
(2 − π)(1 − π) (1 + p)2

Z ūl (π(p))
cl

xh (ul )d F2l (ul ; π(p))

To prove the result, we will show that
"
#
Z ūl (π)

1
xh (ūl (π)) −
xh (ul )d F2l (ul ; π) < 0.
lim
π→1 1 − π
cl
Define H(π) as

Z ūl (π)
H(π) = xh (ūl (π)) −
cl


xh (ul )d F2l (ul ; π) .

Since limπ→1 H(π) = limπ→1 1 − π = 0, we will apply L’Hopital’s rule:
H(π)
= − lim H 0 (π).
π→1 1 − π
π→1
lim

Next, using integration by parts, we have
Z ūl (π)
H(π) =
cl

xh0 (ul )F2l (ul ; π)dul .

Therefore, using (81), we have
H 0 (π) = xh0 (ūl (π))

dūl
+
dπ

Z ūl (π)
cl

xh0 (ul )

dF2l (ul ; π)
dul
dπ

Z ūl (π)
dūl
2
−
xh0 (ul )F2l (ul ; π)dul
dπ
π(1 − π) cl
dūl 2 H(π)
= xh0 (ūl (π))
−
.
dπ
π (1 − π)
= xh0 (ūl (π))

68

#


.

Therefore,
H(π)
dūl
H(π)
= − lim xh0 (ūl (π))
+ 2 lim
,
π→1 1 − π
π→1
π→1 1 − π
dπ
lim

so that, rearranging the terms, we have
H(π)
dūl
= lim xh0 (ūl (π))
.
π→1 1 − π
π→1
dπ
lim

ūl
We now prove that limπ→1 xh0 (ūl (π)) ddπ
< 0. Using the fact that

xh (ul ) =

1
µh (vh − cl )

we have

(1 − µh ) (vl − cl )1−φ (vl − ul )φ − (1 − µh ) vl + ul − µh cl ,

1

xh0 (ul ) =

µh (vh − cl )


1 − φ(1 − µh )(vl − cl )1−φ (vl − ul )φ−1 .

Next, since ūl (π) satisfies

1 = (1 − π)

v l − cl
vl − ūl (π)

we have

φ
,

1

vl − ūl (π) = (1 − π) φ (vl − cl ),
which implies
1
dūl (π)
1
= (1 − π) φ −1 (vl − cl )
dπ
φ

and
xh0 (ūl (π)) =

1
µh (vh − cl )



φ−1
1 − φ(1 − µh )(1 − π) φ .

Combining these results, we find
"
#
1
φ −1
d
ū
v
−
c
(1
−
π)
l
l
l
xh0 (ūl (π))
=
− (1 − µh )
dπ
µh (vh − cl )
φ
and hence
lim xh0 (ūl (π))

π→1

dūl
(1 − µh )(vl − cl )
=−
< 0.
dπ
µh (vh − cl )


A.3.2

Proof of Proposition 6

Proof. We start with the form of W(p, µh ) given by (79) and express this instead as a function of π.
Tedious, but straightforward calculations can be used to show




(vh − ch )
(vh − ch ) 2(1 − π)
W(π, µh ) = (1 − µh ) (vl − cl ) 1 +
+ µ h ch +
(vl − cl )
(vh − cl ) (2 − π)
(vh − cl )
1−2φ(µh )
(vh − ch ) 2(1 − π)2
φ(µh )
+
(vl − cl )
((1 − π) φ(µh ) − 1).
(vh − cl ) π(2 − π)
1 − 2φ(µh )

69

Then Wµh (π, µh ) satisfies
Wµh (π, µh ) = Θ +

i
1
φ(µh ) h
(vh − ch )(vl − cl ) 2(1 − π)2 d
−2
(1 − π) φ(µh ) − 1
vh − cl
π(2 − π) dµh 1 − 2φ(µh )

where
Θ = ch − (vl − cl ) +

(82)

vh − ch
π
.
(vl − cl )
vh − cl
2−π

We will argue that when π is sufficiently small, then
(83)

lim Wµh (π, µh ) < lim Wµh (π, µh )
µh →µ0

µh →0

where µ0 is the value of µh such that φ(µ0 ) = 0. Inequality (83) implies that the Wµh must be increasing
on an interval of µh 52 ; that is, W must be convex on an interval of µh . In contrast, the above inequality
is reversed when π is sufficiently close to 1.
Let
i
1
d
φ(µh ) h
−1
M(π, µh ) =
(1 − π) φ(µh ) − 1
dµh 1 − 2φ(µh )
and
G(π) = lim M(π, µh ) − lim M(π, µh ).
µh →µ0

µh →0

Since the term multiplying M(π, µh ) in (82) is positive, it suffices to show that G(π) < 0 for π close to 0
and G(π) > 0 for π close to 1. Note that


vh − ch π + log(1 − π)
lim M(π, µh ) = −
µh →0
ch − cl
1−π
and
1

"

(1 − π) φ −2
lim M(π, µh ) = φ 0 (µ0 ) −1 − log(1 − π) lim
µh →µ0
φ→0
φ
As a result,


G(π) = −

v h − ch
ch − cl



π + log(1 − π)
−
1−π

It follows that


lim G(π) = −

π→0

vh − ch
ch − cl





#

v h − ch
ch − cl


=



vh − ch
ch − cl



1
.
(1 − µ0 )2

1
(1 − µ0 )2

1
(1 − µ0 )2

and
lim G(π) = +∞

π→1

which completes the proof.
A.3.3



Proof of Proposition 7

In this section, we examine the efficiency properties of equilibrium outcomes. As in the text, we define
the type of seller i ∈ [0, 1] by θi ∈ Θ, where Θ = {l, h} × {0, 1} × {0, 1}. The first element of θi indicates
whether the seller has a high or low quality good, the second element equals 1 if the seller is matched
with buyer 1 and 0 otherwise, and the third element equals 1 if the seller is matched with buyer 2 and
0 otherwise. We let c : Θ → {cl , ch } denote the valuation a seller of type θ ∈ Θ has for her own good,
52 It

is straightforward to show that Wµh (π, µh ) is continuous.

70

and v : Θ → {vl , vh } denote the buyer’s valuation of a good purchased from a seller with type θ. Let
θ̄ : [0, 1] → Θ denote the mapping from sellers to their respective types with Θ̄ representing the set of all
possible mappings, θ̄.
Each buyer’s type consists of the set of sellers with whom the buyer is matched. We represent the
type of buyer k ∈ B = {1, 2} as a mapping mk (i) : [0, 1] → {0, 1}. Let mk denote the mapping mk (i) and
k.
M denote the set of all possible functions
 m
k
We model the realization of θ̄ and m k∈B as the realization of a random variable that is drawn
from a known distribution.53 This ensures that the beliefs of each buyer and seller about the types of
other buyers and sellers conditional on knowledge of their own type give rise to well defined conditional
expectations, as discussed in Uhlig (1996).

k
k
An allocation is a given by tk
i , xi k∈B,i∈[0,1] where ti ∈ R is a transfer of numeraire from buyer k to

seller i and xk
i ∈ [0, 1] is the amount of good transferred from seller i to buyer k. An allocation is feasible
1 2
k
if for all i and k such that mk (i) = 0, the allocation satisfies tk
i = xi = 0 and for all i, xi xi = 0. The
first constraint ensures that transfers of numeraire and goods only occur between matched buyers and
sellers, while the second constraint ensures that trade is exclusive.
k
2
We consider the class of direct mechanisms given by (tik , xk
i )k∈B,i∈[0,1] where ti : Θ̄ × M → R and
k
2
54
xi : Θ̄ × M → [0, 1].
Constrained Efficiency with Direct Mechanisms. We begin by defining and characterizing incentive
compatible direct mechanisms. A direct mechanism is incentive compatible if and only if, for all sellers i,
"
#
X
1
2
k
1
2
E
[tk
i (θi , θ−i , m , m ) + (1 − xi (θi , θ−i , m , m ))c(θi )]
k∈B

"
>E

X

#
1
2
k
1
2
[tk
i (θ̂i , θ−i , m , m ) + (1 − xi (θ̂i , θ−i , m , m ))c(θi )]

k∈B

and, for each buyer k ∈ B,
Z

k
k
−k
k
k
−k
E
[xi (θ̄, m , m )v(θ̄i ) − ti (θ̄, m , m )]di
i
Z

k
−k
k
k
−k
,
m
)v(
θ̄
)
−
t
,
m
)]di
>E
[xk
(
θ̄,
m̂
(
θ̄,
m̂
i
i
i
i

∀θ̂i ∈ Θ,

∀m̂k ∈ M

where the conditional expectations in (84) and (85) are taken with respect to other agents’ types.
Lastly, a direct mechanism satisfies individual rationality if and only if for all sellers i,
"
#
X
1
2
k
1
2
s
E
[tk
i (θi , θ−i , m , m ) + (1 − xi (θi , θ−i , m , m ))c(θi )] > V (θi )

(84)

(85)

(86)

k∈B

where V s (θi ) denotes the expected value a seller expects to receive in equilibrium, or,

R
tθi,1 (ul ) + c(θi )(1 − xθi,1 (ul )) dFl (ul )
if m1 (i)m2 (i) = 0
s

R
V (θi ) =
,
2
tθi,1 (ul ) + c(θi )(1 − xθi,1 (ul )) d(Fl (ul ) ) if m1 (i)m2 (i) = 1
53 A

complete description of one way to model this aggregate shock and the resulting expectations is available upon request.
Revelation Principle applies immediately to this environment so that we may restrict attention to direct mechanisms
without loss of generality.
54 The

71

and for each buyer k ∈ B,
E

Z
i


k
−k
k
k
−k
[xk
(
θ̄,
m
,
m
)v(
θ̄
)
−
t
(
θ̄,
m
,
m
)]di
> Vb
i
i
i

(87)

where V b represents the buyer’s expected equilibrium value, or
Z
Z
1 X
π
b
V =
[vi xi (ul ) − ti (ul )]d(Fl (ul )2 ) .
µi (1 − π) [vi xi (ul ) − ti (ul )]dFl (ul ) +
2−π
2
i=l,h

Characterization. We proceed by characterizing the set of mechanisms which maximize the sum of
buyers’ utilities. First, we simplify the set of incentive constraints. Note that each seller’s match-type—
i.e., whether they are matched with buyer 1, buyer 2, or both—is correlated with the buyers’ match
types. As a result, it is straightforward to design a direct mechanism in which sellers have no incentives
to lie about their match type, and buyers’ incentive constraints are slack. This allows us to re-write
mechanisms simply as transfers (of the numeraire and the good) for each of the four types of sellers:
those with high or low quality goods and those matched with one or two buyers.
Imposing symmetry, we re-define the mechanism as {t(i, n), x(i, n)} for i = {l, h} and n = {1, 2} as
the expected transfer and trade by a seller with quality i and n offers. Interim incentive compatibility
requires, for each (i, n)
t(i, n) + (1 − x(i, n))ci > t(î, n) + (1 − x(î, n))ci .

(88)

Individual rationality of the sellers requires
Z
s

t(i, 1) + (1 − x(i, 1))ci > V (i, 1) = [ti (ul ) + (1 − xi (ul ))ci ] dFl (ul ),
Z
s
t(i, 2) + (1 − x(i, 2))ci > V (i, 2) = [ti (ul ) + (1 − xi (ul ))ci ] d(Fl (ul )2 ).

(89)
(90)

Buyers’ utility associated with any such mechanism satisfies
h
i
2 X
π
µi (1 − π)(vi x(i, 1) − t(i, 1)) + (vi x(i, 2) − t(i, 2)) .
2−π
2

(91)

i=l,h

Thus, a constrained efficient allocation is a feasible allocation which maximizes (91) subject to (88)–(90).
It is immediate that such an allocation satisfies x(l, n) = 1 for n = 1, 2 and
t(l, n) = t(h, n) + (1 − x(h, n))cl .
That is, constrained efficient allocations do not distort trade for low-quality sellers (matched with either
one or two buyers) and the incentive constraint for low-quality sellers must bind. Moreover, the individual rationality constraints for high quality sellers necessarily bind. If these constraints did not bind,
one could decrease the surplus allocated to sellers of high quality goods by increasing x(h, n) by  and
t(h, n) by cl . Such a perturbation raises aggregate buyers’ payoffs by (vh − cl ), preserves incentives,
and for  small does not violate individual rationality of high quality sellers.
Proof of Proposition 7. We first prove that equilibrium allocation is constrained efficient when φl > 0.
To start, note that the individual rationality constraint for low-quality sellers must bind, otherwise one
can improve buyers’ payoffs by reducing transfers to low-quality sellers and adjusting trade with high
quality sellers to preserve incentive compatibility. Since φl > 0, such a perturbation raises buyers’ utility.
Summarizing the results above, when φl > 0 the solution to the program described above must satisfy
72

x(l, n) = 1,
t(l, n) = V s (l, n),

(92)
s

t(h, n) + (1 − x(h, n))ch = V (h, n), and

(93)

t(l, n) = t(h, n) + (1 − x(h, n))cl .

(94)

We now show that expected volume of trade in a constrained efficient allocation coincides with
expected trade in our equilibrium. It is clear that trade by low-quality sellers is the same (since x(l, n) = 1
for n = 1, 2). To see that trade by high quality sellers also coincides, first note that (92)–(94) imply
V s (h, n) − V s (l, n) = [1 − x(h, n)] (ch − cl ).

(95)

Using the definition of V(i, n) in (89)–(90), along with the fact that each menu in equilibrium satisfies
the low-quality seller’s incentive constraint with equality, we have
Z
s
s
V (h, n) − V (l, n) = [1 − xh (ul )] (ch − cl )d (Fl (ul )n ) .
(96)
Solving (95)–(96), we see that the volume of trade under the optimal mechanism between buyers and
high quality sellers with n offers is
Z
x(h, n) = xh (ul )d (Fl (ul )n ) .
(97)
Using (97), similar algebra reveals that the transfers satisfy
Z
t(i, n) = ti (ul )d (Fl (ul )n ) .

(98)

An immediate consequence of (97) and (98) is that buyers’ utility coincides with what they receive in
equilibrium, which proves the claim for φl > 0.
Consider next the case of φl < 0. We claim that equilibrium is constrained efficient if, and only if,
xh (ul ) = 1 for all ul ∈ Supp(Fl ). To see why, suppose that the equilibrium satisfies
Z
xh (ul )d (Fl (ul )n ) < 1
for some n ∈ {1, 2}. We will show that a perturbation of such an allocation is feasible and increases
buyers’ utility, i.e. the initial allocation cannot be constrained efficient. To do so, consider the mechanism
t(l, n) = V s (l, n)
x(l, n) = 1
Z
t(h, n) = th (ul )d (Fl (ul )n )
Z
x(h, n) = xh (ul )d (Fl (ul )n ) .
This mechanism satisfies the incentive and individual rationality constraints by construction. Now con-

73

sider the following perturbation: for some n and  > 0, let
t̂(l, n) = t(l, n) + (ch − cl )
x̂(l, n) = 1
t̂(h, n) = t(h, n) + ch 
x̂(h, n) = x(h, n) + .
We argue that this perturbation remains feasible and strictly increases buyers’ utilities. Note that incentive constraints are satisfied since
t̂(l, n) = t(l, n) + (ch − cl ) > t(h, n) + (1 − x(h, n))cl + (ch − cl ) = t̂(h, n) + (1 − x̂(h, n))cl .
Moreover, this perturbation raises the payoff of low-quality sellers and leaves the payoff of high quality
sellers unchanged. Finally, buyers’ payoffs rise since the net impact of this perturbation is given by
[µh (vh − ch ) − µl (ch − cl )]  = −φl µl (ch − cl ) > 0,
where the last inequality follows from φl < 0.
The final step of the proof requires showing that a pooling equilibrium—with xh (ul ) = 1 for all
ul ∈ Supp(Fl )—is constrained efficient. To see why, note that V s (l, n) = V s (h, n) for n ∈ {1, 2} in any
incentive compatible mechanism with full trade. Since the sellers’ participation constraint binds, and the
total surplus generated by the constrained efficient allocation coincides with that in the equilibrium, the
payoff to the buyers must coincide as well.

A.4
A.4.1

Proofs from Section 6
Proof of Proposition 8

Given π̂1 = π̂2 ≡ π̂, we can use the analysis of our benchmark model to characterize the unique equilibrium. In particular, substituting π̂ = π, Propositions 2 and 3 characterize the equilibrium offer distributions, {Fj (uj )}, along with equilibrium profits, which we denote by Π? (π). For any φl < 1, equilibrium
profits are continuous and strictly decreasing in π, with Π? (0) > 0 and Π? (1) = 0. By assumption, C 0 (π)
is a continuous, strictly increasing function with C 0 (0) = 0 and C 0 (1) > 0, so that there is a unique
solution to the first order condition C 0 (π) = Π? (π).

A.4.2

Proof of Lemma 5

Consider first the case of φl > 0. In this region of the parameter space, π? satisfies
C 0 (π? ) − (1 − µh )(1 − π? )(vl − cl ) = 0,

(99)

?

dπ
and hence clearly dµ
< 0.
h
Next consider the case of φl < 0. If φl 6 φ1 , where φ1 < 0 is defined in (55), then π? satisfies

C 0 (π? ) − (1 − π? )(µh vh + µl vl − ch ) = 0,
and hence clearly

dπ?
dµh

(100)

> 0. The more difficult case is when φ1 < φl < 0. In this case, π? satisfies
C 0 (π? ) − (1 − π? ) [µl (vl − ûl ) + µh Πh (ûl , ch )] = 0,

(101)

where ûl satisfies Υ(ûl , µh ) = 0, with
Υ(ûl , µh ) = v̄ − [vl + (1 − π)g(µh , π)(ûl − vl )] − (1 − π) [µl (vl − ûl ) + µh Πh (ûl , ch )]
74

(102)

and

1

g(µh , π) = (1 − π) φl
To prove that

dπ?
dµh

−1

.

> 0, we will show that
Π? (π, µh ) = (1 − π) [µl (vl − ûl ) + µh Πh (ûl , ch )]

is increasing in µh and decreasing in π. To prove the first result, note that
1

∂Υ
(1 − π) φl
=−
+ (1 − π)φl < 0,
∂ûl
µl
since we are looking at the region with φl < 0, and




∂Υ
∂g
= (vh − vl ) − (1 − π) (ûl − vl )
+ 1 + Πh (ûl , ch )
∂µh
∂µh
> (vh − vl ) − (1 − π) [(ûl − vl ) + Πh (ûl , ch )]


v h − cl
> 0,
= π(vh − vl ) + (1 − π)(ch − ûl )
ch − cl
where we use that

∂g
∂µh

< 0 in the first inequality and ch > ûl in the last. Hence,

dûl
dµh

> 0 and



∂Π¯?
dûl
= (1 − π) Πh (ûl , ch ) + (ûl − vl ) − µl
φl > 0.
∂µh
dµh
To show that Π? is decreasing in π, we must show that
1
1 dû
1
−1
l
(1 − π) φl (u − vl ) − (1 − π) φl
6 0,
φl
dπ

or

dûl
ûl − vl
>
.
dπ
φl (1 − π)

(103)

Solving (102) explicitly for ûl yields

ûl =



1
−cl
v − vl + (1 − π) φl vl − (1 − π) v − µh vchh −c
c
h
l
1

(1 − π) φl − µl φl (1 − π)
= vl +

h −ch )
µh (vh − vl ) − (1 − π) µh (vl −cclh)(v
−cl
1

(1 − π) φl − µl φl (1 − π)
so that
1

−1

h −ch )
− φ1l (1 − π) φl + µl φl
µh (vl −cclh)(v
dûl
−cl
=
− (ûl − vl )
.
1
1
dπ
(1 − π) φl − µl φl (1 − π)
(1 − π) φl − µl φl (1 − π)

75

Thus we have to show that
1

h −ch )
µh (vl −cclh)(v
−cl

(1 − π)
⇔

1
φl

− (ûl − vl )

− φ1l (1 − π) φl
(1 − π)

− µl φl (1 − π)

1
φl

−1

+ µl φ l

− µl φl (1 − π)

>

ûl − vl
φl (1 − π)

h −ch )
µh (vl −cclh)(v
−cl

(1 − π)

1
φl

(ûl − vl ) µl (φl − 1)
.
>
1
(1 − π) φl − µl φl (1 − π)
− µl φl (1 − π)

Again, since ûl > vl and φl 6 0, the right hand side of the inequality above is negative and the left hand
side is positive. This completes the proof.
A.4.3

Proof of Lemma 6

Let


X(π) = 2π(1 − π) + π2 (µh Xh (π)(vh − ch ) + µl (vl − cl ))

(104)

denote the gains from trade realized in a symmetric equilibrium with π? = π. Welfare is defined as

so that

W(τ) = −2Ac (π(τ)) + X (π(τ)) ,

(105)


 dπ
W 0 (τ) = X 0 (π) − 2Ac 0 (π)
.
dτ

(106)

Since
lim π? = 1,

A→0

and
lim X(π) < 0,

π→1

e > 0 such that X 0 (π) < 0 whenever A < A.
e Since
there exists A
that W 0 (τ) > 0 in this region.

A.5
A.5.1

dπ
dτ

< 0, it follows immediately from (106)


Proofs from Section 7
Poisson Meeting Technology

It follows immediately from (31) that
Qn (α) =
and Q0 (α) = 1 −

P∞

n=1 Qn (α)

e−α αn−1
(n − 1)!

= 0. From (34), π̃ = 1 − Q1 (α) and substituting into (35) implies

Gl (ul ; α) =
=

∞
X
1
Qn (α)Fn−1
(ul ; α)
l
1 − Q1 (α)
n=2
i
Q1 (α) h αFl (ul ;α)
e
−1 .
1 − Q1 (α)

Next, using the solution to the differential equation (36),

1 − π̃ + π̃Gl (ul ; α) = (1 − π̃)

76

vl − u l
v l − cl

−φl
,

(107)

one can show that
Q1 (α)
Gl (ul ; α) =
1 − Q1 (α)

"

vl − ul
vl − cl

#

−φl

−1 .

(108)

Combining (107) and (108), we obtain
−φl
Fl (ul ; α) =
log
α
Note also that Fl (ūl ; α) = 1 implies



vl − ul
v l − cl


.

vl − ūl
−α
= e φl ,
vl − cl

and
fl (ul ; α) =

(109)

φl
(vl − ul )−1 ,
α

which we use below.
Next, we evaluate the utilitarian welfare measure given the Poisson meeting technology:
∞
X
n=1



Z
Pn (α) µh (vh − ch ) xh (ul )d(Fn
(u
;
α))
+
µ
(v
−
c
)
l
l l
l
l
Z

= µh (vh − ch ) xh (ul )
Z
= µh (vh − ch ) xh (ul )

∞
X
n=1
∞
X

nPn (α)Fn−1
(ul ; α)fl (ul ; α)dul
l

+ µl (vl − cl )

∞
X

Pn (α)

n=1

nPn (α)Fn−1
(ul ; α)fl (ul ; α)dul + µl (vl − cl )(1 − e−α ).
l

n=1

Consider

Z
Ŵ(α) = xh (ul )

∞
X

nPn (α)Fn−1
(ul ; α)fl (ul ; α)dul .
l

(110)

n=1

Substituting for nPn (α), and using (35) and (108), we obtain
Z
Ŵ(α) = xh (ul )α
Z

∞
X

Qn (α)Fn−1
(ul ; α)fl (ul ; α)dul
l

n=1

= xh (ul )α [Q1 (α) + (1 − Q1 (α))Gl (ul ; α)] fl (ul ; α)dul


Z
vl − ul −φl
= xh (ul )αQ1 (α)
fl (ul ; α)dul .
v l − cl
Substituting for fl (ul ) and xh (ul ) and re-arranging terms yields
Z


φl (vl − cl )φl
Ŵ(α) = Q1 (α)
(vl − ul )−1−φl µl (vl − cl )1−φl (vl − ul )φl − (vl − ul ) + µh (vl − cl ) dul
µh (vh − cl )
where the limits of integration are cl and ūl (α). Applying tedious but straightforward calculus to
compute the integral yields



1−φ
φl
α
vl − cl
v l − cl
v l − cl
−α φ l
−α
l
Ŵ(α) =e
µl (vl − cl )
+
e
−1 +
− e−α
µh (vh − cl )
φl 1 − φl
vh − cl
v h − cl

77

Evaluating welfare as a function of α then implies



φl
vl − cl  − φα
vl − cl
µl (vl − cl ) −α
v l − cl
αe +
W(α) =µh (vh − ch )
+
e l − e−α − e−α
vh − cl µh (vh − cl )
1 − φl µh (vh − cl )
v h − cl
−α
+ (1 − e )µl (vl − cl )
Differentiating welfare with respect to α and re-arranging terms, we obtain


1−φ
1
φl
v h − ch
−α φ l
0
−α (vh − ch )(vl − cl )
l +
µl (1 − α) −
W (α) =e
e
+ µh + µ l
v h − cl
(1 − φl )
1 − φl
v h − cl
Let H(α) denote the term in brackets in the equation above. Since H(α) is a strictly concave function
with H(0) > 0 and limα→∞ H(α) = −∞, there exists a unique α∗ such that for all α > α∗ , H(α) < 0.
Hence, for all finite α > α∗ , W 0 (α) < 0.
A.5.2

Geometric Meeting Technology

For the Geometric meeting technology with λ(α) = α/(1 − α), we have
Qn (α) = (1 − α)2 nαn−1
and Q0 (α) = 0. Much as in the Poisson case, one can use (35) and (36) to show



 φl
1
vl − ul 2 
Fl (ul ; α) =
1−
,
α
v l − cl
so that
φl
fl (ul ; α) =
2α



vl − ul
vl − cl

 φ2l

1
vl − ul

and the upper bound ūl (α) satisfies


vl − ul (α)
v l − cl

 φ2l
= 1 − α.

Next, we evaluate the utilitarian welfare measure given the Geometric meeting technology:
∞
X
n=1



Z
Pn (α) µh (vh − ch ) xh (ul )d(Fn
(u
;
α))
+
µ
(v
−
c
)
l
l l
l
l
Z

= µh (vh − ch ) xh (ul )

∞
X

nPn (α)Fn−1
(ul ; α)fl (ul ; α)dul + µl (vl − cl )α.
l

n=1

Consider Ŵ(α), as defined in (110). Using similar steps to those we used above, one can show that
φl Z
φl 

φl (vl − cl ) 2 ūl (α)
Ŵ(α) = (1 − α)
(vl − ul )−1− 2 µl (vl − cl )1−φl (vl − ul )φl − (vl − ul ) + µh (vl − cl ) dul
2µh (vh − cl ) cl
h
i
φl (1 − α)
2
1
α 2
(vl − cl ) µl α
(1 − α)2/φl −1 − 1 + µh
=
+
.
2µh (vh − cl )
φl 1 − φl /2
1 − α φl

78

Therefore, welfare as a function of α is given by
W(α) =

φl (1 − α) (vh − ch )(vl − cl )
2 (vh − cl )
+ αµl (vl − cl )

µl α

i
h
α 2
2
1
(1 − α)2/φl −1 − 1 + µh
+
φl 1 − φl /2
1 − α φl

Differentiating with respect to α and re-arranging terms, we obtain


2
1
φl /2
(vh − ch )(vl − cl )
0
φl −1
µl (1 − 2α) −
+
W (α) = µl (vl − cl ) +
(1 − α)
+ µh .
(vh − cl )
1 − φl /2
1 − φl /2
Note that W 0 (0) = µl (vl − cl ) and


φl /2
ch − cl (vh − ch )(vl − cl )
µh +
.
+
W (1) = µl (vl − cl )
v h − cl
(vh − cl )
1 − φl /2
0

Since W 0 (0) > 0 and W 0 (1) > 0 and W 0 (α) is a strictly concave function of α, there exists no α ∈ (0, 1)
such that W 0 (α) < 0.

A.6
A.6.1

Proofs from Section 8
Construction of Equilibrium for the Insurance Model

The construction of equilibrium follows the logic of Section 4. For brevity, we focus on the region of
the parameter space where all equilibrium menus are separating and involve no cross-subsidization.
This obtains when the fraction of type-b agents, µb , is sufficiently large. The optimality conditions with
respect to ub and ug in this case are


µg θg (1 − θg ) 0 n  θg (1 − θg ) 0 a 
πfb (ub )
0
Πb (ub ) =C (ub ) −
C ug −
C ug
(111)
1 − π + πFb (ub )
µb
θb − θg
θb − θg
(1 − θg ) θb 0 n  θg (1 − θb ) 0 a 
πfg (ug )
C ug −
C ug .
(112)
Πg (ub , ug ) =
1 − π + πFg (ug )
θb − θg
θb − θg
These
 two differential equations, along with the boundary conditions Fj (uj ) = 0 with uj ≡ θj w (y − d) +
1 − θj w (y), characterize the equilibrium. Note that these are similar in structure to (21), except that
the marginal cost of delivering utility varies with the level of utility (this was constant in the linear
model). To solve this system, we make use of the SRP relationship, Fb (ub ) = Fg (Ug (ub )), which implies
fb (ub ) = fg (Ug (ub ))Ug0 (ub ). Dividing the first differential equation by the second and using the SRP
identities, we obtain
h
 θg (1−θg ) 0 a i
µ
θ (1−θ )
C0 (ub ) − µbg gθb −θgg C0 un
g − θb −θg C ug
Πb (ub ) Ug0 (ub )
=
,
(113)


(1−θg )θb 0
n − θg (1−θb ) C0 ua
Πg (ub , Ug (ub ))
C
u
g
g
θb −θg
θb −θg
a
where un
g and ug are related to ub and Ug through (37). Equation (113) is thus an ordinary differential
equation in Ug , along with the boundary condition Ug (ub ) = ug . Note that this does not depend on π.
Given Ug , equations (111) − (112) can be solved for the distribution functions.
Given a functional form for the utility function, w, this system√can be solved numerically. Figure 9
depicts the solution for the following parameterization: w (c) = 2c, y = 10, d = 9, θb = 0.9, θg =
0.6, µg = 0.3. The left panel plots the equilibrium Ug , while the right panel shows the resource losses
associated with imperfect insurance—specifically, the function L(ub ) from (38).

79

Figure 9: Effect of varying competition

Ug (ub)

L(ub)

2.73

2.25

2.64
0

ub
1.94

1.72

A.6.2

ub
1.94

1.72

Type-Specific π

Since our proofs that Fh and Fl have no flat regions and Fh has no mass points immediately extend
to the case when πl 6= πh , we omit them in the interest of brevity. Hence, we begin by analyzing the
potential for mass point equilibria; that is, for Fl (·) to feature a mass point—to emerge when πl 6= πh .
Proposition 10. Suppose πl < πh . Then Fl (·) does not have a mass point.
Proof. We prove a profitable deviation exists much as in the case when πl = πh . In particular, in any
such equilibrium with a mass point, Πl = 0 and the following inequalities must hold
−µh 1 − πh + πh F−
l (ûl )
µh

 v h − ch

+ µl 1 − πl + πl F−
l (ûl )



6 0
ch − cl
 v h − ch

1 − πh + πh F+
− µl 1 − πl + πl F+
6 0.
l (ûl )
l (ûl )
ch − cl

Rearranging the above, we must have
1 − πl + πl F+
1 − πl + πl F−
µ h v h − ch
l (ûl )
l (ûl )
6
6
.
−
µ l ch − cl
1 − πh + πh Fl (ûl )
1 − πh + πh F+
l (ûl )

(114)

−
Since F+
l (ûl ) > Fl (ûl ) and πl < πh , then we must have that

1 − πl + πl F+
1 − πl + πl F−
l (ûl )
l (ûl )
>
−
1 − πh + πh Fl (ûl )
1 − πh + πh F+
l (ûl )
which is a contradiction.



Proposition 11. Suppose πl > πh . If a mass points exists, then Fl (vl ) = 1.
Proof. First, it is immediate that a mass point cannot exist for any ul 6= vl . Hence, suppose by way
+
of contradiction that there is a mass on vl that is not full. Then either F−
l (vl ) > 0 or Fl (vl ) < 1. Since
above and below vl , the equilibrium features no mass points, the equilibrium must also satisfy the strict
rank-preserving property. Let S = {(vl , uh )} and note that S must have positive measure. Furthermore,
the set S must be of the form {(vl , uh ) : uh ∈ [uh , ūh ]}. Note that we have, ūh > uh > ch > vl .
Therefore, in a neighborhood around S, all equilibrium menus should be separating. As a result,
they must satisfy the optimality condition with respect to ul —for values of ul ∈ [vl − ε, vl + ε] \ {vl } for
80

small but positive ε (depending on whether mass is above or below vl ):
−µl (1 − πl + πl Fl (ul )) + µl πl fl (ul ) (vl − ul ) + µh (1 − πh + πh Fh (uh ))

vh − ch
= 0.
ch − cl

−µl (1 − πl + πl Fl (ul )) + µl πl fl (ul ) (vl − ul ) + µh (1 − πh + πh Fl (ul ))

v h − ch
= 0.
ch − cl

Using SRP,

Therefore, if positive mass is above vl , we must have that
µh (1 − πh + πh Fl (ul ))

v h − ch
− µl (1 − πl + πl Fl (ul )) > 0,
ch − cl

µh (1 − πh + πh Fl (ul ))

v h − ch
− µl (1 − πl + πl Fl (ul )) < 0.
ch − cl

and if it is below,

From above, if mass point is to be an equilibrium property, the inequality (114) must hold:
1 − πl + πl F−
1 − πl + πl F+
µ h v h − ch
πl
l (vl )
l (vl )
6
.
6
<
−
+
µ l ch − cl
πh
1 − πh + πh Fl (vl )
1 − πh + πh Fl (vl )

(115)

Now suppose that F+
l (vl ) < 1. Then, from the differential equation above,


vh − ch
vh − ch
− πl µl − µl πl fl (ul ) (ul − vl ) + µh (1 − πh )
− µl (1 − πl ) = 0.
Fl (ul ) µh πh
ch − cl
ch − cl
The general solution to the above differential equation is given by
Fl (ul ) = A1 (ul − vl )
µh πh

v −c
µh πh ch −ch −πl µl
h
l
µl πl

+ A2 .

vh −ch
c −c −πl µl

h
l
Since
< 0 from (115), the above expression approaches either ±∞ as ul approaches vl
µl πl
+
from above. Hence, Fl (vl ) < 1 cannot hold.
Now suppose that F−
l (vl ) > 0. Then, similar to above, we must have that

Fl (ul ) = A1 (vl − ul )

v −c
µh πh ch −ch −µl πl
h
l
µl πl

+ A2 .

As ul converges to vl , the above expression converges to ∞, which is in contradiction with F−
l (vl ) < 1.
This proves the claim.

A.6.3

Proof of Proposition 9

We have already shown a masspoint equilibrium, if it exists, must full mass at vl . Now, the worst menu
in a masspoint equilibrium (i.e., the one with the lowest uh ) must set uh = ch (otherwise, lowering
uh strictly raises profits). By construction, a function Fh that satisfies (40) ensures equal profits at all
points in the support. To rule out other deviations, consider the payoff from offering u0l = vl − ε, u0h ∈

81

[uh , ūh ] . The change in profits (per ε) satisfy
µl (1 − πl ) − (1 − πh + πh Fh ) µh



(1 − πh + πh Fh ) µh vh − ch
vh − ch
µl (1 − πl ) .
= 1−
(1 − πl )
ch − cl
µl ch − cl

It is sufficient to show that this is negative at the bottom, i.e., when Fh = 0, which leads to
1−

(1 − πh ) µh vh − ch
<0
(1 − πl ) µl ch − cl

⇒

1 − πl
< 1 − φ.
1 − πh

To rule out equilibria without masspoints, note that, in such an environment, the equilibrium is strictly
rank-preserving, so there must be a worst menu, i.e., one with Fl = Fh = 0. If it is a pooling menu, then
it must offer uh = ul = ch . In other words, Πl = vl − ch < 0. On the other hand, if it is a separating
one, it must satisfy the FOC for ul :


1 − πh
πl fl
(1 − φl ) < 0
Πl = 1 −
⇒
Πl < 0
1 − πl + πl Fl
1 − πl
i.e., the worst menu in a non-masspoint equilibrium must necessarily lose money on the low type. But
then, the best menu must also lose money, because
Πl (ūl ) = vl − ūl < vl − ul < 0.
Now, consider a deviation of the form (ūl − ε, ūh ) changes profits, relative to (ūl , ūh ), by
µ l − µh

v h − ch
− µl fl Πl (ūl ) = µl φ − fl Πl (ūl )
ch − cl

>

0

yielding the desired contradiction. Thus, in a masspoint equilibrium, the distribution of ul is degenerate
at vl , i.e., buyers make zero profits from type-l sellers. A buyer can deviate and offer a lower ul , but
that brings higher profits only from the captive l−types at the expense of lower profits from both captive
and noncaptive h−types. When the condition in part (1) of the proposition is satisfied, πl is sufficiently
high or equivalently, the fraction of captive l−types is too low to make such a deviation attractive.
A.6.4

Equilibrium with vertical differentiation

Here, we conjecture and characterize an equilibrium with vertical differentiation. We restrict attention to the region of the parameter space where both buyers offer separating contracts without crosssubsidization. First, note that the upper and lower bounds of the distributions of both buyers must
coincide, i.e., the distributions of offers by both buyers have the same support. This then implies that F2l
has mass of α at its lowest point cl . To see this, consider the equal profit condition for each buyer (recall
that all ties are resolved in favor of buyer 1):
(1 − π) (vl − cl ) = Π (ūl , ūh )
(1 − π + πα) (vl − cl + B) = Π (ūl , ūh ) + B.
Solving, we obtain α = B+vBl −cl . Next, we posit that (i) U1h (ul ) is strictly increasing everywhere in
the support (ii) U2h (ul ) = ch for ul ∈ [cl , cl + s], s > 0. In the interval (cl + s, ul ], U2h (ul ) is strictly
increasing. Formally, the distributions Fk
j satisfy the strict rank-preserving conditions
F1l (ul ) = F1h (U1h (ul ))
F2l (ul )

=

F2h (U2h (ul ))

82

ul ∈ [ul , ul ]

ul ∈ (cl+s , ul ].

(116)
(117)

The optimality conditions for ul and uh for the two buyers yield:
πf2l (ul )
µh
Π1l (ul ) = 1 −
2
µl
1 − π + πFl (ul )

πf2h (uh )
 Π1h ul , U2h (ul ) =
2
1
1 − π + πFh Uh (ul )

!

v h − ch
ch − cl

v h − cl
ch − cl

πf1l (ul )
µh
(vl − ul ) = 1 −
1
µl
1 − π + πFl (ul )

πf1h (uh )
 Π2h ul , U2h (ul ) =
1
2
1 − π + πFh Uh (ul )

1 − π + πF2h U1h (ul )
1 − π + πF2l (ul )

(118)
(119)

1 − π + πF1h U2h (ul )
1 − π + πF1l (ul )

!

v h − ch
ch − cl

v h − cl
.
ch − cl

(120)
(121)

This system of equations (116) − (121), along with the boundary conditions
F1l (cl ) = F1h (ch ) = 0
F2l (cl ) = α
F1l (ul ) = F2l (ul ) = 1
F1h (uh ) = F2h (uh ) = 1
(1 − π) (vl − cl ) =


1 − π + πF1l (cl + s) (vl − cl − s) + (1 − π) Πh (cl + s, ch )

characterize the six unknown functions F1l , F2l , F1h , F2h , U1h , and U2h .

B

General Trading Mechanisms

In our equilibrium construction, we assumed that buyers offer menus consisting of two contracts—one
for high-quality sellers and one for low-quality sellers. In this section, we show that this assumption
is without loss of generality. In particular, we consider a game where sellers can send arbitrary messages and buyers offer mechanisms that are deterministic and exclusive—but otherwise unrestricted—
mapping the seller’s message into potential terms of trade.55 We prove that the distribution of trades in
any equilibrium of this more general setting coincides with that of a game with two-point menus. We
prove this within the context of our baseline model, where two buyers face a continuum of sellers.
Intuitively, this result essentially shows that it is impossible for a buyer to screen a seller based on her
outside offer. To see why, note that screening is possible only when the payoffs from accepting a given
contract differ across types. For example, a seller with a low-quality good gets less utility (compared to
one with a high quality good) from accepting a contract which requires her to retain a fraction of the
good. However, sellers who differ only in their alternative offers get the same utility from accepting a
contract; since trading is exclusive, once they accept the terms of a given contract, their outside offer is
irrelevant. This feature rules out the ability to screen sellers along this dimension.
The proof proceeds in two steps. First, we map our environment into the general framework of
Martimort and Stole (2002), hereafter MS. This allows us to apply their “delegation principle,” which
establishes that any equilibrium of a game with general mechanisms and messages can be achieved by
a menu game. Second, we show that equilibrium menus have at most two contracts that are accepted
by sellers in equilibrium. Together, these steps imply that a game where buyers offer 2-point menus
induces the same equilibrium distribution of trades as a more general game with arbitrary mechanisms
and communication.
Step 1. We begin by expressing payoffs and strategies using the notation of MS. A contract is defined
55 In

a deterministic mechanism, the mapping from the seller’s message to an offer is a deterministic function. Note, however,
that buyers can still randomize over different mechanisms.

83

by a quantity-transfer pair d = (x, t). The seller’s type is given by θ = (j, A), where j ∈ {l, h} is the quality
of her good and A ⊂ {1, 2} is the set of buyers with whom she is matched. Given a pair of contracts
offered by the two buyers, d = d1 , d2 , the payoff to a seller of type θ is

U (d; θ) = max ti + 1 − xi cj .
i∈A

(122)

When a seller has access to both of the buyers and is indifferent between the contracts they offer, we
assume she randomizes, with each buyer being chosen with equal probability. We denote the seller’s
contract choice by si (d; θ), where s1 (d; θ) + s2 (d; θ) = 1, so that the buyer’s payoff can be written

V i (d; θ) = vj xi − ti si (d; θ) .
(123)
There is an unrestricted space of messages, denoted M, available to each buyer-seller pair. The
strategy space for buyers is the space of all deterministic communication mechanisms. Formally, such a
mechanism consists of a mapping d̂i : M → D from messages to the set of all contracts D = [0, 1] × R+ .
The set of such mechanisms is represented by Υ = (D)M . Each buyer’s strategy σi , then, is a distribution
over the elements of Υ. A seller’s strategy is a joint distribution over messages sent to each buyer with
who she is matched. The timing of the game is as follows. First, sellers draw their types. Second, each of
the buyers simultaneously offers a mechanism to the sellers with whom they are matched. Third, each
seller chooses a message to send to each of the buyers with whom she is matched. These choices then
induce (potentially a pair of) contracts, with the resulting payoffs given by (122)–(123).
We can now apply the delegation principle from MS (Theorem 1). It states that the distribution
of contracts and trades induced by any Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium in the game with mechanisms
can be achieved by a game where buyers post menus of contracts and sellers choose their desired
contract. Formally, a menu game is one in which each buyer’s strategy is a distribution (possibly
random) µ ∈ ∆ 2D over all possible menus z ⊂ D. Facing two menus, a seller of type j proceeds in
two steps. First, she chooses a contract from each menu, which is described by a probability distribution
χj (z1 , z2 ; θ) ∈ ∆ (z1 × z2 ) over pairs of contracts d ∈ z1 × z2 . She then chooses one of the two contracts
according to the functions si (·) described above.
Step 2. The second step, stated formally in the following result, shows that equilibrium menus
cannot contain more than two “active” contracts, i.e. ones that are actually traded in equilibrium.
Proposition 12. In any equilibrium of the menu game, any menu z has at most two contracts that are chosen by
some seller type in equilibrium.
Proof. Without loss of generality, consider an arbitrary menu z offered by buyer 1 with positive probability in equilibrium, and define Dj (z) as the set of all contracts in that menu that are chosen by a type
j seller with positive probability, i.e.,

Dj (z) = {d1 ∈ z : ∃ d2 ∈ z 0 ∈ Supp(µ) : d1 , d2 ∈ Supp(χj (z, z 0 )), s1 (d1 , d2 ; (j, ·)) > 0}.
We will show that Dj (z) = 1 for j ∈ {l, h}. The strategy is to show that all elements in Dj (z) must yield
the same utility to type j sellers and the same payoffs to the buyer, i.e., for all (x, t) , (x 0 , t 0 ) ∈ Dj (z), we
must have

t + cj (1 − x) = t 0 + cj 1 − x 0
(124)
vj x − t = vj x 0 − t 0 ,

(125)

which implies (x, t) = (x 0 , t 0 ) . It is easy to see that the two contracts must offer the same utility to
the seller, otherwise she cannot choose both from the same menu with positive probability. To show
that they must yield the same payoff to the buyer, consider the offer intended for the type l seller. Now,
84

suppose that (x, t) , (x 0 , t 0 ) ∈ Dl (z) with vl x − t > vl x 0 − t 0 . This inequality, combined with (124), implies


v l x − x 0 > t − t 0 = cl x − x 0 ⇒ x > x 0 .
As a result,




ch x − x 0 > cl x − x 0 = t − t 0 ⇒ t + ch (1 − x) > t 0 + ch 1 − x 0 .

/ Dh (z). Hence, if we eliminate from z every contract in Dl (z) except the one
This implies that (x 0 , t 0 ) ∈
that delivers the maximum payoff to the buyer from type l sellers, the buyer’s payoff strictly increases
and the high type seller’s choice is not altered. Therefore, if there is more than one element in Dl (z),
they must all yield the same profits.
Now suppose there exist (x, t) , (x 0 , t 0 ) ∈ Dh (z) such that vh x − t > vh x 0 − t 0 . As before, this implies
x > x 0 . We then have



t − t 0 = ch x − x 0 > cl x − x 0 ⇒ t + cl (1 − x) > t 0 + cl 1 − x 0 .
/ Dl (z). Then, as with type l sellers, eliminating all contracts in Dh (z) that deliver less
Hence, (x 0 , t 0 ) ∈
than the maximum payoff to the buyer is a profitable deviation. This concludes the proof.

C

Masspoint Equilibria: The Case of φl = 0

Proposition 13. Suppose φl = 0. The unique equilibrium of the game is described by the pair of distribution
functions, with Fl (ul ) degenerate at vl and Fh (uh ) satisfying
(1 − π + πFh (uh )) µh Πh (vl , uh ) = (1 − π) µl (vl − cl )

(126)

with Supp(Fh ) = [ch , ch + π (vl − cl ) (vh − ch ) /(vh − cl )].
Proof of Proposition 13. To show that the constructed distributions constitute an equilibrium, we show
that there are no profitable deviations. In other words,





∀ u0h , u0l : µh 1 − π + πFl u0l Πh u0l , u0h + µl 1 − π + πFl u0l
vl − u0l 6 (1 − π) µl (vl − cl ) .
We consider two cases:
1. u0h > max Supp (Fh ) = ūh : In this case, when u0l > vl , the profit function is given by


µh Πh u0l , u0h + µl vl − u0l .
Since φl = 0, the above function is invariant to changes in u0h and is strictly decreasing in u0l .
Therefore, its value must be less than its value evaluated at (ūh, vl ), which gives the equilibrium
profits. When, u0l 6 vl , the profits are given by µh Πh u0l , u0h , which is decreasing in u0h , and
therefore




µh Πh u0l , u0h + µl (1 − π) vl − u0l < µh Πh u0l , ūh + µl (1 − π) vl − u0l .
Note that the right-hand side of the above inequality is a linear function of u0l whose derivative is
given by
µh

v h − ch
v h − ch
− µl (1 − π) = µh
− µ l + µl π
v l − cl
ch − cl
= −µl φl + µl π = µl π > 0.

85

Therefore, we must have that


µh Πh u0l , ūh + µl (1 − π) vl − u0l 6 µh Πh (vl , ūh ) = (1 − π) µl (vl − cl )
where the last equality follows from (126).
2. u0h ∈ [ch , ūh ]. In this case, when u0l > vl , profits are given by





µh 1 − π + πFl u0h Πh u0l , u0h + µl vl − u0l 6 µh 1 − π + πFl u0h Πh vl , u0h
= (1 − π) µl (vl − cl )
where the inequality is satisfied since u0l > vl and the last equality follows from (126).
When u0l 6 vl , profits are given by
µh 1 − π + πFl u0h





Πh u0l , u0h + µl (1 − π) vl − u0l .

The above function is linear in u0l and its derivative is given by


 v h − ch
 vh − ch
v h − ch
0
− µl (1 − π) = (1 − π) µh
− µl + πFl u0h
µh 1 − π + πFl uh
ch − cl
ch − cl
ch − cl

v h − ch
= πFl u0h
> 0.
ch − cl
Therefore, it is maximized at u0l = vl . This establishes that there are no profitable deviations.
To conclude the proof, we show that the equilibrium constructed is the unique equilibrium when
φl = 0.
In order to show uniqueness of equilibrium, it is sufficient to show that, in any equilibrium, Fl must
be degenerate at vl . When Fl is degenerate at vl , from Lemmas 7 and 10, we know that Fh must be
continuous and strictly increasing and therefore it must satisfy (126).
Suppose that ul 6= vl exists that belongs to the support of Fl . Then the proof of Lemma 11 can
be used to show that for values of ul 6= vl , Fl must have no flat and mass points and consequently
equilibrium must exhibit the strict rank-preserving (SRP) property. Now consider any menu for which
ul < vl and a deviation that increases the value of ul by a small amount. In this case, Fl is differentiable
and we can write the change in profits from such a deviation as
v h − ch
(1 − π + πFh (uh )) =
ch − cl
µl πf+
l (ul )(vl − ul ) − µl φl (1 − π + πFl (ul )) > 0
µl πf+
l (ul )(vl − ul ) − µl (1 − π + πFl (ul )) + µh

where in the above f+
l is the right derivative of Fl and we have used SRP. The above implies that
increasing ul must be a profitable deviation which proves the contradiction. The case with ul > vl is
ruled out in a similar fashion. This concludes the proof.


D
D.1

The Model with Many Types
Environment and Construction of Equilibrium

We now extend our analysis to the case with an arbitrary, finite number of seller types. We focus our
attention on equilibria where all offers are separating menus. We do so for two reasons. First, in the
case of N = 2, this region yields some of the most interesting results—such as the non-monotonicity of
welfare in π—and we want to confirm that these results are true in a more general setting. Second, in
86

the equilibrium with all separating menus, the monotonicity constraints are slack (xi < xi+1 ), which is
the most commonly studied case in the mechanism design literature.56 We first provide a method for
constructing such a separating equilibrium, and then use the constructed equilibrium to demonstrate
that the welfare implications from the model with two types extend to the general case of N > 2.
Suppose there are N > 2 types, with buyers and sellers deriving utility vi and ci , respectively, per
unit from a good of type i ∈ N ≡ {1, ..., N}. The types are ordered so that v1 < v2 < ... < vN and
c1 < c2 < ... < cN , and there are gains from trading all types of goods,
P i.e., vi > ci for all i ∈ N. The
distribution of types is summarized by the vector (µ1 , . . . , µN ), with i∈N µi = 1. As in our benchmark
model, sellers (of all types) are privately informed about the quality of their good and receive two offers
with probability π and one offer with probability 1 − π.
Equilibrium Properties. The definition of strategies and a (symmetric) equilibrium are identical to
those in the model with two types, and hence we omit them for brevity. We begin our analysis, in
Lemma 20 below, by establishing that buyers’ offers never distort the quantity traded with the lowest
type of seller, and that local incentive constraints always bind “upward,” i.e., equilibrium offers always
leave a type i seller indifferent between his contract and the one intended for type i + 1. As a result, a
buyer’s offer can again be summarized by the indirect utilities it delivers to each type i ∈ N.
Lemma 20. For almost all equilibrium menus:
1. There is full trade with the lowest type, so that x1 = 1, and the local incentive constraints are binding
upward, so that
ti + ci (1 − xi ) = ti+1 + ci (1 − xi+1 ) for all i = 1, 2.....N − 1;
2. Each menu can be summarized by a utility vector u = (u1 , · · · , uN ) with ui > ci ∀ i and
1>

uN − uN−1
u2 − u1
> ··· >
> 0,
cN − cN−1
c2 − c1

(127)

with the corresponding quantities and transfers given by
ui − ui−1
, i = 2, 3.....N
ci − ci−1
ci
(ui − ui−1 ) , i = 2, 3.....N.
t1 = u 1 , ti = u i −
ci − ci−1

x1 = 1,

xi = 1 −

(128)

This proof of Lemma 20 is a direct extension of the proof of Lemma 1, and hence is omitted for
brevity. Given the results, we can recast each buyer’s problem in terms of the utility vector u. In
particular, given a family of marginal distributions Fi (ui ) for i ∈ N, each buyer chooses a vector u to
solve
max

ui >ci

N
X

µi (1 − π + πFi (ui )) Πi (ui−1 , ui )

(129)

i=1

subject to the monotonicity constraints in (127), where (in a slight abuse of notation) profits per trade
with a seller of quality i are given by
Π1 (u1 ) = v1 − u1 ,
vi − ci−1
vi − ci
Πi (ui−1 , ui ) = vi −
ui +
ui−1 ,
ci − ci−1
ci − ci−1
56 See,

e.g., Fudenberg and Tirole (1991).

87

for all i = 2.....N.

(130)

The program in (129) resembles a standard mechanism design problem, where the binding incentive
constraints are substituted into the profit functions in (130). The monotonicity constraints in (127) are
necessary to ensure that local incentive compatibility implies global incentive compatibility.
We now formally define a separating equilibrium, provide a characterization and a method for constructing such equilibria, and then use numerical examples to study their normative properties.
Definition 2. An equilibrium is separating if the utility vector u associated with any equilibrium menu solves the
relaxed problem of maximizing the objective in (129) ignoring the monotonicity constraints in (127).
As a first step, in the conjectured equilibrium, one can use an induction argument to extend Proposition 1, establishing that all the distributions Fi (ui ) are continuous with connected support. Since
the profit function is strictly supermodular, any separating equilibrium must satisfy the strict rankpreserving property. The following proposition summarizes.
Proposition 14. If φ1 = 1 −

µ2 v2 −c1
µ1 c2 −c1

6= 0, then, in any symmetric separating equilibrium,

1. For all i ∈ N, Fi (·) has a connected support and is continuous.
2. There exists a sequence of strictly increasing real-valued functions {Ui (u1 )}N
i=2 such that the utility vector
associated with any equilibrium menu z satisfies:
u (z) = (u1 (z) , U2 (u1 (z)) , U3 (u1 (z)) , · · · , UN (u1 (z))) .

(131)

As in the model with two types, Proposition 14 greatly simplifies the construction of separating
equilibria: it implies that we only need to characterize the distribution of offers to the lowest type,
57 The equilibrium distribution of utilities
F1 (u1 ), together with the sequence of functions {Ui (u1 )}N
i=2 .
can then be derived from the fact that all types have the same ranking across equilibrium menus, i.e.,
Fi (Ui (u1 )) = F1 (u1 ) for all i = 2, ..., N.
Equilibrium construction. We now illustrate how to construct a separating equilibrium. Differentiability of the profit function in (129) implies that any separating equilibrium must satisfy
πfi (Ui (u1 ))
Π1 (u1 ) = φi
1 − π + πFi (Ui (u1 ))
πfi (Ui (u1 ))
Πi (Ui−1 (u1 ) , Ui (u1 )) = φi
1 − π + πFi (Ui (u1 ))

(132)
for all i = 2, ..., N,

(133)

where φi , the marginal cost of increasing the utility of a seller of type i, is given by
µ 2 v 2 − c2
µ 1 c2 − c1
vi − ci−1 µi+1 vi+1 − ci+1
φi =
−
,
ci − ci−1
µi ci+1 − ci
vN − cN−1
φN =
.
cN − cN−1
φ1 = 1 −

for all i = 2, · · · , N − 1

Equation (132) implies that F1 must satisfy
πf1 (u1 )
φ1
=
.
1 − π + πF1 (u1 )
v1 − u 1

(134)

57 This proposition relies on the assumption that the marginal cost of transfers to the lowest type net of any benefits arising from binding incentive constraints, φ1 , is non-zero. As in the two-type case, this assumption is required to show that
equilibrium distributions do not have mass points.

88

Since the strict rank-preserving property implies that each Ui must satisfy Fi (Ui (u1 )) = F1 (u1 ), it must
be the case that Ui0 (u1 )f1 (Ui (u1 )) = f1 (u1 ). Substituting this result into (133) implies that the equilibrium
functions Ui must satisfy the set of differential equations:
Ui0 (u1 ) =

φ1 Πi (Ui−1 (u1 ) , Ui (u1 ))
φi
v1 − u1

for all i = 2, · · · , N.

(135)

The system of differential equations (134) and (135) are ordinary first order differential equations; to
complete the characterization, we need only provide the appropriate boundary conditions. As in the
two-type model, these conditions depend critically on the marginal costs, (φ1 , . . . , φN ), and are closely
tied to the outcome under monopsony. The following result shows that the solution to a monopsonist’s
problem can be represented in the form of a threshold type.
Lemma 21. Let J denote the largest integer i ∈ {1, 2...N} such that
J−1
X

µi φi < 0,

(136)

i=1

P
with J = 1 if k
i=1 µi φi > 0 for all k ∈ {1, 2....N}. The solution to a monopsonist’s problem is to set ui = cJ for
i 6 J and ui = ci for i > J.
P
Intuitively, the accumulated marginal cost of trading with the first J types is negative ( J−1
i=1 µi φi <
0), so they are pooled. In contrast, for the remaining types, the information rents outweigh the potential
gains, so the monopsonist chooses not to trade with them.58 The next result links this threshold J to the
best and worst menu when π > 0.
Lemma 22. Let J be as defined in Lemma 21. Then, in any equilibrium, the best menu has ui = uJ for i < J, and
the worst menu has ui = ci for all i > J.
To see the intuition, note that the best menu trades with probability 1, i.e., attracts all captive and
noncaptive sellers. Therefore, it cannot be profitable for that menu to separate types that a monopsonist
finds profitable to pool; if ui < uJ for some i < J, then increasing ui has no effect on the probability or
composition of trades but yields strictly higher profits (because the effective marginal cost of increasing
ui is negative). Similarly, it cannot be profitable for the worst menu to give any surplus to the types that
the monopsonist finds optimal to shut out completely; if such a menu offers more than ci to any type
i > J, the buyer can raise her profits simply by lowering that utility.
The system of differential equations (134)-(135), along with the boundary conditions described in
Lemma 22, describe necessary conditions for any separating equilibrium. By the Picard-Lindelöf theorem, it has a unique solution. In Appendix D.2.5, we provide analytical expressions for this solution. To
ensure that this solution is an equilibrium, one need only verify that the monotonicity constraints (127)
are satisfied for every u1 ∈ Supp(F1 ).
Finally, we solve two numerical examples using the method described above. The two cases both have
N = 4, but differ in the marginal cost vector, (φ1 , ...φN ).59 In the first case, J = 1, so the monopsonist only
trades with the lowest type. In the second case, J = 2. We use these cases to demonstrate the robustness
of the welfare results in section 5.2. In Figure 10, we plot expected trade for types 2 through 4 (recall
that x1 = 1 always) as a function of π. They show a non-monotonic relationship between expected trade
and competition. In the first case (left panel), in which the monopsonist only trades with type 1, trade
by all three types is hump-shaped. This is analogous to the case with φl > 0 in the two-type model. In
58 For

brevity, we ignore the non-generic case in which the inequality in (136) is satisfied with equality.
both cases, we assume a uniform distribution µi = 0.25 for all i, with valuations ci = 1, 2, 3, 4 and vi = ci δ + 0.5. In
case 1, δ = 1.2 and in case 2, δ = 1.3. In each case, we solve the system (134)-(135) and verify that the monotonicity constraints
are satisfied.
59 For

89

the second case (right panel), however, trade with one of the types (type 2) is monotonically decreasing
in π. This is similar to the case with φl < 0 in the two-type model. In both cases, these patterns imply
that ex-ante welfare is maximized at π < 1.
E[xi ]

E[xi ]

1

1

E[x2 ]

0.5

E[x2 ]

0.5

E[x3 ]

E[x3 ]
E[x4 ]

0
0

E[x4 ]

0
1

π

0

1

Figure 10: Expected trade and competition when N = 4 and J = 1 (left panel) or J = 2 (right panel).

D.2
D.2.1

Proofs
Proof of Lemma 20

This proof is a direct extension of the proof of Lemma 1, and hence is omitted for brevity.
D.2.2

Proof of Proposition 14

To show the strict rank-preserving property, we first show that Fj ’s are continuous and strictly increasing. The argument for this claim is inductive.
Step 1: FN is strictly increasing and continuous.


FN is strictly increasing. Suppose, towards a contradiction, that there is an interval u0N , u00N where
FN is constant and takes a value between 0 and 1. Without loss of generality, we can assume that
u00N belongs to some contract that is offered in equilibrium. Let one such menu be given by u00 =
u001 , · · · , u00N . Given our assumption that the equilibrium is separating, this menu must maximize
PN
i=1 µi (1 − π + πFi (ui )) Πi (ui−1 , ui ) over
 the set of menus that
 are subject to the participation con00

straints. Now consider a menu given by u001 , · · · , uN−1 , u00N − ε for a small ε. Since u00N > u0N > cN ,
this menu satisfies the participation constraint. Moreover, this menu keeps the fraction of noncaptive N
types constant while increasing profits per N-th type, thus yielding higher profits, a contradiction.

FN is continuous. Suppose, towards a contradiction, that FN has a mass point at ûN . Let
u = (u1 , · · · , uN−1 , ûN ) be an arbitrary equilibrium menu with its N-th element given by ûN . Note
that we must have ΠN (uN−1 , ûN ) 6 0 and ûN = cN . The fact that ΠN (uN−1 , ûN ) 6 0 is immediate,
since otherwise a small increase in ûN would attain a higher level of profits. Additionally, if ûN > cN ,
then a small decrease in ûN would attain higher profits. Such a change increases profits because either
ΠN < 0—in which case this change decreases the probability that an N type accepts the offer discretely—
or ΠN = 0—in which case this change makes profits per N type strictly positive.

90

π

Non-positivity of profits, together with ûN = cN , implies that
vN −

v N − cN
v N − cN
v N − cN
vN − cN−1
cN +
uN−1 6 0 ⇒
uN−1 6
cN−1 ⇒ uN−1 6 cN−1 .
cN − cN−1
cN − cN−1
cN − cN−1
cN − cN−1

This inequality, together with the participation constraint, cN−1 6 uN−1 , implies that uN−1 must equal
cN−1 and ΠN = 0. That is, any menu u with ûN as its N-th element must also satisfy uN−1 = cN−1 ,
so that FN−1 must also have a mass point at cN−1 . Repetition of this argument implies that any menu
containing a mass point at ûN must also satisfy uj = cj , and thus Fj must have a mass point at cj .
However, then a small increase in u1 from u1 = c1 must increase profits, as F1 puts a mass at c1 and
profits from type 1 sellers are positive. This yields the necessary contradiction.
Step 2: If {Fk }N
k=j+1 are strictly increasing and continuous, then Fj must have the same properties.
To prove this claim, we first prove the following lemma:
Lemma 23. Suppose that, for some j 6 N − 1, the distributions {Fk }N
k=j are continuous and strictly increasing.

 N
Then there exists a sequence of strictly increasing and continuous functions Uk,j uj k=j+1 such that for any



menu û offered in equilibrium with its j-th element given by ûj , ûj+1 , · · · , ûN = Uj+1,j ûj , · · · , UN,j ûj .
Proof. We prove this claim by induction. For any value of uN−1 , let U+
N (uN−1 ) be the set of values of
uN such that equilibrium menus exist with (N − 1)-th and N-th elements given by (uN−1 , uN ).
We first show that U+
N (uN−1 ) is a strictly increasing function. Using exactly the same arguments
as in the two-type case, it is straightforward to show that: (i) U+
N (uN−1 ) must be a strictly increasing
0 ] ⊆ U+ (u
(u
),
[u,
correspondence; and (ii) if u, u0 ∈ U+
then
u
N−1
N−1 ). These results are direct imN
N
plications of strict supermodularity of the function µN (1 − π + πFN (uN )) ΠN (uN−1 , uN ) and the strict
monotonicity of FN .
Now suppose that for some ûN−1 , U+
N (ûN−1 ) is a correspondence and so contains an interval given
0
00
by [u , u ]. Then
Z


dΦ > FN u00 − FN u0 > 0
Pr (uN−1 = ûN−1 ) =
{(u1 ,··· ,uN−2 ,ûN−1 ,uN )∈Supp(Φ)}

where the last inequality follows from the fact that FN is strictly increasing. This inequality implies that
FN−1 has a mass point at ûN−1 , in contradiction with the assumption that FN−1 is continuous. Hence,
U+
N must be a single-valued function.
One can also adapt our arguments from the two-type case to show that U+
N (uN−1 ) is strictly increasing. If it were constant on an interval, then FN must have a mass point, contradicting the continuity of
FN . Thus, U+
N (uN−1 ) is a strictly increasing function and we may write profits from the N-th type as
function of uN−1 only. Let this function be given by Π+
N (uN−1 ).
(u
)
Next, let U+
be
defined
in
a
similar
fashion
as above. Since the profit function
N−2
N−1
µN−1 (1 − π + πFN−1 (uN−1 )) ΠN−1 (uN−2 , uN−1 ) + Π+
N (uN−1 )
is strictly supermodular and FN−1 and FN−2 are strictly increasing and continuous, U+
N−1 must be a
strictly increasing, single-valued function. Exact repetition of this argument implies that for all k ∈
{j, . . . , N − 1}, U+
j is a strictly increasing function. Therefore, we must have that

 


+
+
Uk,j ûj = U+
U
·
·
·
U
û
j
k
k−1
j+1
for all k ∈ {j + 1, . . . , N}, and this concludes the proof.
91



We now return to proving step 2 of the induction argument.
Fj is strictly increasing. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that Fj has a flat over an interval [u0j , u00j ]. Much
as in Lemma 11, we prove that if Fj is flat on the interval [u0j , u00j ], then the marginal benefit of delivering
one additional unit of surplus to type j + 1 (incorporating the impact on all types i > j + 1) changes
with uj ∈ [u0j , u00j ]. This fact allows us to show alternative menus with higher levels of profits than the
conjectured equilibrium level must
 exist.
To see this, first let U+
u
j be the correspondence defined in the proof of Lemma 23. By our
j+1
induction assumption and Lemma 23, profits from types {j + 1, . . . , N} can be written as



µj+1 1 − π + πFj+1 uj+1 Πj+1 uj , uj+1 + Π+
j+2 uj+1

where Π+
j+2 uj+1 are equilibrium profits constructed by applying Uk,j+1 as defined in Lemma 23. Note
that these profits are strictly supermodular in (uj , uj+1 ), and, as a result, U+
j+1 (uj ) is a strictly increasing
0
00
0
correspondence. Additionally, since Fj is flat over the interval [uj , uj ], we must have that U+
j+1 (uj ) and
00
U+
j+1 (uj ) must have a common element (as in the proof of Lemma 11). Let uj+1 be this common element.
Let u0 be an equilibrium menu with j-th element given by u0j and (j + 1)-th element given by uj+1
and u00 be an equilibrium menu with j-th element given by u00j and j + 1-th element given by uj+1 . Note
that a perturbation of u0 which increases uj0 by a small amount must not increase profits. Similarly, a
perturbation of u00 which decreases uj 00 by a small amount must not increase profits. Since Fj is flat on
[uj0 , uj00 ], non-positivity of these two perturbations imply
− µj Fj u0j

 vj − cj−1
cj − cj−1

+ µj+1 Fj+1 uj+1

 vj+1 − cj+1
cj+1 − cj

= 0.

(137)

As a consequence, profits obtained from any menu û, which is the same as u0 except at its j-th element
and has j-th element equal to uj ∈ [u0j , u00j ], must yield the same profits as u0 .
We now show that a perturbation from some such û must strictly increase profits. In particular,
consider a perturbation from û which increases uj+1 = ūj+1 by a small amount, ε. Since Fj+1 is strictly
increasing and continuous, the change in profits from this perturbation is given by


 vj+1 − cj

d
+
Π+
(138)
µj+1 fj+1 uj+1 Πj+1 uj , uj+1 + µj+1 1 − π + πFj+1 uj+1
j+2 uj+1 .
cj+1 − cj duj+1

Since fj+1 uj+1 > 0 and Πj+1 is linear in uj the expression in (138) must be non-zero for some
uj ∈ (u0j , u00j ). This implies some menu can strictly raise profits above the conjectured equilibrium
level and is a contradiction. Thus, Fj cannot have a flat.

Fj is continuous. Now suppose that Fj has a discontinuity at ûj . As in step 1, it must be that Πj ûj−1 , ûj 6
0. There are two possibilities: ûj = cj or ûj > cj . If ûj = cj , then a straightforward adaptation of the
argument in step 1—where we proved FN is continuous—can be applied to yield
a contradiction. Hence,

consider the second case with ûj > cj . Notice immediately that Πj ûj−1 , ûj must equal zero, since otherwise a small
 decrease in ûj would strictly increase profits. Since there is a unique value ûj−1 such that
Πj ûj−1 , ûj = 0, if Fj has a mass point at ûj , Fj−1 must also have a mass point at some ûj−1 . Repeating
this argument implies that F1 must have a mass point, and this mass point must be at v1 since u1 = v1 is
the unique value such that Π1 (u1 ) = 0.


Let u = v1 , . . . ûj−1 , ûj , uj+1 , Uj+2,j+1 uj+1 , . . . , UN,j+1 uj+1 . Since the distribution functions
0
00
0
00
Fj+1 , . . . , FN have no mass points, U+
j+1 (ûj ) = [uj+1 , uj+1 ] for some values uj+1 and uj+1 .
Let 1 6 k 6 j be the highest index for which φk 6= 0; recall, by assumption φ1 6= 0 so that k > 1. Now

92

consider two different perturbations from u where we perturb elements k through j according to


0
u− = v1 , . . . , ûk−1 , ûk − , . . . , u0j − , uj+1
, Uj+2,j+1 u0j+1 , . . . , UN,j+1 u0j+1 ,


u+ = v1 , . . . , ûk−1 , ûk + , . . . , u0j + , u00j+1 , Uj+2,j+1 u00j+1 , . . . , UN,j+1 u00j+1 .
For small , the change in the profits from the above perturbations are, respectively, given by
vk − ck−1
−
+ µk+1 (1 − π + πF−
k+1 (ûk+1 )) + · · · + µj (1 − π + πFj (ûj ))
ck − ck−1
vj+1 − cj+1
0
−µj+1 (1 − π + πF−
,
j+1 (uj+1 ))
cj+1 − cj
vk − ck−1
+
−µk (1 − π + πF+
− µk+1 (1 − π + πF+
k (ûk ))
k+1 (ûk+1 )) − · · · − µj (1 − π + πFj (ûj ))
ck − ck−1
vj+1 − cj+1
00
+µj+1 (1 − π + πF−
.
j+1 (uj+1 ))
cj+1 − cj
µk (1 − π + πF−
k (ûk ))

Since the distributions Fi are well behaved above and below each ûi , the strict rank preserving property
+
0
00
implies F−
i (ûi ) = Fj+1 (uj+1 ), and Fi (ûi ) = Fj+1 (uj+1 ) for all values of i 6 j. We may then write the
change in profits from the above perturbations, respectively, as
(1 − π + πF−
k (ûk ))

j
X

µi φi ,

i=k
j
X

−(1 − π + πF+
k (ûk ))

µi φ i .

i=k

Since k is the highest index below j for which φk 6= 0, one of the above expressions must be positive.
Therefore, one of the constructed menus increases profits, yielding a contradiction. The claim that
equilibrium is strictly rank-preserving then follows immediately from Lemma 23.

D.2.3

Proof of Lemma 21

The monopsonist maximizes
µ1 (v1 − u1 ) +

N
X
i=2


µi

 X
N
vi − ci
vi − ci−1
ui +
ui−1 =
µi (vi − φi ui )
vi −
ci − ci−1
ci − ci−1
i=1

subject to the monotonicity constraint
1>

un − un−1
ui+1 − ui
ui − ui−1
> ··· >
>
... > 0.
cn − cn−1
ci+1 − ci
ci − ci−1

(139)

Given the linearity in payoffs and constraints, the solution to this problem is a single price offer, i.e.,
ui = cJ , i 6 J and ui = ci for i > J for some J ∈ {1, 2...N} ; see arguments in Myerson (1985b) and
P
Samuelson (1984). To see why J must be the largest integer such that J−1
i=1 µi φi < 0, suppose otherwise,
Pk−1
i.e., ∃ k < J such that i=1 µi φi < 0 and the monopsonist sets ui = ck for i 6 k and ui = ci for i > k.
P
Then, a deviation which increases all ui for i < J by ε changes profits by −ε J−1

i=1 µi φi > 0.

93

D.2.4

Proof of Lemma 22

To show that the best equilibrium menu satisfies ui = uJ for i < J, suppose by way of contradiction that
for some i < J, ui < uJ . The monotonicity constraint implies uJ > uJ−1 ; if uJ = uJ−1 , then we must have
ui = ui−1 for all i < J. Now, consider an alternative menu that increases all the utilities of types below
J by ε. The probability of trade with
any type does not change (since this is already the best menu), the
P J−1
change in profits is given by −ε
i=1 µi φi , which is strictly positive by the definition of J in (136).
To show that the worst equilibrium menu satisfies ui = ci for i > J, suppose by way of contradiction
that uJ+k > cJ+k for some k > 0. This inequality, together with repeated application of the monotonicity
constraint, implies that ui > ci for all i 6 J + k. Now consider an alternative menu that lowers the utility
of all types below and including J + k by ε. This does not change the probability of trade as the original
P
menu is the worst menu. However, the change in profits from captive types is ε J+k
i=1 µi φi , which is
positive by the definition of J in (136).

D.2.5

The Solution to the System of ODEs in (135)

The general solution to this system of equations depends on the sign of the profits from the lowest types,
v1 − u1 . From (134), this profit is positive when φ1 > 0, and negative when φ1 < 0. In what follows, we
−ci−1 φ1
assume that the sequence γi = vcii −c
takes on different values for all i > 2, i.e., γi 6= γj .60 We thus
i−1 φj
have the following general solution:
Ui =

i
X

ak,i (|v1 − u1 |)γk

k=0

with
γ0 = 0, γ1 = 1
where
a0,i =
ak,i =

vi (ci − ci−1 )
vi − ci
+
a0,i−1
vi − ci−1
vi − ci−1
γi
v i − ci
ak,i−1
vi − ci−1 γi − γk

with
a0,1 = v1
a1,1 = sgn(v1 − u1 )
where sgn is 1 if it’s argument is positive and −1 when it’s argument is negative.
In the above formulation, the variables {ai,i }N
i=2 are unknown and have to be determined by the
boundary conditions in Lemma 22. To do this, for any value of u1 = min Supp(F1 ), we can use equation
(134) to solve for F1 , with the boundary condition that u1 . We can then find the value of u1 , i.e., the
upper bound of the support of F1 , using F1 (u1 ) = 1. We refer to this value as ũ1 (u1 ) as a function of u1 .
The boundary conditions then are given by:
UJ (u1 ) = cJ , · · · , UN (u1 ) = cN

U2 (ũ1 (u1 )) = ũ1 (u1 ), · · · , UJ (ũ1 (u1 )) = ũ1 (u1 )
The above is a system of N − J + 1 + J − 1 = N equations with N unknowns given by ai,i N
i=2 and u1 .
Solving this system of equations determines the equilibrium.
60 While

it is possible to provide the general solution of the ODEs, this assumption greatly simplifies the formulation.

94

