                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SHARING RISK WITH THE GOVERNMENT:
                    HOW TAXES AFFECT CORPORATE RISK TAKING

                                     Alexander Ljungqvist
                                       Liandong Zhang
                                           Luo Zuo

                                      Working Paper 21834
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21834


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2015




Previously circulated as "Sharing Risk with the Government: On the Causal Effects of Taxes on
Corporate Risk-Taking." We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from two anonymous
reviewers, Morten Bennedsen, Nathan Goldman, Abhiroop Mukherjee, and Stefan Zeume (our
discussants), Eli Bartov, Sanjeev Bhojraj, Robert Bloomfield, Agnes Cheng, Robert Engle,
Michelle Hanlon, Shane Heitzman, Sudarshan Jayaraman, Andrew Karolyi, Anne Marie Knott,
Clive Lennox, Ji-Chai Lin, Kenneth Merkley, Jeffrey Ng, Joseph Piotroski, Mark Soliman, K.R.
Subramanyam, Ross Watts, John Wei, Haibin Wu, Eric Yeung, Paul Zarowin, and Zilong Zhang,
as well as participants at various seminars and conferences. We thank Charles Choi and Chuchu
Liang for competent research assistance. Zuo gratefully acknowledges generous financial support
from the Institute for the Social Sciences at Cornell University. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alexander Ljungqvist, Liandong Zhang, and Luo Zuo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sharing Risk with the Government: How Taxes Affect Corporate Risk Taking
Alexander Ljungqvist, Liandong Zhang, and Luo Zuo
NBER Working Paper No. 21834
December 2015, Revised January 2017
JEL No. G32,H32

                                           ABSTRACT

Using 113 staggered changes in corporate income tax rates across U.S. states, we provide
evidence on how taxes affect corporate risk-taking decisions. Higher taxes reduce expected
profits more for risky projects than for safe ones, as the government shares in a firm’s upside but
not in its downside. Consistent with this prediction, we find that risk taking is sensitive to taxes,
albeit asymmetrically: the average firm reduces risk in response to a tax increase (primarily by
changing its operating cycle and reducing R&D risk) but does not respond to a tax cut. We trace
the asymmetry back to constraints on risk taking imposed by creditors. Finally, tax loss-offset
rules moderate firms’ sensitivity to taxes by allowing firms to partly share downside risk with the
government.

Alexander Ljungqvist                              Luo Zuo
Stern School of Business                          Johnson Graduate School of Management
New York University                               Cornell University
44 West Fourth Street, #9-160                     114 East Avenue
New York, NY 10012                                349 Sage Hall
and NBER                                          Ithaca, NY 14853
aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu                            luozuo@cornell.edu

Liandong Zhang
College of Business
City University of Hong Kong
83 Tat Chee Avenue
Kowloon, Hong Kong
liandong.zhang@cityu.edu.hk
1. Introduction

       Taxation is one of the most important tools governments use to influence the economy.

Taxes affect many aspects of economic activity, from individuals’ labor supply, consumption,

and savings decisions to companies’ hiring, location, and capital investment choices. In this

paper, we ask how taxes on corporate income affect corporate risk taking. As Solow (1956) notes,

risk taking is essential for both firms and economies to grow in the long run.

       Income taxes affect corporate risk taking because they induce an asymmetry in a firm’s

payoffs. This basic insight can be traced back to early work on individuals’ risk-taking choices in

response to personal income taxes (Domar and Musgrave 1944; Feldstein 1969; Stiglitz 1969)

and to subsequent applications to the corporate setting (Green and Talmor 1985). A simple

numerical example serves to illustrate the intuition. Suppose there are two projects (A and B) and

two equally likely outcomes (“good” and “bad”). Project A yields a profit of $40 in both

scenarios; project B yields a profit of $100 in the good scenario but a loss of $20 in the bad

scenario. Project risk is idiosyncratic and hence diversifiable. Absent taxes, the expected profit of

each project is $40 and so a risk-neutral firm will be indifferent between the projects.

       Now suppose the tax rate increases from zero to 30%. This reduces the expected after-tax

profit of both projects, but risky project B is more affected than safe project A: B’s expected

profit falls to $25 while A’s falls to only $28.1 The greater reduction (of $3) in project B’s

expected profit stems from the fact that the government shares in the profit but not in the loss.

Given this asymmetry, a risk-neutral firm will now prefer the safe project to the risky project.2

Generalizing from the example, we predict that firms should respond to a tax increase by

choosing safer projects and thereby reducing the risks they take.


1
    For project A, $40×(1–0.3) = $28; for project B, 0.5×[(1–0.3)×$100–$20] = $25.
2
    Firms are commonly modeled as being risk-neutral, but this is not crucial to the argument.

                                                                                                    1
       As Domar and Musgrave (1944) argue, introducing loss-offsets into the tax code can modify

this prediction. Consider the extreme case in which losses can be completely written off against

past or future profits. In this case, the pre-tax and post-tax ordering of the two projects are

identical because both the upside and the downside are reduced at the same tax rate.3 In practice,

the tax code permits at most a partial offset of losses, in which case the upside is reduced by

more than the downside. A tax increase will then reduce the expected profit of the risky project

by more than that of the safe project and firms should respond by reducing risk.

       Absent other frictions, these arguments apply symmetrically to tax increases and tax cuts, so

firms should respond to cuts by increasing risk. In practice, there is reason to expect asymmetry.

As the literature on risk-shifting emphasizes, higher risk reduces the value of claims held by

creditors. Whether a firm can respond to a tax cut by increasing risk then depends on the extent

to which creditors constrain its behavior, e.g., by means of debt covenants. In the presence of

such constraints, the effect of a tax cut on risk taking is likely attenuated for many firms.

       A key challenge when testing how taxes affect corporate policies is that a firm’s tax status is

often endogenous to its policies. For example, a firm’s choice of investment projects will affect

its future marginal tax rate. The literature confronts this identification challenge in various ways.

One approach is to exploit changes in federal income tax rates. Unfortunately, federal tax

changes suffer from two shortcomings: they are few and far between, and they affect virtually all

firms in the economy at the same time, making it difficult to find control firms with which to

establish a plausible counterfactual. A second approach is to exploit cross-country differences in

tax policies. This typically results in a larger number of tax “shocks” than in studies using federal

tax changes, but often requires implausible assumptions about treated firms and their controls

being comparable despite operating in different countries.
3
    In our numerical example, project B’s expected profit with full loss offsets is $28, the same as A’s.

                                                                                                            2
    We adopt a third approach, pioneered by Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist (2015), Heider

and Ljungqvist (2015), and Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist (2016). The approach exploits the fact

that U.S. companies pay not only federal income tax but also taxes in the various states in which

they operate. As Heider and Ljungqvist note, state taxes are a meaningful part of U.S. firms’

overall tax burden, accounting for about 21% of total income taxes paid in Compustat. Changes

in state corporate income tax rates are numerous (we count 113 between 1990 and 2011) and,

because they are staggered across states and time, lend themselves to a differences-in-differences

research design. As long as the usual identifying assumptions plausibly hold, such a design can

disentangle the effects of tax changes from other macroeconomic shocks that affect firms’ risk

taking by establishing a counterfactual – what level of risk would firms have chosen absent the

tax change? – using as controls firms that experience similar economic conditions (in time, space,

and industry) but are not themselves subject to a tax change.

    By way of preview, we have four main results. First, we find that firms respond to tax

increases by reducing their earnings volatility, as expected. To illustrate, a treated firm reduces

its earnings volatility by 2.6% in response to the average tax increase of 136 basis points, relative

to other firms in the same industry that are not subject to a tax change in their headquarter state

that year.4 This point estimate is likely conservative, given that firms are taxed not just in their

home state but in every state in which they have operations (their so called “nexus” states). This

means that a given state’s tax change applies to less than a multi-state firm’s entire tax base, so

tests that ignore the geographic distribution of a firm’s tax base likely understate the sensitivity

of risk taking to corporate income taxes. To address this issue, we construct a measure of state

tax changes that takes into account each firm’s tax exposure to each state. Doing so yields tax

4
  This effect is estimated over the 3 years following a tax increase; it becomes stronger when we give firms more
time to adjust their risk profiles. Over the 6 years following a tax increase, for example, the average treated firm
reduces risk by a cumulative 4.8%.

                                                                                                                       3
sensitivities that are between 25% and 60% larger than our baseline estimates.

   Second, investigating possible channels, we find that the main ways in which firms achieve

these risk reductions are efforts to shorten their operating cycles (which puts less capital at risk,

in particular in the form of inventories) and to find less risky ways to commercialize their R&D

projects. We find no evidence that firms tinker with their operating leverage, nor that they

change the level of their capital expenditures or R&D spending in response to state tax changes.

   Third, we find evidence consistent with an asymmetric tax sensitivity: firms do not, on

average, respond significantly to tax cuts, especially on a nexus-weighted basis. This finding is

consistent with our argument that firms face constraints on their ability to increase risk, for

example, in the form of covenants imposed by their creditors. If so, we expect firms with low

financial leverage to face fewer constraints and so to be more responsive to tax cuts. Consistent

with this conjecture, we find that low-leverage firms increase risk in response to tax cuts (by 6-7%

for each percentage-point cut in taxes). High-leverage firms, on the other hand, do not.

   Fourth, we find support for Domar and Musgrave’s (1944) argument that the ability to offset

losses against past or future profits should weaken the negative effect of income taxes on risk

taking. To establish this result, we collect detailed information on how state tax loss carryback

and carryforward rules have evolved over time. When we sort firms by their ability to offset tax

losses, we find that the negative effect of tax increases on risk taking is largely driven by firms

with a limited ability to offset losses. We also test how firms respond to the rule changes

themselves using a diff-in-diff setup. Firms’ responses to changes in offset rules broadly mirror

their responses to changes in tax rates. In particular, they asymmetrically reduce risk when their

ability to carry back losses is reduced.

   A causal interpretation of our findings requires that the diff-in-diff identifying assumptions



                                                                                                        4
plausibly hold. Threats to identification in our setting principally come from three directions: a

failure of the parallel-trends assumption, the possibility that local shocks trigger both states to

change their tax rates and firms to adjust their risk taking, leading to a spurious correlation

between tax and risk, and the potential for anticipation effects to bias the estimated tax

sensitivities. We perform a battery of tests designed to investigate these identification challenges.

   A standard dynamic test shows that treated and control firms exhibit similar trends in risk

taking before the state tax rate changes, supporting the parallel-trends assumption. To remove

potential confounding effects coming from unobserved changes in local economic conditions

that diffuse across state borders, we restrict the sample of controls to firms in states neighboring

treated firms’ home states. This allows us to difference away unobserved confounding effects,

assuming that economic conditions are similar in neighboring states while tax policies stop at the

state’s border. Our results are robust to this design. As for confounds whose effects coincide in

time with the treatment and do not diffuse across state borders, we show that coincident policy

changes (such as changes in state investment incentive programs) do not drive our results;

moreover, an Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) type test suggests that selection on unobservables

is not a major concern in our setting. Finally, we argue that changes in risk taking of the kind we

identify in our setting are not reasonably subject to major adjustment costs, which lessens

concerns that anticipation effects bias our estimates (Hennessy and Strebulaev 2015).

Empirically, we find no evidence that firms change risk in anticipation of future tax changes.

   Our study makes contributions to several literatures. First, it contributes to the tax literature

and to the literature on the effects of taxes on corporate policies by documenting that firms fine-

tune their risk profiles when their tax rates change and that they do so in a way that is consistent

with the theoretical insights of Domar and Musgrave (1944), Feldstein (1969), and Stiglitz



                                                                                                       5
(1969). Prior work on the effects of taxes on corporate policies largely focuses on firms’ capital

structure (following Modigliani and Miller 1958) and investment choices (following Hall and

Jorgenson 1967). The latter body of work is particularly relevant in our context. Its focus is on

the effect of taxes on the level of investment. As Hines (1998) notes, this focus has met with little

empirical success: “The apparent inability of tax incentives to stimulate aggregate investment

spending is one of the major puzzles in the empirical investment literature” (p. 2). We extend this

body of work by showing that corporate taxes affect firms’ choice of risk taking.

    Second, our study adds a new angle to the literature on corporate risk taking by identifying

taxes as an important determinant. While prior work highlights many other determinants, tax has

largely been ignored.5 A notable exception is a recent working paper by Langenmayr and Lester

(2015) whose best identified evidence comes from a change in a rule governing tax loss-offsets

affecting a limited sample of small Spanish firms.6 Our study takes a broader perspective. Our

main focus, motivated by the analysis of Domar and Musgrave (1944), is not on variation in tax

loss-offset rules but on variation in tax rates. Specifically, we focus on the sensitivity of risk

taking to tax rates, on the way tax loss-offset provisions moderate this sensitivity, and on

asymmetry in this sensitivity in the presence of constraints imposed by creditors on a firm’s

ability to increase risk.

    Compared to the extant empirical literature on corporate risk taking, our main advantage is


5
  Among these other determinants are managerial risk aversion and career concerns (May 1995; Gormley and Matsa
2016), the sensitivity of CEO wealth to stock volatility (Coles, Daniel, and Naveen 2006), option compensation
(Rajgopal and Shevlin 2002; Gormley, Matsa, and Milbourn 2013), inside debt (Cassell, Huang, Manuel Sanchez,
and Stuart 2012; Choy, Lin, and Officer 2014), corporate governance (John, Litov, and Yeung 2008), Sarbanes–
Oxley (Bargeron, Lehn, and Zutter 2010), creditor rights (Acharya, Amihud, and Litov 2011), and diversification
(Faccio, Marchica, and Mura 2011).
6
  Using a sharp regression discontinuity design, Langenmayr and Lester find that Spanish firms with revenues just
above EUR 20 million significantly reduced their earnings volatility when their ability to offset losses was limited in
2011, as compared to firms just below the revenue threshold. One of our empirical findings is similar, in that U.S.
firms reduce risk when state-level offset rules become less generous, though given the differences in research design,
we view Langenmayr and Lester’s results as having more limited external validity.

                                                                                                                    6
identification: our diff-in-diff approach not only establishes a set of plausible counterfactuals

taken from the same legal, regulatory, and business environment, but it also mitigates, when

paired with a focus on adjacent states, omitted-variable biases resulting from the confounding

influence of unobserved local shocks. These features of our research design go some way

towards permitting a causal interpretation of our results, which is critical for academic research

to be informative to policymakers (Leuz and Wysocki 2016).

    Finally, our results add nuance to the hedging literature. A parallel literature on risk

management shows that firms hedge to reduce income volatility with a view to increasing debt

capacity (Smith and Stulz 1985; Graham and Rogers 2002). It is possible that increased hedging

contributes to the tax-induced reduction in risk taking we observe. This would be interesting

because the hedging literature has so far found little support for taxes being an important reason

why firms engage in hedging.

2. Research Design, Institutional Setting, and Sample and Data

2.1 Empirical Strategy

    We use a diff-in-diff framework to estimate the effect of changes in state corporate income

tax rates on firms’ risk-taking choices. Our baseline regression takes the following form:

     Riski , j ,s ,t  Ts,t  Ts,t  Z s ,t  X i ,t 1   j ,t   i , j , s ,t ,                      (1)

where i, j, s, and t index firms, industries, states, and years, respectively. is the first-difference

operator. Riski,j,s,t is a measure of firm i’s risk taking (defined in Section 2.3). Zs,t represents state-

level control variables measured as of year t, while Xi,t-1 is a vector of firm-level control variables

measured as of t–1.7 The j,t are SIC4 industry-by-year fixed effects. i,j,s,t is the usual error term.

Given the state-level nature of the tax variation we exploit, we cluster standard errors by state

7
 Consistent with prior research, we use beginning-of-year (i.e., year t–1) values for the firm-level controls as these
variables are likely affected by a firm’s concurrent risk-taking choices (Gow, Larker, and Reiss 2016).

                                                                                                                         7
(Petersen 2009).8

       The variables of interest are Ts,t and Ts,t , which measure the magnitude of a tax increase

or a tax cut in either a firm’s home state or across its nexus states in year t. Details of these tax

changes and how they are computed are provided in Section 2.2. Since each tax-change variable

is measured in absolute terms, corporate risk taking is reduced in response to a tax increase if

β<0 and increased in response to a tax cut if γ>0.

       Estimating Eq. (1) in first-differenced form removes firm-specific fixed effects and potential

confounding effects from time-invariant state-level conditions or policies (e.g., political parties

or fiscal policies). An advantage of a first-differenced specification over a levels specification

with firm fixed effects is that first-differencing can accommodate repeated treatments, treatment

reversals, and asymmetry in firms’ responses to tax changes. Including industry-by-year fixed

effects removes unobserved time-varying industry shocks by comparing the behavior of treated

and control firms in the same industry at the same point in time.

       To illustrate our research design, consider Pennsylvania (PA). In 1991, PA raised its top

corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 12.25%. Following this tax increase, stock market-listed

firms headquartered in PA reduced risk by about 10% on average. From the point of view of an

individual firm in PA, this tax shock is plausibly exogenous: presumably, no firm would have

lobbied for the tax increase. Exogeneity with respect to individual firms’ characteristics is not,

however, sufficient to establish causality: other coincident developments, such as changes in

investment opportunities in PA, could be responsible for the reduction in corporate risk taking.

       To control for such contemporaneous developments, our baseline model in Eq. (1) compares

risk changes among PA firms to the contemporaneous risk changes among firms in the same


8
    Our results are robust to alternative approaches (see the Online Appendix).

                                                                                                         8
industry that are located in other states without a tax change in 1991, say, in New York (NY). To

the extent that PA firms and NY firms are faced with similar changes in their prospects, the

contemporaneous change in risk among NY firms provides a counterfactual estimate of how PA

firms’ risk choices would have evolved absent the tax increase. The difference-in-differences,

that is, the difference across firms in different states of the within-firm risk change around the tax

increase, provides an estimate of the tax sensitivity of corporate risk taking.

    Eq. (1) generalizes this illustrative example in that it exploits variation in taxes across many

states and years. For any change in corporate income taxes in state s and year t, the potential

control states are all those states that did not change their corporate income taxes in that year. In

addition, Eq. (1) also controls for time-varying firm and state factors, as well as unobserved

time-invariant firm characteristics and time-varying industry shocks.

    As discussed in the introduction, a causal interpretation of the coefficients of interest in Eq.

(1) requires that risk taking at treated and control firms follow parallel trends, that state tax

changes do not coincide systematically with variation in local business cycles or other tax or

non-tax state policies that might independently affect firms’ risk taking, and that changes in state

tax policies be unanticipated. We present tests designed to address potential violations of these

identifying assumptions in Section 3.2.

2.2 Institutional Setting

2.2.1 Changes in state corporate income tax rates

    Table A.1 in the Online Appendix provides an overview of all changes in state corporate

income tax rates over the period 1990 to 2011. We start in 1990 because one of our control

variables requires two lags of cash flow statement data, and cash flow data are only available via

Compustat since 1988. We end in 2011 to give firms time to adjust their risk profiles after taxes



                                                                                                        9
change. Panel A lists 40 tax increases in 24 states (including Washington, DC) affecting 1,152

sample firms in fiscal years 1990–2011, while Panel B lists 73 tax cuts in 27 states (including

DC) affecting 4,920 firms in fiscal years 1990–2011.9 The average tax shock increases tax rates

by 93 basis points and the average tax cut reduces tax rates by 55 basis points.

    Our main variables of interest are the magnitude of tax increase and magnitude of tax cut in a

firm’s headquarter state in a given fiscal year, in each case measured as the absolute value of the

difference between this year’s and last year’s tax rate. From time to time, firms move their

headquarters from one state to another. Compustat provides information only on a firm’s current

headquarter state. To remedy this flaw, we use Heider and Ljungqvist’s (2015) hand-collected

data on firms’ historical headquarter states. Based on these data, the average (median) treated

firm experiences a tax increase of 136 (106) basis points and a tax cut of 53 (44) basis points.

    Firms are taxed in every state in which they have a physical presence (their so called “nexus”

states).10 To reduce the scope for profit-shifting and tax arbitrage, states do not attempt to

measure actual profits earned in-state. Instead, under the 1957 Uniform Division of Income for

Tax Purposes Act, a multi-state firm’s federal taxable income is apportioned to each nexus state

using a formula based on an average of the fractions of the firm’s total payroll, sales, and

property located in that state. This has two consequences for our analysis. First, it is not

necessary for us to map a firm’s projects to a specific state (which data limitations prevent us

from doing): a firm can respond to a tax change in state A by changing the risk profile of its

projects in any state it operates in. Second, the extent to which a multi-state firm is exposed to a

9
  In coding which firms are affected by tax changes when, we are careful to capture whether a tax change affects
firms with fiscal years ending or beginning on or after the effective date. This affects when it makes sense for a firm
to react. We lose 8 of Heider and Ljungqvist’s (2015) 121 tax changes, partly because our sample starts later, partly
because two of their tax changes (in North Dakota in 2007 and 2009) affect none of the firms satisfying our
sampling criteria, and partly because we lack a clear prediction for how changes from gross receipts taxes to income
taxes (or vice versa) affect firm risk-taking.
10
   As of 2011, three states (Nevada, South Dakota, and Wyoming) do not impose income taxes, and three states
(Ohio, Texas, and Washington) impose gross receipts taxes rather than income taxes.

                                                                                                                    10
given state income tax change depends on the extent of its nexus to that state.

     To measure the magnitude of tax shocks experienced by multi-state firms more accurately,

we approximate the geographic distribution of their tax liabilities using location data for their

subsidiaries, branches, and plants. Specifically, we match Compustat firms by name to the

National Establishment Time Series (NETS) database, which contains a comprehensive record of

all business establishments in the U.S. since 1989.11 We then calculate the weighted change in

state tax rates in a firm’s nexus states in a fiscal year as follows:

                               1 employees i , s ,t                                     
                           2 employees
                                                                   1 sales i , s ,t      Ts ,t
      tax rate i ,t                                                                             ,       (2)
                                                                   2 sales i ,total ,t   
                          s                    i , total , t                             

where employeesi,s,t and salesi,s,t are firm i’s number of employees and sales in state s in year t,

respectively, and employeesi,total,t and salesi,total,t are the corresponding firm totals across all nexus

states in year t, respectively. Ts,tis the change in the corporate income tax rate in state s in year

t. Eq. (2) approximates a firm’s nexus with each state using a 50/50 average of the fractions of

the firm’s total employment and sales in that state. Based on the magnitude and sign of the

weighted tax change in Eq. (2), we define two alternative variables of interest: nexus-weighted

tax increase and nexus-weighted tax cut, in each case measured in absolute terms.

2.2.2 Tax loss carryback/carryforward rules

     The effect of taxes on risk taking is moderated by tax loss-offset provisions (Domar and

Musgrave 1944). Most states have loss-offset rules. For example, in 2011, about a third of states

allow firms to offset current losses against income earned in the past 2 or 3 years, and all states

allow firms to carry current losses forward, for periods ranging from 5 to 20 years. To examine

heterogeneous treatment effects, we collect data on state tax loss carryback/carryforward rules

over our sample period. We also use changes in these rules as an alternative source of policy
11
  Neumark, Zhang, and Wall (2007) assess NETS along various dimensions and conclude that it is generally
reliable. The name match is borrowed from Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist (2016).

                                                                                                           11
shocks to examine the effects of corporate taxation on firm risk taking.

     Table A.2 in the Online Appendix provides details of changes in state tax loss

carryback/carryforward rules for our sample period. Panel A lists 15 increases in the loss

carryback period in 11 states (including DC) affecting 430 sample firms in fiscal years 1990–

2011, while Panel B lists 36 reductions in the loss carryback period in 26 states (including DC)

affecting 1,164 firms. At the state-level, the average increase is 2.13 years while the average

reduction is 1.75 years. The average (median) treated firm experiences an increase of 2.04 (2)

years and a reduction of 1.83 (1) years.

     Panel C lists 47 increases in the loss carryforward period in 37 states (including DC)

affecting 5,349 sample firms in fiscal years 1990–2011, while Panel D lists 10 reductions in the

loss carryforward period in eight states affecting 1,828 firms. The variation in carryforward

periods is larger than for carryback periods. At the state-level, increases average 6.43 years,

while reductions average 8.2 years. The average (median) treated firm experiences an increase in

the carryforward period of 6.65 (5) years and a reduction of 9.58 (10) years.

2.2.3 Other state-level tax policy changes

     Appendix A shows that changes in state corporate income tax rates and loss-offset rules

rarely coincide with each other or with changes in investment incentive programs (i.e., tax

credits for investment, R&D, and job creation). It is thus unlikely that our results are confounded

by coincident changes in these state policies. The only area of overlap we find is with bank taxes:

28 of the 40 corporate tax increases coincide with bank tax increases and 56 of the 73 corporate

tax cuts coincide with bank tax cuts. Since bank tax changes could trigger changes in the supply

of bank loans, we verify that our results are robust to controlling for changes in bank taxes.12


12
  Banks have a unique status for state tax purposes (Koch 2005). They are taxed on a different schedule from
corporations and so are subject to their own tax changes. When a state increases its bank tax, it reduces the after-tax

                                                                                                                     12
2.3 Sample and Data

2.3.1 Sample

    Our sample begins with all firm-year observations in the merged CRSP-Compustat database

for fiscal years 1990 to 2011. We exclude financial firms (SIC=6; 27,197 observations), utilities

(SIC=49; 7,174 observations), public-sector entities (SIC=9; 2,187 observations), non-U.S. firms

(17,289 observations), and firms headquartered outside the U.S. (954 observations). We delete

firms without stock return data, firms not traded on a major U.S. stock exchange (NYSE, Amex,

or Nasdaq), and firms with a CRSP share code >11 (47,666 observations). Observations with

negative or missing total assets (30,281 observations) are also excluded. Requiring non-missing

data for our risk measures and control variables and their lagged values leaves us with a final

panel of 64,447 firm-year observations for 8,046 firms.

2.3.2 Measures of risk taking

    We view a firm as a portfolio of projects which can differ in their risks. At each instant, the

firm can close down existing projects and add new ones. While we do not observe these project-

level choices, we do observe the aggregate cash flows they generate. We thus measure corporate

risk taking as the firm-level volatility of aggregate cash flows, defined in two different ways.

    Our first measure of risk taking, ROA volatility, is the standard deviation of seasonally

adjusted quarterly pre-tax returns on assets (ROA) over the three-year period from year t to t+2,

where pre-tax ROA is operating income after depreciation (i.e., earnings before interest and taxes)

divided by the book value of total assets and the seasonal adjustment for firm i in quarter q of

year t is computed as ROAi ,t ,q  ROAi ,t ,q  ROAi ,t 1,q (Correia, Kang, and Richardson 2015). The

first difference of ROA volatility for year t is the log-transformed standard deviation computed


profit on every loan made to borrowers located in the state, regardless of the lender’s own location. Variation in a
state’s bank taxes can thus induce variation in the supply of loans available to firms located in the state.

                                                                                                                       13
over years t to t+2 minus the log-transformed standard deviation computed over years t–3 to t–

1.13

       Our second measure of risk taking, ROIC volatility, is the standard deviation of seasonally

adjusted quarterly pre-tax returns on invested capital (ROIC) over a three-year period from year t

to t+2. Following Lundholm and Sloan (2012), we compute ROIC as operating income after

depreciation divided by the sum of debt, minority interests, preferred stock, and common stock.14

       Note that because both variables are measured before interest and taxes, they capture

business (or asset) risk rather than the effects of financing risk. This is important because it is

well-known that tax changes can prompt firms to change their financial leverage. Our measures

are thus designed to isolate the effects of taxes on the real (rather than financial) risks firms take.

       In a robustness test, we use two market-based measures as alternative measures of risk taking,

namely, the standard deviation of stock returns and the de-leveraged standard deviation of stock

returns. We prefer the earnings-based risk measures because they more likely reflect a firm’s

choice of risk (stock returns not being under the firm’s control).

2.3.3 Control variables and descriptive statistics

       Following prior research (e.g., Coles, Daniel, and Naveen 2006), our baseline specification in

Eq. (1) controls for the following firm characteristics: age, size, market-to-book ratio, book

leverage, cash surplus, loss carry-forward, sales growth, and annual stock return. (See Appendix

B for definitions.) Table 1 presents summary statistics. The average (median) ROA volatility is

6.8% (3.8%), and the average (median) ROIC volatility is 10.6% (5.3%). Given the skewed

distribution of these two risk measures, we use their log-transformed values in our regression

13
  To construct these measures, we use data from Compustat Quarterly for fiscal years 1987 to 2013.
14
  ROIC is also called return on net operating assets (RNOA). Some researchers view non-operating cash as negative
debt and subtract total cash from invested capital in computing ROIC. However, in the presence of financial frictions,
non-operating cash should not be viewed as negative debt (Acharya, Almeida, and Campello 2007). Moreover, firms
generally do not disclose how much cash they hold for non-operating purposes (Lundholm and Sloan 2012).

                                                                                                                  14
analysis. The average firm in our sample is 19.6 years old and has total assets of $1,755.2 million.

   Our baseline specification also controls for two state-level variables intended to capture local

variation in economic conditions: the real growth rate in gross state product (GSP) and the state

unemployment rate. The mean home-state GSP growth rate is 2.7% and the mean unemployment

rate is 5.9%. We consider further state-level controls when we address identification concerns.

3. State Corporate Income Taxes

3.1 Baseline Estimates of the Effect of State Corporate Income Tax Changes on Risk Taking

   Table 2 reports the results of estimating Eq. (1). Columns 1 and 2 model how firms respond

to tax changes in their headquarter states. In the regression with ROA volatility as the dependent

variable (column 1), the coefficient on magnitude of tax increase is -0.019 (p=0.007), suggesting

that firms reduce risk taking in response to a tax increase. The effect is both statistically and

economically significant. The point estimate suggests that the average treated firm, whose home-

state tax rate increases by 136 basis points, reduces its risk taking by 2.6% relative to other firms

in the same industry that are not subject to tax changes in their own home state that year. In

column 2, where we use ROIC volatility as the dependent variable, the coefficient on magnitude

of tax increase is -0.020 (p=0.006) – nearly identical to the point estimate in column 1.

   The models shown in columns 1 and 2 relate the difference in volatility measured over fiscal

years t to t+2 and volatility measured over fiscal years t–3 to t–1 to tax changes occurring in

fiscal year t. In columns 3 and 4, we lag the tax changes by one year to allow for delays in firms’

responses to tax changes. This produces stronger results for ROA volatility and similar results for

ROIC volatility: ROA volatility falls by 2.6 percentage points for every one-percentage-point

increase in the tax rate (p<0.001), while ROIC volatility falls by 1.9 percentage points (p=0.047).

   Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 model how firms respond to contemporaneous changes in their



                                                                                                    15
nexus-state weighted income tax rates. As discussed earlier, the weighted tax-change measures

attempt to approximate the shock to a firm’s actual state-tax burden. In column 5, where the

dependent variable is ROA volatility, the coefficient on nexus-weighted tax increase is -0.024

(p=0.011), suggesting that a one-percentage-point increase in a firm’s nexus-weighted tax rate

reduces its risk taking by 2.4% relative to control firms in the same industry and year. In column

6, the coefficient on nexus-weighted tax increase is -0.032 (p=0.005) when we use ROIC

volatility as the dependent variable. The effects estimated for nexus-weighted tax changes are

thus larger than those for home-state tax changes, confirming our prediction that ignoring the

geographic distribution of firms’ tax bases understates the tax sensitivity of firms’ risk taking.

Results using home-state tax changes are hence conservative.15

     The contemporaneous effect of tax cuts is to increase risk taking. The effect is large, but

unlike the effect of tax increases, it is not statistically significant. For example, in column 1, the

coefficient on magnitude of tax cut is 0.016 with a p-value of 0.322. The results for ROIC

volatility or when using nexus-weighted tax changes show a similar pattern. When lagged, the

effect of tax cuts on risk taking is close to zero.16

     The finding that firms more strongly and more consistently respond to tax increases than to

tax cuts could be a power problem,17 or it could be due to external constraints on firms’ ability to

increase risk. A natural source of constraints on corporate risk taking is creditors, whose claims

fall in value as risk increases. To investigate this possibility, we sort firms into those with low

15
   Among the control variables, we find that risk increases by less as the firm ages or grows in size. Firms with a
higher market-to-book ratio change risk more, while firms with higher financial leverage, more cash surplus, and
higher stock returns change risk less. Firms with higher sales growth rates and loss carryforwards change risk more.
The two state-level control variables are also marginally significant. Firms increase risk as the GSP growth rate falls
and as the state unemployment rate increases.
16
   While the difference in the sensitivity to tax increases and to tax cuts is small and not statistically significant for
contemporaneous tax changes, it is economically large and statistically significant for ROA volatility when we use
lagged tax changes.
17
   This reduced sensitivity to tax cuts is not due to tax cuts being smaller, on average, than tax increases in our
sample: as Table A.4 in the Online Appendix shows, similar results obtain when we focus on large tax cuts.

                                                                                                                       16
financial leverage (assumed to face fewer constraints) and those with high leverage (assumed to

face more constraints), measured as of the end of previous fiscal year. Table 3 reports the results.

Consistent with our conjecture, firms with low leverage do, in fact, increase risk taking

significantly in response to a tax cut, whereas firms with high leverage do not.18

     A more direct way to test our conjecture would be to measure the tightness of contractual

constraints imposed on borrowers in the form of covenants. While data on covenants are

available only for a subset of our sample firms, and even then are patchy, we find quite similar

results: firms with few or lax covenants increase risk more strongly in response to tax cuts than

do firms with many or tight covenants; see Table A.5 in the Online Appendix.

3.2 Identification Challenges

     Threats to a causal interpretation of the findings reported in the previous section come from

potential violations of our identifying assumptions. In this section, we report dynamic tests to

shed light on the parallel-trends assumption, tests designed to deal with changes in local

economic conditions that coincide with state tax changes, and tests that deal with potential

anticipation effects. If anything, these refinements strengthen our conclusion insofar as they yield

typically somewhat larger point estimates of the sensitivity of corporate risk taking to tax

increases. We also continue to find evidence that firms respond to tax changes asymmetrically.

3.2.1 Parallel trends

     As in any diff-in-diff test, a causal interpretation of the effect of tax changes on risk taking

requires that treated and control firms follow parallel trends absent the tax change. To test for

parallel trends, Table 4 includes lead terms of the tax change variables. These are measured as of


18
   Table 3 also shows that firms’ sensitivity to tax increases does not vary with their leverage. This rules out an
alternative interpretation of our baseline results, namely that firms reduce risk when taxes increase not because their
tax function has become more convex but simply because doing so allows them to more easily increase their
financial leverage.

                                                                                                                    17
year t+3, given that we use 12 quarters of earnings data to construct our volatility measures. The

point estimates for the lead terms are economically tiny and not statistically different from zero,

suggesting that risk follows parallel trends at treated firms and controls before state income tax

rate changes. One implication of these findings is that firms do not anticipate future changes in

state income taxes (or if they do, that they wait to change risk until the tax changes affect

shareholder wealth). This, in turn, lessens concerns regarding potential anticipation effects.

   Table 4 also allows for potential delays in firms’ responses to tax cuts and post-shock

reversals in the effect of tax increases by including three-year lags. The coefficient for lagged tax

increases is negative, indicating that firms do not subsequently reverse the reduction in risk

following a tax increase. Given the relatively large point estimate, the effect of a tax increase

appears not only persistent but also increasing over time. In column 1, the cumulative effect is -

0.035 (p<0.001), suggesting that a one-percentage-point increase in the state corporate income

tax rate in year t reduces ROA volatility by 3.5% over the next six years (i.e., ROA volatility

measured over years t to t+2 and over years t+3 to t+5). Given an average tax increase of 136

basis points, the average treated firm thus reduces its risk by a cumulative 4.8%. For tax cuts, the

coefficient on the lag term is economically small and statistically insignificant.

3.2.2 Local business cycle effects and other state-level confounds

   What might be called “local shocks” are a standard challenge to research designs that exploit

local policy changes. A priori, there is little reason to expect tax changes to be “exogenous”

rather than to occur in response to local shocks. The identification concern then is that changes in

local economic conditions coincide with, or even drive, state changes in tax rates, and that it is

these changes in local economic conditions – rather than the tax changes – that cause firms to

change their risk taking.



                                                                                                     18
     We next present tests designed to deal with local shocks of three different types: (a) observed

or unobserved changes in local economic conditions that coincide with state tax changes and

whose effects diffuse across state borders, and either (b) observed or (c) unobserved changes in

economic policies that coincide with state tax changes and whose effects stop at the state border.

     To address local shocks of type (a), we perform a neighboring-state test,19 by dropping far-

away control states, restricting the set of control firms to those located in states bordering the

treated state, and including neighboring-state-by-year fixed effects to difference away

unobserved variation in local economic conditions.20 The essence of a neighboring-state test is to

exploit a policy discontinuity along a geographic boundary under the maintained assumption that

there exists an unobserved time-varying confound which might bias the treatment effect of

interest. The aim is to difference away the confound in order to obtain an unbiased estimate of

the treatment effect. In our setting, the policy in question is a tax change TA in state A which

applies only in state A but not in neighboring state B (this is the policy discontinuity). The

outcome variable is the change in risk, R. The potential time-varying confound (denoted by Y)

could, for example, be business cycle variation.

     The identifying assumption is that YA ≈YB (both states are exposed to roughly the same

business cycle variation). Under this identifying assumption, (RA|TA, YA) –RB|YB) is a

consistent estimate of the effect of taxes on risk taking, given that YA −YB ≈ 0, and so the

unobserved confound can be differenced away using a fixed effect common to states A and B in

the tax-shock year. Economically speaking, cross-border neighbors establish the counterfactual

risk-taking response to the local business cycle variation of firms not affected by a tax increase,


19
   See Holmes (1998), Huang (2008), Dell (2010), and Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010).
20
   Note that, in so doing, we drop observations for states that are treated in another year but are not the neighbor of a
treated state in the current year.

                                                                                                                      19
and this counterfactual response is then subtracted from the treated firms’ response to the

treatment. In other words, comparing treated firms to their immediate neighbors helps ensure that

trends are parallel after removing the effects (if any) of common variation in local conditions.21

     Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 report the results. Compared to firms in neighboring states,

treated firms reduce both ROA volatility and ROIC volatility by 2.5% (p=0.016 in column 1 and

p=0.037 in column 2) in response to a one-percentage-point increase in the corporate tax rate.

Thus, controlling for unobserved local shocks increases the point estimates a little compared to

the Table 2 baseline. Tax cuts continue to have no effect on risk taking. Overall, these patterns

confirm that our findings are not driven by unobserved variation that coincides with the tax

changes but diffuses across state borders.

     A related threat to identification is that there could be an interaction between time-varying

local conditions and a state’s time-invariant policies. Say states A and B are exposed to the same

business cycle variation but state A is a business-friendly state while state B believes in heavy

regulation. Then firms in state A will be more sensitive to the common business cycle variation

than firms in state B. This, in turn, would violate a version of the identifying assumption, namely

that absent the tax change in state A, RA|YA ≈RB|YB. In this scenario, our test would

wrongly attribute the difference in risk taking, (RA|TA, YA) –RB|YB), to the tax change

rather than to the moderating effect on YB of state B’s heavy regulatory burden.

     For such an interaction between time-varying local conditions and time-invariant policies to

spuriously produce our results, it would have to be the case that firms’ risk choices were

systematically more sensitive to changes in economic conditions in tax-increasing states than in

neighboring control states. We view this as unlikely for two reasons. First, while it is conceivable
21
  The neighboring-state test does not assume that neighboring states have the same or similar policies. Assume
there is variation in policies across neighboring states. If these policies do not themselves change at the time of the
tax change, they are differenced away by our first-difference research design and so cannot confound the results.

                                                                                                                      20
that a particular constellation of policy differences across neighboring states and local conditions

could produce this identification challenge in some place at some point in our data, it is much

less likely to systematically confound our results, given that we exploit not one but 113 tax

changes that are neither clustered in time nor in space. Second, the large number of tax changes

means that every state (bar Montana) that is treated at some time also acts as a control state at

some other time in our panel. The effects of cross-state differences in the sensitivity of risk

taking to local conditions thus cancel out.22,23

     This leaves confounds whose variation coincides with the tax changes and whose influence

stops at the state border. Some of these are observable, others unobservable. Prominent potential

confounds of the observable variety include the state-level policy changes listed in Appendix A.

Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 control for changes in state taxes on bank profits and in investment

incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for investment, R&D, and job creation), some of which

coincide with corporate tax changes. Doing so increases the estimated effect of tax increases by

around a third (from -0.025 to around -0.033). The effect of tax cuts remains statistically

insignificant, and the difference between the sensitivities to tax cuts and tax increases is

economically large and statistically significant (p=0.007 in column 3 and p=0.021 in column 4).

     Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) propose dealing with confounds of the unobservable variety

by estimating the degree of selection on observables and using it as a guide to the degree of

selection on unobservables. In our context, this entails gauging the potentially confounding role

of state-level political and economic conditions that may affect state tax policy. As a first step,


22
   If risk-taking in business-friendly state A always responds to the business cycle while risk-taking in state B does
not, then the treatment effect is (A–B) when A is treated and (B–A) when B is treated, so that the overall treatment
effect averages zero (i.e., (A–B)+(B–A)=0). Our results reject this null hypothesis, at least for tax increases.
23
   A related concern is that tax changes in one state may trigger changes in the behavior of firms in a neighboring
state. To investigate such cross-border spillovers, we conduct a test in the spirit of Table 5 that restricts the set of
control firms to those located in states not neighboring the treated state. As Table A.6 in the Online Appendix shows,
our inferences are unchanged.

                                                                                                                    21
columns 5 and 6 of Table 5 include the main determinants of state tax changes as identified by

Heider and Ljungqvist (2015). This increases the estimated sensitivity to tax increases further, to

3.6% (p=0.012) for ROA volatility and 4.1% (p=0.006) for ROIC volatility. The effect of tax cuts

on risk taking continues to be economically small and statistically insignificant.

    In the next step, we follow Christensen et al. (2016) who propose a falsification test of the

potential bias induced by selection on unobservables. The test regresses the part of the outcome

variable that is related to observed determinants of the suspected confounds (here: the change in

risk taking predicted from our economic and political controls) on the treatment variable (here:

the change in the tax rate). A small coefficient in the falsification test, compared to the estimated

treatment effect in the baseline test, suggests that the baseline treatment effect is unlikely to

reflect unobserved confounds. As Table A.7 in the Online Appendix shows, the point estimates

in the falsification test are tiny and statistically insignificant. These results reinforce our

conclusion that unobserved variation in local conditions is unlikely to be severe in our setting.

3.2.3 Anticipation effects

    If firms plan their current policies based on the tax rates they expect to face in the future,

their observed responses to an actual tax change may not uncover the causal effect of taxes on

their behavior. To see why, consider a tax increase that turns out smaller than expected. This

may cause corporate policy to change in a way normally expected after a tax cut (since the tax

rate increased by less than expected), which in turn would confound the interpretation of the

observed treatment effect (as the econometrician does not observe the firm’s expectations).

Having said that, the absence of significant lead effects in Table 4, discussed earlier, suggests

that firms do not change risk in anticipation of future tax changes.

    As Hennessy and Strebulaev (2015) note, anticipation effects only undermine identification if



                                                                                                     22
the corporate policy in question is subject to adjustment costs, so that the firm must plan ahead in

order to reach its desired position over time given its expectations. The next subsection explores

empirically various mechanisms by which firms may change risk taking in response to tax

changes. Some of these are more plausibly subject to adjustment costs than others. The one that

we find to be strongest in the data is a short-term mechanism with few obvious adjustment costs.

       There is one (somewhat obvious) scenario, besides the absence of adjustment costs, for when

anticipation effects do not pose an identification challenge: if policy changes are unanticipated.

More formally, a necessary and sufficient condition for correct inference about causal effects is

that the policy variable is a Martingale (Hennessy and Strebulaev 2015), which in our context

means that state tax rates follow a random walk. Using three unit root tests, Ljungqvist and

Smolyansky (2016) largely fail to reject the null hypothesis of a random walk.24

       Specifically, in separate augmented Dickey-Fuller tests on each state’s time series of tax rates

from 1969 to 2013, Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2016) fail to reject the presence of a unit root in

each state and DC, suggesting corporate tax rates follow a random walk in every state. Realizing

that some states condition their tax policy on the tax policies of their neighbors (Heider and

Ljungqvist 2015), Ljungqvist and Smolyansky also test the null hypothesis that each state in a

given regional “cluster” has a unit root while allowing for cross-sectional dependence in tax rates

across states. Clusters are defined either as a state and its contiguous neighbors (giving 49

clusters, including DC’s but excluding Alaska and Hawaii) or as states that are located in a given

Census region. The null cannot be rejected at standard significance levels except in Connecticut

and in Massachusetts and their respective contiguous neighbors. Within Census regions, the null

is never rejected at the 5% level; it is rejected at the 10% level in New England.

       To see whether anticipation effects in states whose tax rates do not follow a random walk
24
     These findings echo Barro (1990), who reports that federal taxes follow a random walk.

                                                                                                    23
may confound our results, Table 6 excludes firms headquartered in Connecticut or Massachusetts

(columns 1 and 2 ) or in New England as a whole (columns 3 and 4). Doing so marginally

reduces the magnitude of the treatment effect of tax increases, to between -0.014 and -0.018

(p<0.05). Tax cuts continue to have no significant effect on the average firm’s choice of risk.

   An alternative to this econometric way of classifying tax changes as potentially anticipated is

the “narrative approach” of Romer and Romer (2010). Heider and Ljungqvist (2015) examine the

political economy events surrounding all state tax changes affecting at least 100 firms since 1989

to identify potentially anticipated tax changes. Based on their findings, columns 5 and 6 of Table

6 exclude firms headquartered in Colorado, Connecticut, Minnesota, or New York (all of which

experienced sequences of tax cuts). This yields sensitivities to tax increases of between -0.016

and -0.019 (p<0.05), again marginally smaller than those reported in our baseline tests.

   Collectively, the results in Table 6 suggest that anticipation effects do not play a major role

in contaminating our findings. This, in turn, increases our confidence in the external validity of

our findings: to the extent that state tax rates truly follow a random walk, the patterns we

document should apply more broadly than just in the setting and time period we study.

3.3 Mechanisms

   By what means do firms reduce risk in response to state corporate income tax increases? The

reasonably fast reduction in earnings volatility (measured over the three-year period from t to t+2)

suggests that firms change the risk profile of their existing operations. One way to do so is to

make changes to the operating cycle: the process by which cash is transformed into raw materials,

work in progress, finished goods, accounts receivable, and eventually back into cash. Shortening

the operating cycle (for example, by reducing the amount of cash tied up in inventory that could

go unsold) puts less capital at risk and so reduces earnings volatility. Essentially, the firm can



                                                                                                     24
reduce its operating risk by reducing its investment in working capital, and it can do so relatively

quickly and, potentially, without incurring substantial adjustments.

     Panel A of Table 7 provides evidence of such reductions in operating risk. In the year

following a tax increase, we see firms reducing their operating cycles by an average of 1.7 days

and 3.05 days for every one percentage-point increase in their home-state or nexus-weighted tax

rate, respectively. (Tax cuts have no effect on operating cycles.) Relative to the sample average

operating cycle of 83.6 days, this implies a reduction of 2% to 3.6% for the average treated firm.

About half of this reduction comes from a reduction in inventory holding periods, which fall by

an average of 0.72 to 1.47 days in columns 2 and 5.25

     Another way firms could reduce operating risk is by reducing operating leverage, that is, the

sensitivity of profits to changes in output. In practice, reducing operating leverage requires

turning fixed costs into variable costs. Whether the tax shocks are on average large enough to

justify the expense involved in making costs more flexible is an open question. For example,

making labor costs more flexible may involve protracted negotiations with unions and increase

the risk of strikes (a form of adjustment cost). As columns 3 and 6 of Panel A show, we fail to

find evidence of firms changing their operating leverage in response to state tax changes.26,27

     Given the further reduction in risk taking observed over the medium term (i.e., the three-year

period t+3 to t+5 in Table 4), firms may also change the risk profiles of their investment projects.

Panel B of Table 7 begins by showing that firms do not adjust the level of their capital


25
   Though not shown to conserve space, the two other components of the operating cycle, the average number of
days to collect receivables and pay payables, do not change significantly.
26
   Another way firms can fine-tune their risk profiles in response to state tax rate changes is hedging (Graham and
Smith 1999; Graham and Rogers 2002). Data on hedging activities are not systematically available.
27
   Table A.8 in the Online Appendix reports two robustness tests. The first restricts the set of control firms to those
located in neighboring states, following Table 5. This reduces the effect of tax increases on changes in operating
cycles somewhat, though the effect remains both economically and statistically significant. The second shows that
firms do not change their operating risk in response to a tax cut, regardless of their financial leverage (coded as in
Table 3), possibly because doing so would reduce operational efficiency.

                                                                                                                      25
expenditures or R&D spending in response to state tax changes: the tax sensitivity of either is

both economically and statistically zero, consistent with Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist

(2015).28 This finding leaves open the possibility that firms instead respond to tax increases by

changing project risk. For example, firms may choose safer R&D projects (say, to enhance the

quality or variety of their existing products) over riskier ones (say, to invent new products).

     Project risk is not directly observable, but its effect on cash flows is potentially measurable.

To see how, start from the observation that R&D has an asymmetric effect on sales: all else equal,

successful R&D projects boost the firm’s sales while failed R&D projects have no (immediate)

effect. This insight gets around the problem that accounting data reveal only R&D inputs (i.e.,

spending), not R&D outputs (i.e., new products or processes that generate sales): an increase in

the sensitivity of sales to R&D spend implies an increase in R&D outputs for a given amount of

R&D spend. Next, consider a mean-preserving increase in R&D risk. This would increase the

sensitivity of sales to R&D spend if the project succeeds and leave it unchanged if the project

fails. On average, therefore, an increase in R&D risk results in an increase in the sensitivity of

sales to R&D spend. The opposite holds for a reduction in R&D risk.

     Using a measure called the Research QuotientTM (available on WRDS), Panel B shows that

the sensitivity of sales to R&D spend falls after a tax increase, consistent with firms reducing

R&D risk. The effect is not immediate – it takes on average between one and three years for a

tax increase to reduce the R&D sensitivity of sales – and not overly strong statistically.

     A cautious interpretation of the findings in Table 7 is that the most prominent mechanism by

which firms reduce risk in response to state corporate income tax increases involves making

changes to the operating cycle. Since such changes should be relatively easy to reverse, they


28
  As Table A.9 in the Online Appendix shows, we similarly find no evidence that firms change their M&A
activities or reduce risk by engaging in diversifying acquisitions.

                                                                                                         26
should not involve substantial adjustment costs, reducing concerns about anticipation effects that

are not already allayed by Ljungqvist and Smolyansky’s (2016) finding that state tax rates mostly

follow a random walk or by the auxiliary evidence reported in our previous subsection.

3.4 Robustness Tests

     Before turning our attention to the moderating effect of tax loss-offset rules, we briefly

consider two robustness tests.

     Our baseline tests use ROA volatility and ROIC volatility to measure firm risk. Prior research

on corporate risk taking often uses stock return volatility to measure a firm’s choice of risk.

Table A.10 in the Online Appendix shows that our findings are robust to using equity volatility

instead of earnings volatility: a firm’s annual stock return volatility falls by around 2% following

a tax increase and is invariant to tax cuts, and the difference between the two tax sensitivities is

economically large and statistically significant.

     Our results may be driven by tax-related changes in earnings management.29 To investigate

this concern, we test if a firm’s performance-matched discretionary accruals (Kothari, Leone,

and Wasley 2005) vary with tax changes, but find no evidence that they do (see Table A.11 in

the Online Appendix). This is consistent with Graham’s (2006) observation that “tax incentives

appear to be a second-order consideration, rather than a dominant influence on earnings

management” (p. 663). In addition, equity-based measures of risk taking, such as those modeled

in Table A.10, are not affected by earnings management, further alleviating this concern.

4. State Tax Loss-Offset Rules

4.1 Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

     According to Domar and Musgrave’s (1944) theory, the effect of personal income taxes on


29
  Scholes, Wilson, and Wolfson (1992) find that firms respond to anticipated reductions in federal tax rates by
delaying recognizing income. Maydew (1997) provides evidence that firms shift income to benefit from loss-offsets.

                                                                                                               27
individual risk taking is negative in the absence of loss-offsets. The same is true in the corporate

arena. However, if firms can offset losses against past or future profits, the effect of taxes on risk

taking becomes more complex. On the one hand, income taxes discourage risk taking by

reducing the per-unit benefit of risk taking. On the other hand, loss-offset rules essentially make

the government shoulder part of the losses. Thus, both the benefit of risk taking and the level of

after-tax cash flow risk are reduced. If complete offset of losses is possible, variation in tax rates

may have no net effect on risk taking.

     To test this prediction, we partition the sample based on the carryback and carryforward rules

in effect in each firm’s home state in a given fiscal year. Specifically, we code firms as having a

low ability to offset losses when their home state allows no loss carrybacks and no more than 10

years of loss carryforwards. Otherwise, we code firms as having a high ability to offset losses.30

     Table 8 presents the results of estimating Eq. (1) in the partitioned samples. For firms with a

low loss-offset ability, the sensitivity of ROA volatility and ROIC volatility to a tax increase is -

0.026 (p=0.010 in column 1) and -0.033 (p=0.008 in column 3), respectively. For firms with a

high loss-offset ability, the sensitivity is -0.010 (p=0.391 in column 2) and -0.004 (p=0.817 in

column 4), respectively.31 These results suggest that the negative effect of tax increases on risk

taking is largely driven by firms located in states with weak loss-offset provisions, consistent

with the prediction that the effect of corporate income taxes on risk taking is attenuated by the

ability to offset tax losses against past or future profits.

4.2 State Loss-offset Rules and Risk Taking

     Our baseline tests investigate firms’ responses to tax rate changes while our tests of

heterogeneous treatment effects examine if firms’ responses to tax rate changes are moderated by

30
  These cutoffs are arbitrary but, as Table A.12 in the Online Appendix shows, not selective.
31
  The difference between the coefficients on magnitude of tax increase in the two subsamples, although
economically large, is only statistically significant when we use ROIC volatility as the dependent variable.

                                                                                                               28
tax loss-offset rules. We next test if changes in loss-offset rules affect risk taking independently.

A reduction in the number of years that losses can be carried back or forward essentially reduces

the extent to which the government shares in a firm’s risks, analogous to a tax rate increase. Thus,

we expect that reductions in the generosity of carryback or carryforward rules lead to lower risk

taking. The opposite argument can be made for an increase in the length of carryback or

carryforward periods (subject to creditors constraining firms’ ability to increase risk).

     Table 9 examines loss-offset rule changes both in a firm’s home state (in Panel A) and across

its nexus states (in Panel B).32 We allow for asymmetric responses by separately including

increases and reductions in the length of loss carryback or carryforward periods. For both home-

state and nexus-weighted changes, and whether we model risk as ROA volatility or ROIC

volatility, we find an asymmetric response to changes in carryback rules: firms reduce risk taking

as carryback rules are made less generous but do not respond when the rules become more

generous.33 Since a shorter carryback period amounts to a tax increase, these patterns are

consistent with our baseline finding that firms reduce risk taking in response to an increased tax

burden but do not significantly increase risk taking in response to a reduced tax burden.

     The response to changes in carryforward rules is different: firms respond to more generous

carryforward rules by increasing risk (sometimes significantly so). However, these effects are

economically small. Firms do not respond when carryforward rules become less generous.

     The contrast between firms’ risk-reducing response to less generous carryback rules and their

indifference to less generous carryforward rules is consistent with claims in the literature that



32
   For the latter, we estimate nexus-weighted changes in the length of tax loss carryback/carryforward periods using
Eq. (2) (i.e., the formula used to estimate nexus-weighted changes in tax rates), after replacing tax rate changes with
changes in the length of loss carryback/carryforward periods.
33
   The results are stronger for nexus-weighted changes than for home-state changes. They are robust to controlling
for the tax rate changes from our baseline tests (see columns 3 and 4). This is not surprising: as Appendix A shows,
changes in state corporate income tax rates rarely coincide with changes in state tax loss-offset rules.

                                                                                                                    29
carrybacks allow firms to claim cash taxes back immediately when incurring losses whereas the

benefit of carryforwards is more uncertain (Langenmayr and Lester 2015).

   Overall, using changes in state tax loss-offset rules yields results that reinforce our

conclusion from using tax-rate changes that increasing a firm’s tax burden reduces its

willingness to take risk.

5. Conclusions

   We ask whether and how corporate income taxes affect firms’ risk taking. Based on theories

of the effect of personal income taxes on individual risk taking, we predict a negative effect of

corporate taxes on corporate risk taking. Using staggered changes in corporate tax rates across

U.S. states, we provide evidence that firms reduce risk when tax rates increase, by shortening

their operating cycles and by reducing the risks they take in their R&D projects. The effect of tax

increases on risk taking is largely driven by firms located in states with few loss-offset

opportunities, as theory would have predicted. Consistent with the interpretation that creditors

use restrictive covenants to prevent firms from increasing risk ex post, we show that only firms

with low financial leverage increase risk in response to tax cuts.

   In addition to using a difference-in-differences regression with a comprehensive set of firm-

level and state-level control variables, we employ a battery of refinements to establish causality:

including industry-by-year fixed effects to control for time-varying industry shocks, adding lead

terms to confirm parallel trends, using neighboring states to control for local shocks, and

controlling for other coincident state-level policy changes. Of course, the extent to which our

evidence can be viewed as causal will depend on the severity of any remaining identification

concerns.

   As in Heider and Ljungqvist (2015), an important caveat concerns the external validity of our



                                                                                                    30
findings. The state-level tax changes in our sample are generally small in magnitude, and it is

possible that firms would respond differently if the tax shocks were larger. The relatively small

magnitude of our tax changes may also be the reason why we do not see firms adjusting their

long-term investment decisions in response to state tax changes.

   We end with a brief discussion of potential policy implications. While raising taxes can

increase the government’s revenue, it may have the side effect of dulling risk-taking incentives

in the corporate sector, which in turn may adversely affect innovation and economic growth.

Moreover, if the government wishes to encourage risk taking, our findings suggest that merely

reducing tax rates is unlikely to be effective without other policy changes.




                                                                                                   31
References

Acharya, V. V., Almeida, H., Campello M., 2007. Is cash negative debt? A hedging perspective
   on corporate financial policies. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515–554.
Acharya, V. V., Amihud, Y., Litov, L., 2011. Creditor rights and corporate risk-taking. Journal
   of Financial Economics 102, 150–166.
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T., Taber, C., 2005. Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
   Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy 113, 151–
   184.
Asker, J., Farre-Mensa, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2015. Corporate investment and stock market listing:
   A puzzle? Review of Financial Studies 28, 342–390.
Bargeron, L., Lehn, K., Zutter, C. J., 2010. Sarbanes-Oxley and corporate risk-taking. Journal
   of Accounting and Economics 49, 34–52.
Barro, R. J., 1990. On the predictability of tax-rate changes. In: Barro, R. J., (Ed.).
   Macroeconomic Policy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 268–297.
Cassell, C. A., Huang, S. X., Manuel Sanchez, J., Stuart, M. D., 2012. Seeking safety: The
   relation between CEO inside debt holdings and the riskiness of firm investment and
   financial policies. Journal of Financial Economics 103, 588–610.
Chirinko, R., Wilson, D., 2008. State investment tax incentives: a zero-sum game? Journal of
   Public Economics 92, 2362–2384.
Choy, H., Lin, J., Officer, M. S., 2014. Does freezing a defined benefit pension plan affect firm
   risk? Journal of Accounting and Economics 57, 1–21.
Christensen, H. B., Hail, L., Leuz, C., 2016. Capital-market effects of securities regulation:
   Prior conditions, implementation, and enforcement. Review of Financial Studies 29, 2885–
   2924.
Coles, J. L., Daniel, N. D., Naveen, L., 2006. Managerial incentives and risk-taking. Journal of
   Financial Economics 79, 431–468.
Correia, M., Kang, J., Richardson, S., 2015. Does fundamental volatility help explain credit
   risk? Working Paper.
Dell, M., 2010. The persistent effects of Peru’s mining mita. Econometrica 78, 1863–1903.
Domar, E. D., Musgrave, R. A., 1944. Proportional income taxation and risk-taking. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 58, 388–422.
Dube, A., Lester, T. W., Reich, M., 2010. Minimum wage effects across state borders:
   Estimates using contiguous counties. Review of Economics and Statistics 92, 945–964.
Faccio, M., Marchica, M.-T., Mura, R., 2011. Large shareholder diversification and corporate
   risk-taking. Review of Financial Studies 24, 3601–3641.
Farre-Mensa, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2016. Do measures of financial constraints measure financial
    constraints? Review of Financial Studies 29, 271–308.
Feldstein, M. S., 1969. The effect of taxation on risk-taking. Journal of Political Economy 77,

                                                                                                    32
   755–764.
Gormley, T. A., Matsa, D. A., 2016. Playing it safe? Managerial preferences, risk, and agency
   conflicts. Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Gormley, T. A., Matsa, D. A., Milbourn, T., 2013. CEO compensation and corporate risk-
   taking: Evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Accounting and Economics 56, 79–
   101.
Gow, I., Larcker, D., Reiss, P., 2016. Causal inference in accounting research. Journal of
  Accounting Research 54, 477–523.
Graham, J. R., 2006. A review of taxes and corporate finance. Foundations and Trends in
   Finance 1, 573–691.
Graham, J. R., Rogers, D. A., 2002. Do firms hedge in response to tax incentives?. Journal of
   Finance 57, 815–839.
Graham, J. R., Smith, C. W., 1999. Tax incentives to hedge. Journal of Finance 54, 2241–2262.
Green, R. C., Talmor, E., 1985. The structure and incentive effects of corporate tax liabilities.
   Journal of Finance 40, 1095–1114.
Hall, R. E., Jorgenson, D. W., 1967. Tax policy and investment behavior. American Economic
   Review 57, 391–414.
Heider, F., Ljungqvist, A., 2015. As certain as debt and taxes: Estimating the tax sensitivity of
   leverage from state tax changes. Journal of Financial Economics 118, 684–712.
Hennessy, C., Strebulaev, I., 2015. Beyond random assignment: Credible inference of causal
   effects in dynamic economies. NBER Working Paper No. 20978.
Hines, J., 1998. Investment ramifications of distortionary tax subsidies. NBER Working Paper
   No. 6615.
Hirsch, B., Macpherson, D., 2003. Union membership and coverage database from the Current
   Population Survey: note. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56, 349–354.
Holmes, T. J., 1998. The effect of state policies on the location of manufacturing: Evidence
   from state borders. Journal of Political Economy 106, 667–705.
Huang, R. R., 2008. Evaluating the real effect of bank branching deregulation: Comparing
   contiguous counties across U.S. state borders. Journal of Financial Economics 87, 678–705.
John, K., Litov, L., Yeung, B., 2008. Corporate governance and risk-taking. Journal of Finance
   63, 1679–1728.
Knott, A. M., 2008. R&D returns causality: Absorptive capacity or organizational IQ.
   Management Science 54, 2054–2067.
Koch, A. C., 2005. State taxation of banks and financial institutions (CA, IL, NY, TN).
   Arlington, VA: Tax Management Inc..
Kothari, S. P., Leone, A., Wasley, C. E., 2005. Performance matched discretionary accrual
   measures. Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 163–197.
Langenmayr, D., Lester, R., 2015. Taxation and corporate risk-taking. Working Paper.


                                                                                                    33
Leuz, C., Wysocki, P. D., 2016. The economics of disclosure and financial reporting regulation:
   Evidence and suggestions for future research. Journal of Accounting Research 54, 525–622.
Ljungqvist, A., Smolyansky, M., 2016. To cut or not to cut? On the impact of corporate taxes
   on employment and income. NBER Working Paper No. 20753.
Lundholm, R., Sloan, R., 2012. Equity valuation and analysis with eVal. 3rd Edition. New
   York: McGraw-Hill.
Mandelker, G. N., Rhee, S. G., 1984. The impact of the degrees of operating and financial
  leverage on systematic risk of common stock. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis 19, 45–57.
May, D. O., 1995. Do managerial motives influence firm risk reduction strategies? Journal of
  Finance 50, 1291–1308.
Maydew, E. L., 1997. Tax induced earnings management by firms with net operating losses.
  Journal of Accounting Research 35, 83–96.
Modigliani, F., Miller, M., 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of
  investment. American Economic Review 48, 261–297.
Neumark, D., Zhang, J., Wall, B., 2007. Employment dynamics and business relocation: New
   evidence from the National Establishment Time Series. Research in Labor Economics 26,
   39–83.
Neumark, D., Grijalva, D., 2015. The employment effects of state hiring credits during and after
   the great recession. NBER Working Paper No. 18928.
Petersen, M., 2009. Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
    approaches. Review of Financial Studies 22, 435–480.
Rajgopal, S., Shevlin, T., 2002. Empirical evidence on the relation between stock option
   compensation and risk taking. Journal of Accounting and Economics 33, 145–171.
Romer, C. D., Romer, D. H., 2010. The macroeconomic effects of tax changes: Estimates based
  on a new measure of fiscal shocks. American Economic Review 100, 763–801.
Scholes, M. S., Wilson, P., Wolfson, M. A., 1992. Firms’ responses to anticipated reductions in
   tax rates: The tax reform act of 1986. Journal of Accounting Research 30, 161–191.
Smith, C. W., Jr., Stulz, R. M., 1985. The determinants of firms’ hedging policies. Journal of
   Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 20, 391–405.
Solow, R. M. 1956. A contribution to the theory of economic growth. Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 70, 65–94.
Stiglitz, J. E., 1969. The effects of income, wealth and capital gains taxation on risk-taking.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 83, 263–283.
Wilson, D., 2009. Beggar thy neighbor? The in-state, out-of-state, and aggregate effects of R&D
   tax credits. Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 431–436.




                                                                                                  34
Appendix A. Coincident State-Level Changes.

Panel A. Coincident State-Level Changes for Tax Rate Changes.
This table reports state-level changes in economic quantities that coincide with either increases or cuts in state
corporate income taxes and that have a plausible basis in theory to potentially affect corporate risk-taking decisions.
We focus on changes in state taxes on banks and changes in state investment incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for
investment, R&D, and job creation, as well as job creation grant programs). We also report state-level changes in the
length of tax loss carryback/carryforward periods that coincide with state tax rate changes. For variable definitions
and details of their construction, see Appendix B.

                                                                                           Tax            Tax
                                                                                        increases         cuts

     Number of tax changes                                                                40              73

     … of which coincide with        increase in length of state carryback periods          1               3
                                     cut in length of state carryback periods               0               2

                                     increase in length of state carryforward periods       0               4
                                     cut in length of state carryforward periods            1               2

                                     increase in state tax on banks                       28               0
                                     cut in state tax on banks                             0              56

                                     increase in state investment tax credit rate           1               6
                                     cut in state investment tax credit rate                0               0

                                     increase in state R&D credit rate                      2               9
                                     cut in state R&D credit rate                           1               2

                                     increase in state job creation credit                  0               3
                                     cut in state job creation credit                       0               1

                                     increase in state job creation grants                  0               1
                                     cut in state job creation grants                       0               0




                                                                                                                   35
Panel B. Coincident State-Level Changes for Tax Loss Carryback Changes.
This table reports state-level changes in economic quantities that coincide with either increases or cuts in the number
of periods a state allows a company to carry back losses and that have a plausible basis in theory to potentially affect
corporate risk-taking decisions. We focus on changes in state taxes on banks and changes in state investment
incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for investment, R&D, and job creation, as well as job creation grant programs).
For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B.

                                                                                    Increases in           Cuts in
                                                                                     carrybacks          carrybacks

  Number of carryback changes                                                           15                  36

  … of which coincide with         increase in state tax on banks                        1                   0
                                   cut in state tax on banks                             0                   0

                                   increase in state investment tax credit rate          2                   1
                                   cut in state investment tax credit rate               0                   0

                                   increase in state R&D credit rate                     0                   2
                                   cut in state R&D credit rate                          0                   0

                                   increase in state job creation credit                 2                   0
                                   cut in state job creation credit                      0                   0

                                   increase in state job creation grants                 0                   0
                                   cut in state job creation grants                      0                   0




                                                                                                                      36
Panel C. Coincident State-Level Changes for Tax Loss Carryforward Changes.
This table reports state-level changes in economic quantities that coincide with either increases or cuts in the number
of periods a state allows a company to carry forward losses and that have a plausible basis in theory to potentially
affect corporate risk-taking decisions. We focus on changes in state taxes on banks and changes in state investment
incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for investment, R&D, and job creation, as well as job creation grant programs).
For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B.

                                                                                    Increases in           Cuts in
                                                                                   carryforwards        carryforwards

Number of carryforward changes                                                          47                    10

… of which coincide with            increase in state tax on banks                       1                     0
                                    cut in state tax on banks                            3                     1

                                    increase in state investment tax credit rate         3                     1
                                    cut in state investment tax credit rate              0                     0

                                    increase in state R&D credit rate                    2                     2
                                    cut in state R&D credit rate                         0                     0

                                    increase in state job creation credit                2                     0
                                    cut in state job creation credit                     1                     0

                                    increase in state job creation grants                0                     0
                                    cut in state job creation grants                     0                     0




                                                                                                                   37
Appendix B. Variable Definitions.
Dependent variables

ROA volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the difference between quarterly ROA and ROA for the same
quarter of the previous year, computed over a three-year period t to t+2 (requiring a minimum of four quarters of
data). ROA (return on assets) is defined as operating income after depreciation (Compustat item oiadpq) over the
book value of assets (Compustat item atq). We annualize ROA volatility by multiplying it by 4 .

ROIC volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the difference between quarterly ROIC and ROIC for the same
quarter of the previous year, computed over a three-year period t to t+2 (requiring a minimum of four quarters of
data). ROIC (return on invested capital) is defined as operating income after depreciation (Compustat item oiadpq)
over the sum of debt (Compustat items dlttq + dlcq), minority interests (Compustat item mibtq), preferred stock
(pstkq) and common stock (ceqq). We annualize ROIC volatility by multiplying it by 4 .

Operating cycle is defined as the sum of the average inventory holding period and the average number of days to
collect receivables minus the average number of days to pay payables. The average inventory holding period is
computed as average inventory (Compustat item invt) over cost of goods sold (Compustat item cogs), multiplied by
365. The average number of days to collect receivables is computed as average accounts receivable (Compustat item
rect) over sales (Compustat item sale), multiplied by 365. The average number of days to pay payables is computed
as average accounts payable (Compustat item ap) over purchases (cost of goods sold + ending inventory – beginning
inventory), multiplied by 365.

Days inventory is defined as the average inventory holding period, computed as average inventory (Compustat item
invt) over cost of goods sold (Compustat item cogs), multiplied by 365.

Operating leverage is measured as the sensitivity of EBIT to sales (Mandelker and Rhee 1984). Specifically, it is
estimated as the coefficient on the logarithm of quarterly sales in a firm-specific regression that regresses the
logarithm of quarterly operating income after depreciation (Compustat item oiadpq) on the logarithm of quarterly
sales (Compustat item saleq) over a three-year period from t to t+2 (requiring a minimum of four quarters of data).

Capex is defined as net capital expenditure (Compustat item capx – sppe) over the book value of assets (Compustat
item at).

R&D is defined as research and development expenditure (Compustat item xrd) over the book value of assets
(Compustat item at). Following standard practice, we set xrd equal to zero when it is missing from Compustat.

RQ (short for research quotient) is a firm-year measure of the output elasticity of R&D (Knott 2008), obtained from
the WRDS RQTM database. It represents the percentage increase in revenues (in year t+1) resulting from a 1%
increase in R&D (in year t), when other inputs and their elasticities are held constant.

Independent variables: Firm characteristics

Firm age is defined as the Compustat age.

Firm size is defined as the book value of total assets (Compustat item at) in year 2009 real dollars (deflated using the
GDP deflator available at http://www.bea.gov/national/xls/gdplev.xls).

Market/book is defined as the ratio of the market value of equity (Compustat items prcc_f × csho) to the book value
of equity (Compustat item ceq).

Book leverage is defined as long-term debt (Compustat item dltt) over the book value of assets (Compustat item at).

Cash surplus is defined as cash from assets-in-place (Compustat items oancf – dpc + xrd) over the book value of
assets (Compustat item at).

                                                                                                                     38
Loss carryforward is an indicator set equal to one if the firm has positive net operating loss carryforward (Compustat
item tlcf), and zero otherwise.

Sales growth is defined as the log of current year sales over last year sales (Compustat item sale).

Stock return is defined as cumulated monthly returns over the 12-month period ending at the fiscal year end
(measured using data from CRSP).

Independent variables: State-level characteristics

GSP growth rate is the real annual growth rate in gross state product (GSP) using data obtained from the U.S. Bureau
of Economic Analysis.

State unemployment rate is the state unemployment rate, obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

State tax on banks captures changes in the rate at which a state taxes financial institutions with nexus to the state.
(Both a physical presence in the state and out-of-state lending to borrowers located in the state constitute nexus.)
The data come from the Book of the States and state codes accessed through Lexis-Nexis.

State investment tax credit rate is the rate at which a firm can deduct capital expenditures directly from its state
corporate income tax liability (in addition to the usual depreciation deductions against taxable income). Data
through 2006 come from Chirinko and Wilson (2008). Data for subsequent years come from tax forms available on
state Department of Revenue websites.

State R&D credit rate is the percentage of a firm’s R&D expenditures that it can deduct directly from its state
corporate income tax liability (in addition to the usual deduction against taxable income). Data through 2006 come
from Wilson (2009). Data for subsequent years come from tax forms available on state Department of Revenue
websites.

State job creation credit is set equal to one if the state offers a tax credit in return for hiring new workers meeting
certain requirements, and zero otherwise. The data come from Appendix A1 in Neumark and Grijalva (2015).

State job creation grants is set equal to one if the state offers grant payments in return for hiring new workers
meeting certain requirements, and zero otherwise. The data come from Appendix A1 in Neumark and Grijalva
(2015).

Democratic governor is an indicator set equal to one if the state is governed by a Democratic governor, and zero
otherwise. Data come from the Congressional Quarterly (through 2008) and state election websites (after 2008).

State budget balance equals the difference between a state’s general revenues and its general expenditures scaled
by its general expenditures. The data come from the U.S. Census Bureau’s State & Local Finances database,
available at http://www.census.gov/govs/local.

State bond rating downgrade is an indicator set equal to one if the state’s credit rating is downgraded by either
Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s.

State union penetration is the fraction of private-sector employees in a state who belong to a labor union in year t.
The data come from Hirsch and Macpherson (2003) as updated on their website, http://www.unionstats.com.

Tax competition is measured as the difference between a state’s corporate income tax rate and the highest corporate
income tax rate levied by any of the neighboring states.




                                                                                                                          39
Table 1. Firm-Level Summary Statistics.
The sample consists of 64,447 firm-years for all non-financial and non-utility U.S. companies that are traded on the
NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq in fiscal years 1990 through 2011, as per the merged CRSP-Compustat Fundamentals
Annual database. The table reports summary statistics for our dependent variables and the controls. For variable
definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. All variables are winsorized 1% in each tail.

                                                                                        percentile
                                                           mean        s.d.     25th       50th       75th

           Dependent variables
            ROA volatility (in %)                            6.8      11.0       2.3        3.8        7.2
            ROIC volatility (in %)                          10.6      17.2       3.1        5.3       10.2
            operating cycle                                 83.6      96.1      32.2       73.3      125.7
            days inventory                                  75.7      76.8      12.9       59.7      108.7
            operating leverage                               2.5       3.6       0.9        1.8        3.4
            capex (in %)                                     5.4       6.1       1.7        3.6        6.9
            R&D (in %)                                       5.3      11.8       0.0        0.1        5.9
            RQ                                              10.0       5.4       7.5       10.0       12.6

           State characteristics
             GSP growth rate (in %)                          2.7        2.6      1.1        2.7        4.2
             state unemployment rate (in %)                  5.9        1.9      4.6        5.5        6.9

           Firm characteristics
             firm age                                       19.6       13.3       9.0      15.0       27.0
             firm size (total assets, $m)                1,755.2    4,899.7     52.6      219.2      969.3
             market/book                                      3.0       4.7      1.1         1.9        3.3
             book leverage                                 0.162      0.179    0.002      0.111      0.267
             cash surplus                                  0.035      0.199   -0.012      0.050      0.115
             loss carryforward                             0.363      0.481    0.000      0.000      1.000
             sales growth                                  0.052      0.339   -0.057      0.050      0.166
             stock return                                  0.166      0.744   -0.251      0.040      0.375




                                                                                                                 40
Table 2. Effect of Tax Changes on Firm Risk.
We estimate OLS regressions to test whether, and by how much, firms change their risk profile in response to
changes in state corporate income taxes. The dependent variable change in log ROA (or ROIC) volatility is defined as
the difference between log ROA (or ROIC) volatility at t (i.e., computed over t to t+2) and log ROA (or ROIC)
volatility at t–3 (i.e., computed over t–3 to t–1). For variable definitions and details of their construction, see
Appendix B. In columns 1 and 2, we use contemporaneous changes in the firm’s home-state top marginal corporate
income tax rate. In columns 3 and 4, we use lagged changes in the firm’s home-state top marginal corporate income
tax rate. Columns 5 and 6 use the contemporaneous nexus-weighted change in tax rates as defined in Eq. (2). The
unit of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to
remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry
shocks. The fixed effects are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the
state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the test for
equal tax sensitivity (tax increase = -tax cut) is one-sided.

                                                                   Change in log …
                                        ROA         ROIC          ROA          ROIC         ROA         ROIC
                                      volatility   volatility   volatility   volatility   volatility   volatility
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

        magnitude of tax increase      -0.019***    -0.020***
                                        0.007        0.007
        magnitude of tax cut           0.016        0.018
                                        0.016        0.015
        lagged tax increase                                      -0.026***    -0.019**
                                                                  0.007        0.009
        lagged tax cut                                           0.000         0.000
                                                                  0.015        0.017
        nexus-weighted tax increase                                                        -0.024**     -0.032***
                                                                                            0.009        0.011
        nexus-weighted tax cut                                                             0.014        0.017
                                                                                            0.024        0.028
        Change in …
         GSP growth rate               -0.003**     -0.003*      -0.003**     -0.003*      -0.003**     -0.003*
                                        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.002        0.001        0.001
          state unemployment rate      0.009**      0.010*       0.009*        0.009*      0.009**      0.009*
                                        0.005        0.006        0.005        0.005        0.005        0.006
        Lagged change in …
         log firm age                  -0.526***    -0.556***    -0.526***    -0.553***    -0.527***    -0.556***
                                        0.040        0.041        0.040        0.040        0.039        0.041
          log firm size                -0.242***    -0.325***    -0.242***    -0.325***    -0.242***    -0.325***
                                        0.018        0.027        0.017        0.027        0.018        0.027
          log market/book              0.123***     0.164***     0.121***      0.163***    0.123***     0.164***
                                        0.007        0.007        0.007        0.008        0.007        0.007
          book leverage                -0.300***    -0.389***    -0.301***    -0.392***    -0.300***    -0.389***
                                        0.032        0.035        0.034        0.037        0.032        0.035
          cash surplus                 -0.250***    -0.253***    -0.248***    -0.247***    -0.249***    -0.253***
                                        0.021        0.021        0.020        0.020        0.021        0.021
          loss carryforward            0.018*       0.030***     0.017*        0.029***    0.018*       0.030***
                                        0.010        0.010        0.010        0.010        0.010        0.010
          sales growth                 0.042***     0.052***     0.042***      0.052***    0.042***     0.052***
                                        0.005        0.005        0.005        0.005        0.005        0.005
          stock return                 -0.047***    -0.055***    -0.046***    -0.054***    -0.047***    -0.055***
                                        0.002        0.003        0.003        0.003        0.002        0.003

        Industry-year fixed effects      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        R2                             21.3%        21.0%        21.4%        21.1%        21.3%        21.0%
        Equal tax sensitivity? (F)      0.03         0.02         2.03*        0.74         0.17         0.25
        No. of firms                   8,046        7,999        8,041        7,994        8,046        7,999
        No. of observations           64,447       64,221       64,435       64,200       64,447       64,221




                                                                                                                    41
Table 3. Effect of Tax Changes on Risk for Firms with Low or High Leverage.
To test whether firms are constrained by their lenders from increasing risk in response to a tax cut, we partition the
sample based on financial leverage (measured as of the end of the fiscal year before a tax change). Columns 1 and 3
focus on firms with book leverage below the sample median. Columns 2 and 4 focus on firms with book leverage
above the sample median. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of
analysis is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences with industry-by-year fixed
effects (not shown for brevity). The tests for equal tax sensitivity across columns 1 and 2 and across columns 3 and
4 are based on fully-interacted models. Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the tests for equal tax
sensitivity are one-sided. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
(two-sided), respectively.

                                                                         Change in log …
                                                           ROA volatility                ROIC volatility
                                                        Low           High              Low         High
                                                      leverage      leverage          leverage    leverage
                                                         (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)

         magnitude of tax increase                     -0.026***      -0.024***          -0.032**       -0.022**
                                                        0.009          0.008              0.012          0.009
         magnitude of tax cut                           0.063***      -0.019              0.072***      -0.019
                                                        0.018          0.019              0.014          0.023

         Controls                                        Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
         Industry-year fixed effects                     Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes
         R2                                            25.6%          31.1%              25.3%         31.1%
         Equal tax sensitivity? (F)
          Tax increases: (1) vs. (2) or (3) vs. (4)           0.03                              0.41
          Tax cuts: (1) vs. (2) or (3) vs. (4)               15.44***                          13.91***
         No. of firms                                  5,769        5,467                5,723      5,441
         No. of observations                          32,223       32,224               32,105     32,106




                                                                                                                      42
Table 4. Testing for Pre-Trends, Delays, and Post-Event Reversals.
To investigate possible pre-trends, delays, and reversals, we include lead and lag terms in the baseline regressions
shown in Table 2, columns 1 and 2. Recall that the change in ROA volatility or ROIC volatility compares earnings
volatility in the period t to t+2 to earnings volatility in the period t–3 to t–1. Accordingly, we use leads dated t+3 and
lags dated t–3 to avoid inducing a mechanical correlation between the dependent variable and the lead or lag term.
For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of analysis is a firm-year. All
specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and
include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The full set of controls (as in Table 2) and fixed
effects are included but not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state
level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                       Change in log …
                                                                     ROA            ROIC
                                                                   volatility     volatility
                                                                      (1)            (2)

                         magnitude of tax increase at t = +3         -0.001           -0.005
                                                                      0.025            0.028
                         magnitude of tax increase at t = 0          -0.019**         -0.017**
                                                                      0.009            0.008
                         magnitude of tax increase at t = –3         -0.016*          -0.014
                                                                      0.008            0.008

                         magnitude of tax cut at t = +3              -0.007            0.007
                                                                      0.011            0.013
                         magnitude of tax cut at t = 0                0.018            0.018
                                                                      0.014            0.014
                         magnitude of tax cut at t = –3              -0.001           -0.002
                                                                      0.014            0.018

                         Controls                                      Yes              Yes
                         Industry-year fixed effects                   Yes              Yes
                         R2                                         24.4%            23.6%
                         No. of firms                                6,183            6,171
                         No. of observations                        47,966           47,879




                                                                                                                      43
Table 5. Potential Confounds: Local Business Cycle Effects, Other Tax Changes, and Determinants of Tax Rate Changes.
States may change corporate tax rates, and firms may change their risk profile, in response to unobserved changes in local business conditions. To examine this
potential confound, we restrict the set of control firms to those located in a neighboring state, thus excluding far-away states (i.e., firms in states that neither
experience a tax change nor border a state that does are excluded). This means that we drop observations for states that are treated in another year but are not the
neighbor of a treated state in the current year. This reduces the sample compared to the baseline models shown in Table 2. To address concerns stemming from
the fact that corporate tax changes occasionally coincide with changes in state taxes on bank profits or in investment incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for
investment, R&D, and job creation), columns 3 and 4 control explicitly for these concurrent changes. In columns 5 and 6, we further control for local political
forces and economic conditions that may influence whether a state changes its corporate tax rate (namely, the governor’s political affiliation, the election cycle,
the state’s budget balance, ratings downgrades, unemployment, growth, union penetration, and tax competition with neighboring states). All specifications are
estimated using OLS in first differences with industry-by-year fixed effects and group-year fixed effects, where a treated state and its neighboring states are
coded as a group. The full set of controls (as in Table 2) and fixed effects are included but not reported for brevity. For variable definitions and details of their
construction, see Appendix B. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates.
We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the test for
equal tax sensitivity (tax increase = -tax cut) is one-sided.

                                                                                                    Change in log …
                                                                  ROA            ROIC             ROA           ROIC             ROA            ROIC
                                                                volatility      volatility      volatility     volatility      volatility      volatility
                                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)

          magnitude of tax increase                               -0.025**        -0.025**       -0.032**        -0.034**        -0.036**        -0.041***
                                                                   0.010           0.011          0.014           0.015           0.014           0.014
          magnitude of tax cut                                     0.000          -0.003         -0.013          -0.017          -0.006          -0.010
                                                                   0.014           0.018          0.018           0.020           0.022           0.024
          Other coincident tax changes
           increase in state tax on banks                                                         0.022           0.033           0.029          0.042*
                                                                                                  0.025           0.027           0.023          0.025
            cut in state tax on banks                                                             0.024           0.030           0.022          0.034
                                                                                                  0.029           0.026           0.032          0.030
            increase in state investment tax credits                                             -0.004          -0.005          -0.005          -0.007
                                                                                                  0.006           0.006           0.006          0.006
            cut in state investment tax credits                                                   0.003           0.000           0.004          0.000
                                                                                                  0.005           0.006           0.005          0.006
            increase in state R&D tax credits                                                     0.004           0.003           0.005*         0.004*
                                                                                                  0.003           0.003           0.003          0.002
            cut in state R&D tax credits                                                         -0.004          -0.008***       -0.004          -0.008**
                                                                                                  0.006           0.002           0.006          0.003
            increase in state job tax credits                                                     0.025           0.027           0.020          0.023
                                                                                                  0.018           0.019           0.018          0.019
            cut in state job tax credits                                                          0.051           0.076           0.064          0.090
                                                                                                  0.063           0.065           0.062          0.064

                                                                                                                                                                 44
Political conditions
 Lagged change in Democratic governor                                                       0.046***    0.034**
                                                                                            0.015       0.015
 =1 if one year to next gubernatorial election                                             -0.006      -0.014
                                                                                            0.018       0.020
 =1 if two years to next gubernatorial election                                             0.004       0.008
                                                                                            0.013       0.014
 =1 if three years to next gubernatorial election                                          -0.032      -0.034*
                                                                                            0.020       0.019
Economic conditions
 Lagged change in state budget balance                                                      0.120       0.168
                                                                                            0.139       0.145
 =1 if state bond rating downgraded in year t–1                                            -0.017      -0.018
                                                                                            0.021       0.023
 Lagged change in GSP growth rate                                                           0.002       0.004
                                                                                            0.003       0.003
 Lagged change in state unemployment rate                                                  -0.016*     -0.014
                                                                                            0.008       0.011
 Lagged change in state union penetration                                                  -0.005      -0.005
                                                                                            0.006       0.006
Tax competition
 Lagged change in state’s tax rate relative to                                              0.000       0.007*
 highest tax rate among its neighboring states                                              0.004       0.004

Controls                                              Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
Industry-year fixed effects                           Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
Group-year fixed effects                              Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
R2                                                  29.0%    28.8%    29.0%      28.8%     29.1%       28.8%
Equal tax sensitivity? (F)                           1.84*    1.44     6.65***    4.35**    4.16**      3.51**
No. of firms                                         6,586    6,547    6,586      6,547     6,586       6,547
No. of observations                                 29,613   29,498   29,613     29,498    29,613      29,498




                                                                                                                  45
Table 6. Anticipation Effects.
If state tax rate changes are anticipated, measured treatment responses to realized tax rate changes may not capture
causal effects (Hennessy and Strebulaev 2015). To address this concern, we exclude firms headquartered in states
whose tax rate changes are likely to be anticipated. Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2015) test whether state tax rates
follow a Martingale (which implies that changes in tax rates are unpredictable). Based on their findings, columns 1
and 2 exclude firms headquartered in Connecticut or Massachusetts while columns 3 and 4 exclude firms
headquartered in New England (i.e., Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, or
Vermont). Heider and Ljungqvist (2015) examine the political economy events surrounding all state tax changes
affecting at least 100 firms, using a “narrative approach” to identify potentially anticipated tax changes. Based on
their findings, columns 5 and 6 exclude firms headquartered in Colorado, Connecticut, Minnesota, or New York. For
variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of analysis in each column is a firm-
year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in the levels
equations and include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The full set of controls (as in Table
2) and fixed effects are included but not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered
at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                   Change in log …
                                  ROA           ROIC             ROA           ROIC            ROA           ROIC
                                volatility     volatility      volatility     volatility     volatility     volatility
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

magnitude of tax increase        -0.016**       -0.018**       -0.014**        -0.017**       -0.016**       -0.019**
                                  0.006          0.008          0.006           0.007          0.007          0.008
magnitude of tax cut              0.003          0.009          0.006           0.012         -0.012         -0.009
                                  0.021          0.022          0.022           0.023          0.014          0.014

Controls                           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
R2                               22.1%          21.9%          22.2%           22.0%         23.3%          23.0%
No. of firms                      7,433          7,391          7,363           7,321         6,685          6,652
No. of observations              59,130         58,915         58,476          58,263        52,699         52,511




                                                                                                                      46
Table 7. Effect of Tax Changes on Operational and Investment Choices.
We estimate OLS regressions to test whether, and by how much, firms change their operational and investment
policies in response to changes in state corporate income taxes. Panel A focuses on a firm’s operational choices. The
dependent variable change in operating cycle (or days inventory) is defined as the difference between operating
cycle (or days inventory) at time t and operating cycle (or days inventory) at t–1. The dependent variable change in
operating leverage is defined as the difference between operating leverage at time t (i.e., computed over t to t+2) and
operating leverage at t–3 (i.e., computed over t–3 to t–1). Panel B focuses on a firm’s investment choices. To
investigate possible pre-trends, delays, and reversals, we include lead and lag terms in the regressions. The
dependent variable change in capex (or R&D, RQ) is defined as the difference between capex (or R&D, RQ) at time
t and capex (or R&D, RQ) at t–1. In both panels, columns 1 to 3 use changes in the firm’s home-state corporate
income tax rate while columns 4 to 6 use the nexus-weighted change in tax rates as defined in Eq. (2). For variable
definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All
specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and
include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. We include the same controls and fixed effects as
in Table 2. These are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state
level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

Panel A. Effect of Tax Changes on Operational Choices.
                                                                   Change in …
                                    operating       days       operating operating          days       operating
                                      cycle       inventory    leverage      cycle        inventory    leverage
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)

    magnitude of tax increase        -1.702***     -0.724*       0.078
                                      0.379         0.375        0.099
    magnitude of tax cut             -0.030        -0.246        0.173
                                      0.956         0.755        0.135
    nexus-weighted tax increase                                               -3.052**     -1.473**      0.077
                                                                               1.163        0.559         0.177
    nexus-weighted tax cut                                                    -0.787       -0.134        0.158
                                                                               1.431        1.014         0.193

    Controls                           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
    Industry-year fixed effects        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
    R2                               10.1%        11.5%         14.9%        10.1%         11.5%        14.9%
    No. of firms                      7,952        7,981         6,105        7,952         7,981        6,105
    No. of observations              63,472       63,881        49,707       63,472        63,881       49,707




                                                                                                                   47
Panel B. Effect of Tax Changes on Investment Choices.

                                                                     Change in …
                                       capex       R&D          RQ             capex      R&D          RQ
                                           Home-state tax changes               Nexus-weighted tax changes
                                        (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)

magnitude of tax increase at t = +1    0.000       0.000      -0.121          0.000       0.001       -0.114
                                       0.001       0.001       0.114          0.001       0.001       0.110
magnitude of tax increase at t = 0     0.000      -0.001      -0.049         -0.001      -0.001       -0.098
                                       0.001       0.001       0.089          0.001       0.001       0.113
magnitude of tax increase at t = –1    0.000       0.000      -0.167*         0.000       0.000       -0.231*
                                       0.001       0.000       0.089          0.001       0.001       0.123
magnitude of tax increase at t = –2    0.000       0.001      -0.085          0.001       0.001       -0.005
                                       0.000       0.001       0.099          0.001       0.001       0.109
magnitude of tax increase at t = –3    0.001      -0.001      -0.155*         0.002      -0.001       -0.231**
                                       0.001       0.001       0.081          0.001       0.001       0.113

magnitude of tax cut at t = +1         0.000       0.001       0.126         -0.001       0.002       0.227
                                       0.001       0.002       0.130          0.001       0.002       0.169
magnitude of tax cut at t = 0         -0.001      -0.003      -0.058          0.000      -0.004       0.002
                                       0.001       0.002       0.122          0.002       0.003       0.128
magnitude of tax cut at t = –1         0.000       0.002      -0.009         -0.001       0.003       -0.140
                                       0.001       0.001       0.117          0.001       0.002       0.133
magnitude of tax cut at t = –2         0.000      -0.001      -0.016          0.000      -0.002       -0.035
                                       0.001       0.001       0.082          0.001       0.002       0.135
magnitude of tax cut at t = –3         0.001       0.001      -0.146          0.002       0.001       -0.184
                                       0.001       0.002       0.117          0.001       0.003       0.144

Controls                                Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
Industry-year fixed effects             Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
R2                                    16.7%       8.0%       29.5%          16.7%         8.0%       29.5%
No. of firms                           7,323      7,379       3,771          7,323        7,379       3,771
No. of observations                   57,747     58,498      28,833         57,747       58,498      28,833




                                                                                                              48
Table 8. Heterogeneous Treatment Effects.
Tax loss carryback and carryforward rules dampen the impact of corporate income tax rate changes on firm risk. To
test this, we partition sample firms based on the tax loss carryback and carryforward rules of their headquarter state.
Columns 1 and 3 include firms headquartered in a state that (1) does not allow losses to be carried back and (2) does
not permit losses to be carried forward for more than 10 years. Columns 2 and 4 include only the remaining sample
firms. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of analysis is a firm-year.
All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences with industry-by-year fixed effects (not shown for
brevity). The tests for equal tax sensitivity across columns 1 and 2 and across columns 3 and 4 are based on fully-
interacted models. Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the tests for equal tax sensitivity are one-sided.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the
coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

                                                                          Change in log …
                                                           ROA volatility                   ROIC volatility
                                                     Low loss      High loss           Low loss      High loss
                                                   offset ability offset ability     offset ability offset ability
                                                        (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)

      magnitude of tax increase                      -0.026**          -0.010           -0.033***           -0.004
                                                      0.009             0.012           0.011                0.016
      magnitude of tax cut                            0.009            0.012            0.017               0.014
                                                      0.022             0.017           0.019                0.019

      Controls                                         Yes               Yes             Yes                  Yes
      Industry-year fixed effects                      Yes               Yes             Yes                  Yes
      R2                                             29.8%             26.9%           28.8%                26.8%
      Equal tax sensitivity? (F)
       Tax increases: (1) vs. (2) or (3) vs. (4)                1.18                                2.10*
      No. of firms                                    4,221             5,757           4,203                5,716
      No. of observations                            26,005            38,442          25,914               38,297




                                                                                                                     49
Table 9. Effect of Changes in Loss Carryback/Carryforward Rules on Firm Risk.
We estimate OLS regressions to test whether, and by how much, firms change their risk profile in response to
changes in state tax loss carryback/carryforward rules. Panel A focuses on the change in the number of years a loss
can be carried back or forward in a firm’s headquarter state. Panel B focuses on the nexus-weighted change in the
number of years a loss can be carried back or forward in the states a firm has nexus with. Both increases and
reductions are measured in absolute terms. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B.
The unit of analysis is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm
fixed effects in the levels equations and include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The full
set of controls (as in Table 2) and fixed effects are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. Reflecting the signed nature of the
predictions, the test for equal tax sensitivity is one-sided.

Panel A. Home-State Rule Changes.
                                                                                 Change in log …
                                                                 ROA           ROIC          ROA           ROIC
                                                               volatility     volatility   volatility     volatility
                                                                  (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)

 increase in length of carryback period                           0.016         0.022         0.016         0.022
                                                                  0.014         0.016         0.014         0.016
 reduction in length of carryback period                         -0.023***     -0.019**      -0.023***     -0.019**
                                                                  0.007         0.008         0.007         0.008
 increase in length of carryforward period                        0.002**       0.003***      0.002**       0.003***
                                                                  0.001         0.001         0.001         0.001
 reduction in length of carryforward period                       0.001         0.001         0.001         0.001
                                                                  0.001         0.001         0.001         0.001
 magnitude of tax increase                                                                   -0.019***     -0.020***
                                                                                              0.007         0.007
 magnitude of tax cut                                                                         0.014         0.015
                                                                                              0.016         0.016

 Controls                                                         Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Industry-year fixed effects                                      Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 R2                                                             21.3%          21.0%         21.3%         21.0%
 Equal tax sensitivity? (F)
   increase in carryback = -reduction in carryback               0.24           0.03          0.23          0.04
   increase in carryforward = -reduction in carryforward         4.95**         5.49**        4.03**        4.66**
   reduction in carryback = -increase in carryforward            8.02***        3.89**        8.21***       3.93**
 No. of firms                                                   8,046          7,999         8,046         7,999
 No. of observations                                           64,447         64,211        64,447        64,211




                                                                                                                       50
Panel B. Nexus-Weighted Rule Changes.
                                                                           Change in log …
                                                             ROA         ROIC          ROA          ROIC
                                                           volatility   volatility   volatility    volatility
                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)

 nexus-weighted increase in carryback period                 0.025        0.038         0.025        0.038
                                                             0.024        0.028         0.024        0.028
 nexus-weighted reduction in carryback period               -0.035***    -0.028***     -0.035***    -0.028***
                                                             0.010        0.010         0.010        0.010
 nexus-weighted increase in carryforward period              0.002        0.003**       0.002        0.003*
                                                             0.002        0.001         0.002        0.001
 nexus-weighted reduction in carryforward period             0.000        0.000         0.000        0.000
                                                             0.002        0.002         0.002        0.002
 nexus-weighted tax increase                                                           -0.024**     -0.031***
                                                                                        0.009        0.011
 nexus-weighted tax cut                                                                 0.012        0.015
                                                                                        0.024        0.028

 Controls                                                    Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 Industry-year fixed effects                                 Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 R2                                                        21.3%        21.0%         21.3%        21.0%
 Equal tax sensitivity? (F)
   increase in carryback = -reduction in carryback           0.22         0.13         0.21          0.15
   increase in carryforward = -reduction in carryforward     0.52         0.84         0.47          0.76
   reduction in carryback = -increase in carryforward       10.56***      5.70**      10.65***       5.70**
 No. of firms                                               8,046        7,999        8,046         7,999
 No. of observations                                       64,447       64,211       64,447        64,211




                                                                                                                51
       ONLINE APPENDIX



(NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION)




                                 52
Table A.1. List of Changes in State Corporate Income Tax Rates.

Panel A. List of Tax Increases.
This table lists all U.S. state corporate income tax increases in calendar years 1989–2012 affecting firms in fiscal
years 1990-2011. In states with more than one tax bracket, we report the change to the top bracket. Tax changes are
identified from the Tax Foundation (an abbreviated version of which is available at http://www.taxfoundation.org),
the Book of the States, a search of the “Current Corporate Income Tax Developments” feature published periodically
in the Journal of State Taxation, and state tax codes accessed through Lexis-Nexis.

                                                                                                                     No. of
                                                                                                                   affected
 State   Year   Description                                                                                    sample firms

 IL      1989   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 4% to 4.8%                                                6
 KY      1989   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7.25% to 8%                                               7
 NJ      1989   Introduction of 0.375% tax surcharge                                                                     7
 RI      1989   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 9%                                                  7
 CT      1990   Introduction of 20% tax surcharge, increasing top marginal tax rate from 11.5% to 13.8%                 64
 MO      1990   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6.5%                                               34
 MT      1990   Introduction of 5% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                        2
 NE      1990   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6.65% to 7.24%                                            5
 OK      1990   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6%                                                 27
 AR      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6% to 6.5%                                               14
 ME      1991   Introduction of 10% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                       3
 NC      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 7.75% and introduction of 4% tax                   53
                surcharge on tax liability
 NE      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7.24% to 7.81% and introduction of 15% tax                9
                surcharge on tax liability
 PA      1991   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 12.25%                                          132
 RI      1991   Introduction of 11% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                      12
 DC      1992   Introduction of 2.5% surcharge on tax liability                                                          4
 KS      1992   Increase in top corporate income tax rate (including surcharge) from 6.75% to 7.35%                     19
 KY      1992   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 8.25%                                               9
 MT      1992   Re-introduction of tax surcharge on tax liability at 2.3% rate                                           1
 MO      1993   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6.25% and reduction in federal income              43
                tax deductibility from 100% to 50%
 MT      1993   Increase in tax surcharge on tax liability from 2.3% to 4.7%                                             1
 DC      1994   Introduction of additional 2.5% surcharge on tax liability                                               1
 VT      1997   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8.25% to 9.75%                                            7
 NH      1999   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 8%                                                 13
 AL      2001   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 6.5%                                               20
 NH      2001   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 8.5%                                               13
 KS      2002   Increase in tax surcharge on taxable income from 3.35% to 4.5%                                          23
 TN      2002   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6% to 6.5%                                               44
 AR      2003   Introduction of 3% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                       15
 CT      2003   Introduction of 20% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                      77
 IN      2003   Repeal of gross income tax (based on revenue rather than profits) and of supplemental income            32
                tax; effective adjusted gross income tax rate (on profits) increased from 7.75% to 8.5%
 CT      2004   Increase in tax surcharge on tax liability to 25%                                                       76
 NJ      2006   Introduction of 4% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                      116
 MD      2008   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 8.25%                                              40
 CT      2009   Introduction of 10% tax surcharge on tax liability for companies with revenues > $100m                  39
 NC      2009   Introduction of 3% tax surcharge on tax liability                                                       48
 OR      2009   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 6.6% to 7.9%                                             22
 IL      2011   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 4.8% to 7%                                              100
 CT      2012   Unscheduled two-year extension of tax surcharge on tax liability and increase to 20%                     1
 MI      2012   Increase in top corporate income tax rate from 4.95% to 6%                                               6




                                                                                                                         53
Panel B. List of Tax Cuts.
This table lists all U.S. state corporate income tax cuts in calendar years 1989–2012 affecting firms in fiscal years
1990-2011. In states with more than one tax bracket, we report the change to the top bracket. Tax changes are
identified from the Tax Foundation (an abbreviated version of which is available at http://www.taxfoundation.org),
the Book of the States, a search of the “Current Corporate Income Tax Developments” feature published periodically
in the Journal of State Taxation, and state tax codes accessed through Lexis-Nexis.

                                                                                                               No. of
                                                                                                             affected
 State   Year   Description                                                                              sample firms

 CO      1989   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.5% to 5.4%                                      68
 WV      1989   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.6% to 9.45%                                      4
 AZ      1990   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.5% to 9.3%                                     23
 CO      1990   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.4% to 5.3%                                      74
 WV      1990   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.45% to 9.3%                                      5
 CO      1991   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.3% to 5.2%                                      85
 MN      1991   Reduction in the legislated tax increase of 0.4%                                                 117
 MT      1991   Repeal of 5% tax surcharge                                                                         2
 WV      1991   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.3% to 9.15%                                      6
 CO      1992   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.2% to 5.1%                                      85
 CT      1992   Reduction in tax surcharge from 20% to 10%                                                        94
 MO      1992   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 6.5% to 5%                                        41
 NC      1992   Reduction in tax surcharge from 4% to 3%                                                          65
 WV      1992   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.15% to 9%                                        4
 CO      1993   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5.1% to 5.0%                                      81
 CT      1993   Repeal of 10% tax surcharge                                                                       70
 ME      1993   Repeal of 10% tax surcharge                                                                        3
 NC      1993   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3% to 2%                                                          51
 NE      1993   Repeal of 15% tax surcharge                                                                        9
 NH      1993   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.5%                                         9
 AZ      1994   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.3% to 9%                                        31
 MT      1994   Repeal of 4.7% tax surcharge                                                                       1
 NC      1994   Reduction in tax surcharge from 2% to 1%                                                          54
 NH      1994   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.5% to 7%                                        17
 NJ      1994   Repeal of 0.375% tax surcharge                                                                   154
 PA      1994   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 12.25% to 11.99%                                 135
 RI      1994   Repeal of 11% tax surcharge                                                                        9
 CT      1995   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 11.5% to 11.25%                                   87
 DC      1995   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10% to 9.5% (+2 tax surcharges at 2.5%             6
                each)
 NC      1995   Repeal of 1% tax surcharge                                                                        46
 PA      1995   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 11.99% to 9.99%                                  144
 CT      1996   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 11.25% to 10.75%                                  91
 CA      1997   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.3% to 8.84%                                    554
 CT      1997   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.75% to 10.5%                                   89
 NC      1997   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.75% to 7.5%                                     65
 AZ      1998   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 8%                                          44
 CT      1998   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.5% to 9.5%                                     84
 NC      1998   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.5% to 7.25%                                     59
 CO      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 5% to 4.75%                                       91
 CT      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.5% to 8.5%                                      77
 NC      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.25% to 7%                                       46
 NY      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 8.5%                                       265
 OH      1999   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.9% to 8.5%                                     132
 AZ      2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.968%                                      49
 CO      2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 4.75% to 4.63%                                    80
 CT      2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 7.5%                                      72
 NC      2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 6.9%                                        61
 NY      2000   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.5% to 8%                                       262



                                                                                                                   54
AZ   2001   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.968% to 6.968%                                40
ID   2001   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.6%                                       7
NY   2001   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8% to 7.5%                                     244
KS   2003   Reduction in tax surcharge from 4.5% to 3.35%                                                   22
ND   2004   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 10.5% to 7%                                      1
AR   2005   Repeal of 3% tax surcharge                                                                      14
KY   2005   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.25% to 7%                                     18
OH   2005   Tax reform phasing out corp. income tax while phasing in gross receipts tax over period of 5    90
            years
CT   2006   Reduction in tax surcharge from 25% to 20%                                                      64
VT   2006   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.75% to 8.9%                                    2
NY   2007   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.5% to 7.1%                                   197
VT   2007   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.9% to 8.5%                                     2
WV   2007   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9% to 8.75%                                      3
CT   2008   Repeal of 20% tax surcharge                                                                     63
KS   2008   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3.35% to 3.1%                                                   12
KY   2008   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7% to 6%                                        16
KS   2009   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3.1% to 3.05%                                                   13
WV   2009   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.75% to 8.5%                                    3
MA   2010   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 9.5% to 8.75%                                  134
NJ   2010   Repeal of 4% tax surcharge                                                                      85
KS   2011   Reduction in tax surcharge from 3.05% to 3%                                                     11
MA   2011   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 8.75% to 8.25%                                 123
NC   2011   Repeal of 3% tax surcharge                                                                      36
ND   2011   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 6.4% to 5.4%                                     1
OR   2011   Reduction in top corporate income tax rate from 7.9% to 7.6%                                    18




                                                                                                            55
Table A.2. List of Changes in State Tax Loss Carryback/Carryforward Rules.

Panel A. List of Loss Carryback Period Increases.
This table lists all state-level increases in the length of tax loss carryback periods affecting firms in fiscal years
1990-2011. Tax loss carryback period changes are identified from the Book of the States.

                                                                                                              No. of
                                                                                                            affected
 State   Year   Description                                                                             sample firms

 DC      1991   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 3 years                                                7
 ME      1991   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 3 years                                                3
 MS      1992   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 1 year                                                 7
 MS      1993   Increase in loss carryback period from 1 to 2 years                                                7
 VT      1993   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 3 years                                                4
 MS      1994   Increase in loss carryback period from 2 to 3 years                                                6
 AL      1995   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 3 years                                               21
 VT      1998   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 2 years                                                8
 NY      1999   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 2 years                                              282
 AK      2002   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 2 years                                                2
 LA      2002   Increase in loss carryback period from 2 to 3 years                                               23
 OK      2002   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 2 years                                               23
 NH      2005   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 3 years                                               12
 KS      2008   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 2 years                                               12
 KS      2011   Increase in loss carryback period from 0 to 3 years                                               13




                                                                                                                  56
Panel B. List of Loss Carryback Period Reductions.
This table lists all state-level reductions in the length of tax loss carryback periods affecting firms in fiscal years
1990-2011. Tax loss carryback period changes are identified from the Book of the States.

                                                                                                               No. of
                                                                                                             affected
 State   Year   Description                                                                              sample firms

 ME      1990   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                               4
 NM      1991   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                              10
 RI      1992   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                              10
 VT      1992   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                               4
 VT      1996   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                               7
 AL      1997   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                              28
 NY      1997   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                             293
 OK      1997   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                              33
 AK      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                                2
 DC      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                                4
 DE      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               11
 GA      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                              100
 HI      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                                5
 IA      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               18
 IL      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                              153
 IN      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               43
 KY      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               18
 MD      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               51
 ME      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                                7
 MO      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               56
 MS      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               11
 ND      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                                1
 VA      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               79
 WV      1998   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                                5
 ID      1999   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                                9
 DC      2000   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                               5
 AK      2001   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                               1
 LA      2001   Reduction in loss carryback period from 3 to 2 years                                               24
 ME      2002   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                               2
 ND      2003   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                               1
 IL      2004   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                             118
 KY      2006   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                              17
 VT      2006   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                               2
 NH      2008   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                               7
 IA      2009   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                              12
 KS      2009   Removal of ability to carry back losses (reduction from 2 years to 0)                              13




                                                                                                                   57
Panel C. List of Loss Carryforward Period Increases.
This table lists all state-level increases in the length of tax loss carryforward periods affecting firms in fiscal years
1990-2011. Tax loss carryforward period changes are identified from the Book of the States.

                                                                                                                 No. of
                                                                                                               affected
 State   Year   Description                                                                                sample firms

 AL      1990   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 15 years                                              11
 ID      1990   Increase in loss carryforward period from 10 to 15 years                                             10
 OH      1990   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 15 years                                             120
 TN      1991   Increase in loss carryforward period from 7 to 15 years                                              29
 MS      1992   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 15 years                                               7
 UT      1993   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 15 years                                              30
 CA      1994   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 15 years                                             458
 PA      1995   Increase in loss carryforward period from 0 to 2 years                                              143
 PA      1996   Increase in loss carryforward period from 2 to 3 years                                              145
 NM      1997   Increase in loss carryforward period from 0 to 5 years                                                4
 TX      1997   Increase in loss carryforward period from 0 to 5 years                                              316
 AK      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              2
 CA      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 4 to 5 years                                              583
 CO      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             97
 DE      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             11
 FL      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                            163
 GA      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                            100
 HI      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              5
 IA      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             18
 IL      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                            153
 IN      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             43
 KY      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             18
 MD      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             51
 ME      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              7
 MO      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             56
 MS      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             11
 ND      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              1
 NY      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                            283
 PA      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 3 to 10 years                                             140
 VA      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             79
 VT      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              8
 WV      1998   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              5
 DC      1999   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              7
 ID      1999   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                              9
 NC      1999   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 15 years                                              56
 SC      1999   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             21
 CA      2000   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 10 years                                             574
 CT      2000   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 20 years                                              79
 CA      2001   Increase in loss carryforward period from 10 to 20 years                                            528
 LA      2001   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             24
 NH      2002   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 10 years                                              13
 OK      2002   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                             23
 PA      2002   Increase in loss carryforward period from 10 to 20 years                                            136
 OH      2003   Increase in loss carryforward period from 15 to 20 years                                            103
 CA      2008   Increase in loss carryforward period from 10 to 20 years                                            454
 MA      2010   Increase in loss carryforward period from 5 to 20 years                                             132
 NJ      2011   Increase in loss carryforward period from 7 to 20 years                                              83




                                                                                                                     58
Panel D. List of Loss Carryforward Period Reductions.
This table lists all state-level reductions in the length of tax loss carryforward periods affecting firms in fiscal years
1990-2011. Tax loss carryforward period changes are identified from the Book of the States.

                                                                                                                  No. of
                                                                                                                affected
 State   Year   Description                                                                                 sample firms

 NM      1991   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 15 to 5 years                                              10
 PA      1991   Removal of ability to carry forward losses (reduction from 3 years to 0)                             131
 NM      1992   Removal of ability to carry forward losses (reduction from 5 years to 0)                               9
 RI      1992   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 15 to 5 years                                              10
 CA      1993   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 15 to 5 years                                             442
 CA      1997   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 15 to 4 years                                             554
 CA      2002   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 20 to 10 years                                            529
 LA      2002   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 20 to 15 years                                             23
 IL      2004   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 20 to 12 years                                            118
 VT      2006   Reduction in loss carryforward period from 20 to 10 years                                              2




                                                                                                                      59
Table A.3. Effect of Tax Changes on Firm Risk: Alternative Standard Errors.
We repeat the tests in Table 2 with standard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity and cross-sectional and time-
series correlations using a two-way cluster at the firm and year levels (Gow, I.D., Ormazabal, G., Taylor, D.J., 2010.
Correcting for cross-sectional and time-series dependence in accounting research. The Accounting Review 85, 483–
512). In columns 1 and 2, we use contemporaneous changes in the firm’s home-state top marginal corporate income
tax rate. In columns 3 and 4, we use lagged changes in the firm’s home-state top marginal corporate income tax rate.
Columns 5 and 6 use the contemporaneous nexus-weighted change in tax rates as defined in Eq. (2). For variable
definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All
specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and
include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The fixed effects are not reported for brevity.
Standard errors are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions,
the test for equal tax sensitivity (tax increase = -tax cut) is one-sided.

                                                                   Change in log …
                                        ROA         ROIC          ROA          ROIC         ROA         ROIC
                                      volatility   volatility   volatility   volatility   volatility   volatility
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

        magnitude of tax increase      -0.019***    -0.020***
                                        0.006        0.006
        magnitude of tax cut           0.016        0.018
                                        0.015        0.014
        lagged tax increase                                      -0.026***    -0.019***
                                                                  0.004        0.004
        lagged tax cut                                           0.000         0.000
                                                                  0.014        0.015
        nexus-weighted tax increase                                                        -0.024***    -0.032***
                                                                                            0.009        0.010
        nexus-weighted tax cut                                                             0.014        0.017
                                                                                            0.016        0.018
        Change in …
         GSP growth rate               -0.003       -0.003       -0.003       -0.003       -0.003       -0.003
                                        0.002        0.002        0.002        0.002        0.002        0.002
          state unemployment rate      0.009        0.010        0.009         0.009       0.009        0.009
                                        0.007        0.007        0.007        0.007        0.007        0.007
        Lagged change in …
         log firm age                  -0.526***    -0.556***    -0.526***    -0.553***    -0.527***    -0.556***
                                        0.089        0.103        0.088        0.102        0.089        0.103
          log firm size                -0.242***    -0.325***    -0.242***    -0.325***    -0.242***    -0.325***
                                        0.020        0.024        0.020        0.025        0.020        0.024
          log market/book              0.123***     0.164***     0.121***      0.163***    0.123***     0.164***
                                        0.010        0.012        0.010        0.012        0.010        0.012
          book leverage                -0.300***    -0.389***    -0.301***    -0.392***    -0.300***    -0.389***
                                        0.037        0.037        0.037        0.038        0.037        0.037
          cash surplus                 -0.250***    -0.253***    -0.248***    -0.247***    -0.249***    -0.253***
                                        0.034        0.038        0.030        0.034        0.034        0.038
          loss carryforward            0.018        0.030***     0.017         0.029***    0.018        0.030***
                                        0.011        0.010        0.011        0.010        0.011        0.010
          sales growth                 0.042***     0.052***     0.042***      0.052***    0.042***     0.052***
                                        0.012        0.012        0.013        0.013        0.012        0.012
          stock return                 -0.047***    -0.055***    -0.046***    -0.054***    -0.047***    -0.055***
                                        0.007        0.010        0.008        0.010        0.007        0.010

        Industry-year fixed effects      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
        R2                             21.3%        21.0%        21.4%        21.1%        21.3%        21.0%
        Equal tax sensitivity? (F)      0.05         0.03         4.52**       1.80*        0.48         0.83
        No. of firms                   8,046        7,999        8,041        7,994        8,046        7,999
        No. of observations           64,447       64,221       64,435       64,200       64,447       64,221




                                                                                                                    1
Table A.4. Effect of Tax Changes on Firm Risk: Big and Small Tax Cuts.
To investigate whether the insignificant coefficients on tax cuts reported in Table 2 are driven by the fact that tax
cuts in our sample are, on average, smaller than tax increases (in absolute magnitude), we allow for a differential
sensitivity to large and small tax cuts. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The
unit of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to
remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry
shocks. The full set of controls (as in Table 2) and fixed effects are included but not reported for brevity.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the
coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided),
respectively.

                                                                          Change in log …
                                                        ROA            ROIC            ROA             ROIC
                                                      volatility      volatility     volatility       volatility
                                                         (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)

      magnitude of tax increase                        -0.019***       -0.020***       -0.019***       -0.020***
                                                        0.007           0.007           0.007           0.007
      magnitude of large tax cut (≥50 bps)              0.012           0.013
                                                        0.015           0.014
      magnitude of small tax cut (<50 bps)              0.048           0.054
                                                        0.046           0.051
      magnitude of large tax cut (≥100 bps)                                             0.008           0.008
                                                                                        0.017           0.014
      magnitude of small tax cut (<100 bps)                                             0.041           0.048
                                                                                        0.031           0.035

      Controls                                           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      Industry-year fixed effects                        Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      R2                                               21.3%           21.0%           21.3%           21.0%
      No. of firms                                      8,046           7,999           8,046           7,999
      No. of observations                              64,447          64,221          64,447          64,221




                                                                                                                      2
Table A.5. Effect of Tax Changes on Risk for Firms with Tight or Lax Covenants.
To test whether firms are constrained by their lenders from increasing risk in response to a tax cut, we use data from
DealScan to measure the tightness of covenants. We include firms with zero leverage (according to Compustat)
among firms that are unconstrained in this sense. Since DealScan does not track all borrowers and all types of
borrowing, the sample size is reduced compared to our baseline tests. Columns 1 and 2 reestimate our Table 2
baseline specifications in the restricted sample. The remaining columns allow the effect of tax cuts to vary with two
alternative measures of the restrictiveness of a firm’s covenants. Specifically, for each firm-year, we compute the
size-weighted average number of covenants and average slack across all loan facilities a firm has outstanding. Slack
is the distance from the covenant threshold: for a covenant that sets a minimum limit, distance is computed as (r’–
r)/sigma, where r’ is the actual variable, r is the covenant threshold, and sigma is the standard deviation of r’; for a
covenant that sets a maximum threshold, distance is calculated as – (r’–r)/sigma, where the extra negative sign is to
ensure a consistent interpretation with that of the minimum type of covenant. We code firms as having few
covenants if they either have zero leverage or at most one covenant (the sample median). We code firms as having
high slack if they either have zero leverage or are at least one standard deviation above (below) the minimum
(maximum) covenant threshold. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit
of analysis is a firm-year. The full set of controls (as in Table 2) and industry-by-year fixed effects are included but
not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
(two-sided), respectively.

                                                                   Change in log …
                                 ROA            ROIC             ROA           ROIC             ROA            ROIC
                               volatility      volatility      volatility     volatility      volatility      volatility
                                  (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)

magnitude of tax increase       -0.033*         -0.031*        -0.033*         -0.031*         -0.033*        -0.031*
                                 0.020           0.017          0.020           0.017           0.020          0.017
magnitude of tax cut             0.034          0.043*         -0.028          -0.039          0.004           0.013
                                 0.021           0.022          0.030           0.028           0.021          0.023
 … × few covenants                                              0.087**         0.116***
                                                                0.034           0.035
 … × high slack                                                                                0.060**         0.060
                                                                                                0.030          0.039

Controls                          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Industry-year fixed effects       Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
R2                              32.0%          31.0%           32.0%          31.0%           32.0%           31.0%
No. of firms                     5,092          5,068           5,092          5,068           5,092           5,068
No. of observations             29,712         29,624          29,712         29,624          29,712          29,624




                                                                                                                           3
Table A.6. Potential Cross-State Spillovers.
One identification concern is that tax changes in one state may trigger changes in the behavior of firms in the
neighboring states. To address this concern, we restrict the set of control firms to those located in states that do not
neighbor the treated state. (This contrasts with Table 5, where the set of control firms is restricted to those located in
neighboring states.) This reduces the sample compared to the baseline models shown in Table 2. To address
concerns stemming from the fact that corporate tax changes occasionally coincide with changes in state taxes on
bank profits or in investment incentive programs (i.e., tax credits for investment, R&D, and job creation), columns 3
and 4 control explicitly for these concurrent changes. The unit of analysis in each specification is a firm-year. All
specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences with industry-year fixed effects. The full set of controls
(as in Table 2) and fixed effects are included but not reported for brevity. For variable definitions and details of their
construction, see Appendix B. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in
italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level (two-sided), respectively. Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the test for equal tax sensitivity (tax
increase = -tax cut) is one-sided.

                                                                          Change in log …
                                                       ROA             ROIC            ROA               ROIC
                                                     volatility       volatility     volatility         volatility
                                                        (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)

     magnitude of tax increase                        -0.022**         -0.026***        -0.019**         -0.027**
                                                       0.010            0.009            0.009            0.011
     magnitude of tax cut                              0.023            0.030*           0.007            0.007
                                                       0.016            0.017            0.012            0.013
     Other coincident tax changes
      increase in state tax on banks                                                    -0.009            0.003
                                                                                         0.018            0.016
       cut in state tax on banks                                                         0.044***         0.057***
                                                                                         0.014            0.021
       increase in state investment tax credits                                         -0.005***        -0.004*
                                                                                         0.002            0.002
       cut in state investment tax credits                                              -0.004            0.001
                                                                                         0.004            0.004
       increase in state R&D tax credits                                                -0.003           -0.001
                                                                                         0.003            0.003
       cut in state R&D tax credits                                                     -0.006           -0.005
                                                                                         0.004            0.004
       increase in state job tax credits                                                -0.008           -0.012
                                                                                         0.016            0.015
       cut in state job tax credits                                                     -0.009           -0.008
                                                                                         0.034            0.036

     Controls                                          Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
     Industry-year fixed effects                       Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
     R2                                              25.7%            25.1%            25.7%            25.1%
     Equal tax sensitivity? (F)                       0.01             0.04             0.66             1.19
     No. of firms                                    7,160            7,114            7,160            7,114
     No. of observations                            40,900           40,751           40,900           40,751




                                                                                                                        4
Table A.7. Falsification Test.
This table reports the results of estimating Christensen et al.’s (2016) falsification test of the potential bias induced
by unobserved confounds. The test regresses the part of the outcome variable that is related to the observed
determinants of the confound (here: the change in risk taking predicted from the economic and political controls
included in columns 5 and 6 of Table 5) on the treatment variable (here: the change in the tax rate). A small
coefficient in the falsification test, compared to the estimated treatment effect in the baseline test, suggests that the
baseline treatment effect is unlikely to reflect unobserved confounds. Columns 1 and 2 present the results of the
falsification test for the full sample, and columns 3 and 4 present the results for the neighboring-state sample used in
Table 5. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of analysis in each
column is a firm-year. The full set of controls (as in Table 2) and industry-by-year fixed effects are included but not
reported for brevity. Columns 3 and 4 further control explicitly for other concurrent tax changes and include group-
year fixed effects, where a treated state and its neighboring states are coded as a group. Heteroskedasticity-
consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We
use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                           Change in log …
                                                         ROA            ROIC            ROA             ROIC
                                                       volatility      volatility     volatility       volatility
                                                          (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)

      magnitude of tax increase                         -0.001          -0.001           0.000           0.002
                                                         0.001           0.002           0.002           0.002
      magnitude of tax cut                              -0.004          -0.002          -0.004          -0.004
                                                         0.003           0.003           0.004           0.004
      Other coincident tax changes
       increase in state tax on banks                                                   -0.004          -0.007**
                                                                                         0.003           0.003
        cut in state tax on banks                                                        0.002          -0.002
                                                                                         0.005           0.005
        increase in state investment tax credits                                         0.000           0.001
                                                                                         0.001           0.001
        cut in state investment tax credits                                              0.000           0.001*
                                                                                         0.000           0.000
        increase in state R&D tax credits                                                0.000           0.000
                                                                                         0.001           0.001
        cut in state R&D tax credits                                                     0.000          -0.001
                                                                                         0.001           0.001
        increase in state job tax credits                                                0.005*          0.006**
                                                                                         0.003           0.003
        cut in state job tax credits                                                    -0.002           0.000
                                                                                         0.011           0.010

      Controls                                            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      Industry-year fixed effects                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
      Group-year fixed effects                             No              No             Yes             Yes
      R2                                                42.9%           46.8%           69.6%           72.2%
      No. of firms                                       8,046           7,999           6,586           6,547
      No. of observations                               64,447          64,221          29,613          29,498




                                                                                                                       5
Table A.8. Effect of Tax Changes on Operational Choices.
Columns 1 and 2 report a variation on our Table 7 specification, restricting the set of control firms to those located
in a neighboring state, as in Table 5. Columns 3 and 4 report a variation on our Table 7 specification, allowing firms’
choices of operating risk in response to a tax cut to vary with their financial leverage (which proxies for constraints
on risk taking imposed by lenders). As in Table 3, we code firms as having high (low) financial leverage if their
book leverage at the end of the previous fiscal year is above (below) the sample median. For variable definitions and
details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All specifications
are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and include
industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. We include the same controls and fixed effects as in Table
5 or Table 7, as appropriate. These are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                               Change in operating cycle
                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)

                  magnitude of tax increase        -1.244***                  -1.702***
                                                   0.570                       0.379
                  magnitude of tax cut             -0.163                     0.632
                                                   1.167                       0.877
                    … × low leverage                                          -1.399
                                                                               1.412
                  nexus-weighted tax increase                    -2.774**                  -3.051**
                                                                  1.321                     1.163
                  nexus-weighted tax cut                         -1.234                     0.815
                                                                  1.444                     1.690
                    … × low leverage                                                       -3.019
                                                                                            2.362

                  Controls                          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
                  Industry-year fixed effects       Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
                  R2                              15.9%          15.9%       11.5%         10.1%
                  No. of firms                     6,511          6,511       7,952         7,952
                  No. of observations             29,243         29,243      63,472        63,472




                                                                                                                    6
Table A.9. Effect of Tax Changes on Acquisitions.
We estimate OLS regressions to test whether, and by how much, firms change their M&A activity in response to
changes in state corporate income taxes. The dependent variable change in the number of acquisitions (or diversifying
acquisitions) is defined as the difference between the number of acquisitions (or diversifying acquisitions) in year t
and the number of acquisitions (or diversifying acquisitions) in year t–1. The number of acquisitions (or diversifying
acquisitions) is defined following Gormley and Matsa (2016). Specifically, the number of acquisitions is calculated
using SDC’s Mergers and Acquisitions Database after excluding acquisitions meeting any of the following criteria:
(1) the ratio of the deal size to the market value of the acquirer’s assets is less than 1%; (2) the acquiring firm
controlled more than 50% of the target’s equity prior to the announcement date or less than 100% after the
acquisition was completed; (3) the ultimate parent of the acquirer and the target are the same; (4) either the acquirer
or the target is a financial firm; or (5) the deal was not completed within 1,000 days of the announcement date. The
number of diversifying acquisitions is the number of acquisitions a firm undertakes for which its primary SIC
industry does not coincide with any of the target firm’s SIC codes. In columns 1 and 2, we use contemporaneous
changes in the firm’s home-state top marginal corporate income tax rate. In columns 3 and 4, we use lagged changes
in the firm’s home-state top marginal corporate income tax rate. Columns 5 and 6 use the contemporaneous nexus-
weighted change in tax rates as defined in Eq. (2). The unit of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All
specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects in the levels equations and
include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. We include the same controls and fixed effects as
in Table 2. These are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state
level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                 Change in the number of …
                                                  diversifying                  diversifying                  diversifying
                                   acquisitions   acquisitions   acquisitions acquisitions     acquisitions   acquisitions
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

     magnitude of tax increase       0.002          0.000
                                     0.012          0.009
     magnitude of tax cut            0.006          0.000
                                     0.010          0.007
     lagged tax increase                                           0.005          0.007
                                                                    0.006         0.004
     lagged tax cut                                                0.019          0.010
                                                                    0.014         0.010
     nexus-weighted tax increase                                                                -0.004         -0.003
                                                                                                 0.013          0.011
     nexus-weighted tax cut                                                                      0.015          0.003
                                                                                                 0.009          0.007

     Controls                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     Industry-year fixed effects      Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     R2                             14.2%          13.8%          14.4%          14.1%          14.2%          13.8%
     No. of firms                   8,077          8,077          7,931          7,931          8,077          8,077
     No. of observations           64,721         64,721         63,762         63,762         64,721         64,721




                                                                                                                             7
Table A.10. Effect of Tax Changes on Equity Volatility.
We estimate OLS regressions to test whether, and by how much, firms change their equity volatility in response to
changes in state corporate income taxes in their headquarter state. Column 1 models equity volatility and column 2
models deleveraged equity volatility. Equity volatility is defined as the standard deviation of monthly returns over
the 12-month period ending at the fiscal year end (measured using data from CRSP). We annualize equity volatility
by multiplying it by 12 . Deleveraged equity volatility is defined as equity volatility times the ratio of market
capitalization (Compustat items prcc_f × csho) to the sum of market capitalization and the book value of debt
(Compustat items dlttq + dlcq). For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit
of analysis in each column is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove
firm fixed effects in the levels equations and include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The
fixed effects are not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the state level are
shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. Reflecting the signed nature of the predictions, the test for equal tax
sensitivity (tax increase = -tax cut) is one-sided.

                                                                      Change in log …
                                                                                 deleveraged
                                                             equity volatility equity volatility
                                                                   (1)               (2)

                        magnitude of tax increase                -0.023***          -0.020***
                                                                  0.005              0.006
                        magnitude of tax cut                      0.002             -0.003
                                                                  0.005              0.006
                        Change in …
                         GSP growth rate                         -0.003**           -0.002
                                                                  0.001              0.001
                          state unemployment rate                 0.022***           0.025***
                                                                  0.005              0.005
                        Lagged change in …
                         log firm age                            -0.032*            -0.137***
                                                                  0.018              0.020
                          log firm size                          -0.118***          -0.175***
                                                                  0.007              0.010
                          log market/book                        -0.084***          -0.113***
                                                                  0.006              0.008
                          book leverage                           0.167***           0.183***
                                                                  0.026              0.028
                          cash surplus                           -0.114***          -0.062***
                                                                  0.016              0.015
                          loss carryforward                       0.011*             0.015*
                                                                  0.006              0.007
                          sales growth                            0.006              0.010**
                                                                  0.004              0.005
                          stock return                           -0.024***          -0.011***
                                                                  0.004              0.003

                        Industry-year fixed effects               Yes                 Yes
                        R2                                      25.1%               22.4%
                        Equal tax sensitivity? (F)               8.57***             6.74***
                        No. of firms                            7,867               7,865
                        No. of observations                    63,017              62,992




                                                                                                                        8
Table A.11. Effect of Tax Changes on Earnings Management.
We estimate OLS regressions to test whether, and by how much, firms change their performance-matched
discretionary accruals in response to state corporate income tax changes. The dependent variable change in
performance-matched discretionary accruals is defined as the difference between performance-matched
discretionary accruals measured at t and those measured at t–1. We estimate performance matched discretionary
accruals as total accruals minus predicted accruals, where predicted accruals is calculated using the formula:
PR_ACCRit = b0 + b1×(1/ATit) + b2×(SALEit–SALEit-1–RECTit+RECTit-1) + b3×PPEit + b4×ROAit-1. The firm-year
specific parameters b0 to b4 are estimated using within SIC2-industry-year regressions: ACCRjt = b0 + b1×(1/ATjt) +
b2×(SALEjt–SALEjt-1) + b3×PPEjt + b4×ROAjt-1 + errorjt. In estimating the parameters for firm i in year t, the
observation of firm i in year t is excluded from the regression. ACCR is total accruals, calculated as Compustat item
ibc–oancf+xidoc; AT is total assets (Compustat item at); SALE is total sales (Compustat item sale); RECT is
accounting receivables (Compustat item rect); PPE is property, plant, and equipment (Compustat item ppegt); ROA
is return on assets (Compustat item pi/at). In columns 2 and 3, we restrict the set of control firms to those located in
a neighboring state, thus excluding far-away states (i.e., firms in states that neither experience a tax rate change nor
border a state that does are excluded). For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The
unit of analysis is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed
effects in the levels equations and include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The full set of
controls (as in Table 2) and fixed effects are included but not reported for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **,
and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                 Change in performance-matched
                                                                     discretionary accruals
                                                               (1)             (2)           (3)

             magnitude of tax increase                        0.000           -0.001           -0.003
                                                              0.001            0.001            0.002
             magnitude of tax cut                            -0.002           -0.004           -0.007
                                                              0.004            0.006            0.005
             Other coincident tax changes
              increase in state tax on banks                                                    0.007**
                                                                                                0.003
               cut in state tax on banks                                                        0.007
                                                                                                0.009
               increase in state investment tax credits                                        -0.001
                                                                                                0.001
               cut in state investment tax credits                                             -0.001**
                                                                                                0.001
               increase in state R&D tax credits                                                0.000
                                                                                                0.000
               cut in state R&D tax credits                                                    -0.001
                                                                                                0.001
               increase in state job tax credits                                               -0.006
                                                                                                0.005
               cut in state job tax credits                                                     0.002
                                                                                                0.010

             Controls                                          Yes              Yes              Yes
             Industry-year fixed effects                       Yes              Yes              Yes
             R2                                             18.7%            24.4%            24.4%
             No. of firms                                    7,090            5,765            5,765
             No. of observations                            56,779           26,058           26,058




                                                                                                                      9
Table A.12. Alternative Cutoffs of Loss Offset Rules.
We repeat the tests reported in Table 8 with alternative cutoffs for the loss offset rules. Columns 1 and 3 of Panel A
include firms headquartered in a state that (1) does not allow losses to be carried back and (2) does not permit losses
to be carried forward for more than 12 years. Columns 2 and 4 of Panel A include only the remaining sample firms.
Columns 1 and 3 of Panel B include firms headquartered in a state that (1) does not allow losses to be carried back
and (2) does not permit losses to be carried forward for more than 15 years. Columns 2 and 4 of Panel B include
only the remaining sample firms. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix B. The unit
of analysis is a firm-year. All specifications are estimated using OLS in first differences to remove firm fixed effects
in the levels equations and include industry-by-year fixed effects to remove industry shocks. The full set of controls
(as in Table 2) and fixed effects are included but not reported for brevity. The tests for equal tax sensitivity across
columns 1 and 2 and across columns 3 and 4 are based on fully-interacted models. Reflecting the signed nature of
the predictions, the tests for equal tax sensitivity are one-sided. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
clustered at the state level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

Panel A. Alternative Carryforward Cutoff of 12 Years.
                                                                          Change in log …
                                                           ROA volatility                   ROIC volatility
                                                     Low loss      High loss           Low loss      High loss
                                                   offset ability offset ability     offset ability offset ability
                                                        (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)

      magnitude of tax increase                      -0.030***          -0.004          -0.036***        0.014
                                                      0.010              0.018          0.013             0.023
      magnitude of tax cut                            0.009             0.013           0.017            0.014
                                                      0.022              0.018          0.019             0.020

      Controls                                         Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes
      Industry-year fixed effects                      Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes
      R2                                             29.8%              27.0%          28.7%             26.9%
      Equal tax sensitivity? (F)
       Tax increases: (1) vs. (2) or (3) vs. (4)                 1.41                           3.45**
      No. of firms                                    4,383              5,715          4,365             5,674
      No. of observations                            26,863             37,584         26,771            37,440




                                                                                                                     10
Panel B. Alternative Carryforward Cutoff of 15 Years.
                                                                        Change in log …
                                                         ROA volatility                   ROIC volatility
                                                   Low loss      High loss           Low loss      High loss
                                                 offset ability offset ability     offset ability offset ability
                                                      (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)

    magnitude of tax increase                      -0.027***           0.018          -0.033***         0.049
                                                    0.008               0.028         0.010             0.032
    magnitude of tax cut                            0.014              -0.001         0.020             0.000
                                                    0.018               0.021         0.017             0.023

    Controls                                         Yes                 Yes           Yes             Yes
    Industry-year fixed effects                      Yes                 Yes           Yes             Yes
    R2                                             24.5%               33.8%         24.0%           33.6%
    Equal tax sensitivity? (F)
     Tax increases: (1) vs. (2) or (3) vs. (4)                 2.38*                          6.22***
    No. of firms                                    6,088               4,258         6,063              4,226
    No. of observations                            39,775              24,672        36,640             24,571




                                                                                                                   11
