                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ENDOGENOUS VOLATILITY AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND:
                    IMPLICATIONS FOR STABILIZATION POLICY

                                            Susanto Basu
                                            Brent Bundick

                                        Working Paper 21838
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21838


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2015




We thank Taisuke Nakata, Alexander Richter, Andrew Lee Smith, and Stephen Terry for helpful discussions,
and Martin Eichenbaum and several anonymous referees for insightful comments. We also appreciate
the feedback from participants at various conferences and seminars. We thank Daniel Molling for
excellent research assistance and Research Automation for computational support. The views expressed
herein are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Endogenous Volatility at the Zero Lower Bound: Implications for Stabilization Policy
Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick
NBER Working Paper No. 21838
December 2015
JEL No. E32,E52

                                             ABSTRACT

At the zero lower bound, the central bank's inability to offset shocks endogenously generates volatility.
In this setting, an increase in uncertainty about future shocks causes significant contractions in the
economy and may lead to non-existence of an equilibrium. The form of the monetary policy rule is
crucial for avoiding catastrophic outcomes. State-contingent optimal monetary and fiscal policies
can attenuate this endogenous volatility by stabilizing the distribution of future outcomes. Fluctuations
in uncertainty and the zero lower bound help our model match the unconditional and stochastic volatility
in the recent macroeconomic data.


Susanto Basu
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
susanto.basu@bc.edu

Brent Bundick
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Research Department
1 Memorial Drive
Kansas City, MO 64198
brent.bundick@kc.frb.org
1     Introduction
Models with nominal rigidities allow aggregate demand to determine output. In response to
declines in aggregate demand, monetary policy plays a key role in stabilizing real activity and
inflation. Even in the face of significant exogenous shocks, an unconstrained central bank can
stabilize the economy using its nominal policy rate. Households internalize this ability of the
monetary authority to influence real activity and inflation in all states of the world. In this
setting, uncertainty about future exogenous shocks is irrelevant because monetary policy can
effectively offset all possible shocks.


    At the zero lower bound, however, monetary policy cannot offset further negative shocks
but will offset sufficiently large positive shocks. This asymmetry reduces the mean of expected
future outcomes and increases their variance. Thus, the zero lower bound generates endoge-
nous volatility. This endogenous volatility leads households to increase their desired savings.
With flexible prices, higher desired savings by households would simply lower the real interest
rate but leave equilibrium output unchanged. With nominal rigidities, precautionary saving
by households reduces aggregate demand further, and keeps the economy at the zero lower
bound for a longer period of time. Under standard assumptions about monetary policy, this
destabilizing feedback mechanism leads to significant contractions in the economy. In fact, this
feedback mechanism may be so powerful that an equilibrium fails to exist. We show that the
form of the monetary policy reaction function is crucial for avoiding this catastrophic outcome.


    Through this destabilizing feedback mechanism, the distribution of possible future shocks
becomes crucially important. Expectations of more volatile shocks further increase the expected
variance of future consumption and strengthen the destabilizing feedback loop. Through the
endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound, small amounts of uncertainty about
future exogenous shocks are transformed into large declines in aggregate demand.


    This paper illuminates these interactions between the zero lower bound and the uncertainty
about future exogenous shocks. We begin by examining the positive economics of changes in
expected volatility when the economy is trapped at the zero lower bound. We then examine
the normative issues of choosing optimal monetary and fiscal policy to stabilize an economy
subject to stochastic volatility and the zero lower bound constraint.


    Many policymakers and economists have cited increased uncertainty about the future as a
key driver in generating the Great Recession and the subsequent slow recovery. Empirical work


                                               2
by Stock and Watson (2012) and Leduc and Liu (2014) and speeches by policymakers such
as Kocherlakota (2010) point to higher uncertainty as the reason for a sizable fraction of the
decline in real activity during the Great Recession and the slow subsequent recovery. Basu and
Bundick (2012) present a simple model where higher uncertainty about future shocks can cause
contractions in all major macroeconomic aggregates. But these papers raise a puzzle: why does
uncertainty sometimes have small and sometimes large macroeconomic effects? For example,
Bloom (2009) documents a variety of events that generate significant uncertainty about the
future. Prior to the Great Recession, however, these events did not seem to spill over dramati-
cally to the broader economy, especially in the post-1984 period.


   Our model resolves this puzzle. We show that the level of background uncertainty about the
future – just the expectation of future shocks – can assume much greater importance depending
on the economic environment. We identify the constraint imposed by the zero lower bound as
the key culprit that can transform this normal background noise into a significant downturn.
The problematic element is the famous Taylor (1993) rule. This rule interacts with uncertainty
and the zero lower bound constraint to create what we term the “contractionary bias.” This bias
emerges when the zero lower bound prevents the monetary authority from attaining its inflation
target on average. We show that higher ex ante uncertainty at the zero lower bound increases
this bias and raises the expected average real interest rate. Higher expected real rates reduce
output and inflation, making the zero lower bound constraint bind more strongly and creating
a destabilizing feedback loop. Our paper thus explains why the effects of uncertainty can be
time-varying, and why the existence of uncertainty at the zero lower bound can be catastrophic.


   To derive a full set of policy implications, we show that it is crucial to use global solution
methods that allow for ex ante uncertainty about future events. The existing literature often
fails to uncover the contractionary bias or conflates two conceptually distinct channels: (1)
the contractionary bias and (2) the effects of uncertainty per se at a given real interest rate.
To disentangle these two effects, we need to shift away from simple Taylor rules to rules that
allow the central bank to achieve its inflation target on average despite the zero lower bound
constraint. These history-dependent rules prevent the average expected real rate from rising
simply because the zero lower bound binds in more states of nature. We show that the negative
effects of uncertainty per se can be substantial when the economy is at the zero lower bound.
However, it is the interaction between ex ante uncertainty about future shocks, the zero lower
bound, and the Taylor rule that can be devastating. The implication is that monetary policy
must follow a rule that may emulate the Taylor rule during normal times, but stabilizes the
real interest rate when the zero lower bound constraint binds.


                                               3
   Optimal monetary policy can attenuate the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower
bound. The central bank achieves this outcome via two channels: (1) lowering the expected
path of real interest rates and (2) stabilizing the conditional distribution of household consump-
tion. If a contractionary shock is realized, the central bank lowers real rates by committing to
a lower path of future nominal interest rates. Households fully internalize this commitment by
the central bank to respond to the economy if bad shocks are realized. This state-contingent
policy response stabilizes the household’s expected distribution of consumption. However, the
optimal policy requires maintaining a zero policy rate for an extended period of time. To stabi-
lize the short-run distribution of outcomes at the zero lower bound, the central bank tolerates
a higher and more volatile medium-run distribution of inflation. State-contingent government
spending, if available, can help stabilize the economy further.


   To analyze the quantitative impact of ex ante uncertainty at the zero lower bound, we cal-
ibrate and solve a representative-agent, dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model using a
global solution method. The model economy is continually hit by first- and second-moment
shocks to aggregate demand. We denote a second-moment shock an “uncertainty” shock since
it makes forecasting future exogenous shocks more difficult. Qualitatively, this modeling choice
allows us to show how expectations about future shocks can assume much greater importance
at the zero lower bound. In addition, we show that the interactions between the zero lower
bound and these uncertainty shocks are quantitatively important for matching features of re-
cent macroeconomic aggregates. In particular, these two nonlinearities help the model match
the unconditional and stochastic volatility of the output gap, inflation, and the nominal interest
rate. The model also can generate significant periods of time at the zero lower bound, which
is consistent with the recent US experience. The zero lower bound episodes are also character-
ized by a highly uncertain future liftoff date, which is in line with a recent survey of Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants. Without uncertainty shocks and the zero lower
bound, the model struggles to jointly match these features of the recent macroeconomic data.


   As an extension, we show that the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound
may provide an explanation for the “Forward Guidance Puzzle.” Using a similar model with
nominal rigidities, Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson (2013) argues that the model is too
responsive to exogenous changes in future interest rates. However, they reach this conclusion
using a linearized model where households do not take into account the uncertainty about
future consumption. Our paper argues that this omitted variable may be crucially important
when the economy is stuck at the zero lower bound. We show that the endogenous volatility
generated by the zero lower bound heavily attenuates the response of the economy to exogenous


                                                4
changes in interest rates.


2     Intuition
This section formalizes the intuition from the Introduction using a few key equations from a
simple general-equilibrium model. For Section 2 only, we use Taylor series approximations of
these equations to show how the zero lower bound endogenously generates volatility. These
approximations provide analytical tractability which is unavailable when examining the equa-
tions in their original nonlinear form. In Section 4, we show that the intuition from these
approximations is consistent with the computational results using the full nonlinear model.


2.1    Household Consumption Under Uncertainty
The household consumption Euler equation highlights how the zero lower bound endogenously
generates volatility. Under constant relative risk aversion utility from consumption, the follow-
ing equation links household consumption Ct to the gross real interest rate RtR :
                                       (            −σ )
                                                Ct+1
                                 1 = Et βRtR               ,                                  (1)
                                                 Ct

where β is the household discount factor and σ parameterizes intertemporal substitution and
risk aversion. Using a third-order Taylor series approximation around the steady state, Ap-
pendix A shows that Equation (1) can be written as follows:
                                 1 r       1           1
                  ct = Et ct+1 −   rt − r − σ Vart ct+1 + σ 2 Skewt ct+1 ,
                                         r
                                                                                              (2)
                                 σ           2           6
where lowercase variables denote the log of the respective variable, rr is the steady state net
real interest rate, and Vart ct+1 and Skewt ct+1 denotes the conditional variance and skewness
of future consumption. For any given real interest rate, households consume less if they expect
a more volatile and negatively-skewed distribution of future consumption.


    After defining a flexible-price version of Equation (2), Appendix A shows how to derive the
following approximate higher-order version of a standard New-Keynesian IS Curve:
                                1 r        1               1
                 xt = Et xt+1 −    rt − rtn − σ Vart xt+1 + σ 2 Skewt xt+1                    (3)
                                σ              2             6
where xt denotes the gap between equilibrium and flexible-price output and rtn is the natural
real interest rate that would prevail in the flexible-price economy. Iterating Equation (3) for-
ward and taking expectations at time t implies the following solution for current output gap:

                                               5
                  ∞                                    ∞                   ∞
                  X
                            n             r
                                                    1 X                1 2X
         xt = −         Et rt+i   −   Et rt+i       − σ    Vart xt+1+j + σ     Skewt xt+1+k    (4)
                  i=0
                                                     2 j=0              6  k=0

The impact of these higher-order terms on the macroeconomy depends the ability of monetary
policy to stabilize the economy. Without a zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate, the
monetary authority can always fully offset the effects of uncertainty by setting its policy rate to
close the gap between the real and natural real interest rates. In this scenario, the conditional
variance and skewness of the output gap are zero since the monetary authority can stabilize
the economy in all future states of the world. However, suppose the natural real rate becomes
negative and the zero lower bound prevents the central bank from fully stabilizing the economy.
Households internalize this reduced ability to offset future contractionary shocks throughout
the zero lower bound episode. This asymmetric ability to stabilize the economy endogenously
generates a more volatile and negatively-skewed distribution of future output gaps. Increased
uncertainty about future shocks increases this asymmetry and leads to a significantly negative
output gap today due to precautionary saving by households.


   In response to the endogenous volatility at the zero lower bound, the optimal monetary
policy can help stabilize the economy. Even though they are constrained today, the monetary
authority can offset the higher expected volatility by committing to a lower path of future
nominal rates. Lower nominal rates, for any given level of expected inflation, lower real interest
rates and help stabilize the output gap. In addition, the monetary authority can promise
to further lower nominal rates if bad shocks are realized. Households fully internalize this
commitment by the central bank to respond to the economy in bad states of the world. This
state-contingent policy response helps stabilize the expected distribution of outcomes. Optimal
fiscal policy can also help stabilize the economy by committing to increase government spending
if adverse shocks are realized. This additional policy tool helps further stabilize the possible
future outcomes for the output gap.


2.2    From Intuition to Model Simulations
The intuition of this section argues that the zero lower bound can transform symmetric back-
ground noise about the future into a significant economic downturn. In the following section, we
calibrate and solve a nonlinear model and show that the simulated zero lower bound scenarios
are consistent with the intuition developed in this section. In addition, we solve for the optimal
responses of monetary and fiscal policy under commitment.




                                                         6
3        Model
This section outlines the baseline dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model that we use
in our analysis. The baseline model shares many features with the models of Ireland (2003)
and Ireland (2011). The model features optimizing households and firms and a central bank
that systematically adjusts the nominal interest rate to offset adverse shocks in the economy.
We allow for sticky prices using the quadratic-adjustment costs specification of Rotemberg
(1982). The baseline model considers fluctuations in the discount factor of households, which
we interpret as demand shocks, since they are non-technological in nature.


3.1      Households
In the model, the representative household maximizes lifetime expected utility over streams
of consumption Ct and leisure 1 − Nt . The household receives labor income Wt for each unit
of labor Nt supplied in the representative intermediate goods-producing firm. The household
also owns the intermediate goods firm, receives lump-sum dividends Dt , and has access to zero
net supply nominal bonds Bt and real bonds BtR . A nominal bond pays the gross one-period
nominal interest rate Rt while a real bond pays the gross one-period real interest rate RtR .
The household divides its income from labor and its financial assets between consumption Ct
                                      R
and the amount of the bonds Bt+1 and Bt+1 to carry into next period. The discount factor of
the household β is subject to shocks via the stochastic process at . An increase in at induces
households to consume more and work less.


    The representative household maximizes lifetime utility by choosing Ct+s , Nt+s , Bt+s+1 , and
 R
Bt+s+1 ,   for all s = 0, 1, 2, . . . by solving the following problem:
                                          ∞                  η                        1−σ
                                          X
                                                         s (Ct+s (1   − Nt+s )1−η )
                                 max Et         at+s β
                                          s=0
                                                                      1−σ

subject to the intertemporal household budget constraint each period,
                                 1 Bt+1   1 R      Wt      Bt Dt
                          Ct +          + R Bt+1 ≤    Nt +    +    + BtR .
                                 R t Pt  Rt        Pt      Pt   Pt
Using a Lagrangian approach, household optimization implies the following first-order condi-
tions:
                                                     (1 − Nt )(1−η)(1−σ) = λt
                                          η(1−σ)−1
                                   ηat Ct                                                     (5)
                                                                         Wt
                                              (1 − Nt )(1−η)(1−σ)−1 = λt
                                            η(1−σ)
                             (1 − η) at Ct                                                    (6)
                                                                         Pt
                                                             
                                                  λt+1    R t Pt
                                      1 = Et    β                                             (7)
                                                   λt     Pt+1

                                                            7
                                                                           
                                                            λt+1
                                      1 = Et              β             RtR                      (8)
                                                             λt
where λt denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the household budget constraint. Equations (5) -
(6) represent the household intratemporal optimality conditions with respect to consumption
and leisure, and Equations (7) - (8) represent the Euler equations for the one-period nominal
and real bonds.


3.2     Intermediate Goods Producers
Each intermediate goods-producing firm i rents labor Nt (i) from the representative household
in order to produce intermediate good Yt (i). Intermediate goods are produced in a monopolisti-
cally competitive market where producers face a quadratic cost of changing their nominal price
Pt (i) each period. Firm i chooses Nt (i), and Pt (i) to maximize the discounted present-value
of cash flows Dt (i)/Pt (i) given aggregate demand, Yt , and the price Pt of finished goods. The
intermediate goods firms all have access to the same constant returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas
production function. We introduce a production subsidy Ψ = θ/(θ−1) to ensure that the steady
state of the model is efficient, where θ is the elasticity of substitution across intermediate goods.


   Each intermediate goods-producing firm maximizes discount cash flows using the household
stochastic discount factor:                 ∞                                    
                                                          s λt+s         Dt+s (i)
                                            X
                                 max Et               β
                                             s=0
                                                               λt         Pt+s
subject to the production function:
                                                    −θ
                                            Pt (i)
                                                           Yt ≤ Nt (i),
                                             Pt
where                               1−θ                                 2
                  Dt (i)      Pt (i)           Wt          φP   Pt (i)
                         =Ψ               Yt −    Nt (i) −              − 1 Ct
                   Pt          Pt              Pt           2 ΠPt−1 (i)
The first-order conditions for the firm i are as follows:
                                       Wt
                                           Nt (i) = Ξt Nt (i)                                    (9)
                                        Pt
                                                                −θ               −θ−1
                 Pt (i)           Pt C t                      Pt (i)             Pt (i)
           φP             −1                   = Ψ(1 − θ)                + θΞt
                ΠPt−1 (i)       ΠYt Pt−1 (i)                   Pt                 Pt
                                                                                        (10)
                                    λt+1 Ct+1 Yt+1 Pt+1 (i)               Pt+1 (i) Pt
                        +φP Et    β                                −1                       ,
                                     λt      Yt+1 Yt ΠPt (i)              ΠPt (i) Pt (i)
where Ξt is the multiplier on the production function, which denotes the real marginal cost of
producing an additional unit of intermediate good i.

                                                           8
3.3    Final Goods Producers
The representative final goods producer uses Yt (i) units of each intermediate good produced by
the intermediate goods-producing firm i ∈ [0, 1]. The intermediate output is transformed into
final output Yt using the following constant returns to scale technology:
                                    Z 1               θ
                                                     θ−1
                                               θ−1
                                         Yt (i) θ di      ≥ Yt
                                         0

Each intermediate good Yt (i) sells at nominal price Pt (i) and each final good sells at nominal
price Pt . The finished goods producer chooses Yt and Yt (i) for all i ∈ [0, 1] to maximize the
following expression of firm profits:
                                                  Z       1
                                        Pt Yt −               Pt (i)Yt (i)di
                                                      0
subject to the constant returns to scale production function. Finished goods-producer opti-
mization results in the following first-order condition:
                                                        −θ
                                                  Pt (i)
                                       Yt (i) =              Yt
                                                   Pt
The market for final goods is perfectly competitive, and thus the final goods-producing firm
earns zero profits in equilibrium. Using the zero-profit condition, the first-order condition for
profit maximization, and the firm objective function, the aggregate price index Pt can be written
as follows:                                                              1
                                             Z       1                1−θ
                                      Pt =                Pt (i)1−θ di
                                                  0


3.4    Monetary Policy
We assume a cashless economy where the monetary authority sets the one-period net nominal
interest rate rt = log(Rt ). Due to the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, the central
bank cannot lower its nominal policy rate below zero. In the following results, we show that
the form of the monetary policy reaction function is crucial in determining how uncertainty
affects the macroeconomy. In our baseline model, we follow the previous literature and assume
that the monetary authority sets its policy rate according to the following Taylor (1993)-type
policy rule subject to the zero lower bound:
                                                       
                                    rtd = r + φπ πt − π + φx xt                                (11)
                                                          
                                           rt = max 0, rtd                                     (12)
where rtd is the desired policy rate of the monetary authority, rt is the actual policy rate subject
to the zero lower bound, πt is the log of the gross inflation rate, and xt is the gap between
current output and output in the equivalent flexible-price economy.

                                                              9
3.5     Shock Processes
Shocks to the discount rate of households are the exogenous stochastic processes in the baseline
model. Large negative innovations to the level this process imply a large decline in aggregate
demand, which forces the economy to encounter the zero lower bound. The stochastic processes
for these fluctuations are as follows:
                                                                    a
                                      at = (1 − ρa ) a + ρa at−1 + σt−1 εat                                   (13)
                                                                           a   a
                                   σta = (1 − ρσa ) σ a + ρσa σt−1
                                                               a
                                                                   + σ σ εσt                                  (14)
εat is a first moment shock that captures innovations to the level of the household discount
                             a
factors. We refer to εσt and as a second moment or “uncertainty” shock since it captures
innovations to the volatility of the exogenous processes of the model. An increase in the
volatility of the shock process increases the uncertainty about its future time path. Both
stochastic shocks are independent, standard normal random variables.1


3.6     Equilibrium
In the symmetric equilibrium, all intermediate goods firms choose the same price Pt (i) = Pt
and employ the same amount of labor Nt (i) = Nt . Thus, all firms have the same cash flows
and we define gross inflation as Πt = Pt /Pt−1 and the markup over marginal cost as µt = 1/Ξt .
Therefore, we can model our intermediate-goods firms with a single representative intermediate
goods-producing firm. To be consistent with national income accounting, we define a data-
consistent measure of output Ytd = Ct . This assumption treats the quadratic adjustment costs
as intermediate inputs. Fluctuations in household discount factors do not affect the equivalent
flexible-price version of the baseline model. Therefore, we define the output gap as data-
consistent output in deviation from its deterministic steady state xt = ln(Ytd /Y d ). In addition,
the gross natural real interest rate that would prevail in the equivalent flexible-price economy
can be defined as Rtn = β −1 at (Et at+1 )−1 . Thus, shocks to the household discount factor act as
fluctuations in the natural real rate for the economy.


3.7     Solution Method
We solve the model using the policy function iteration method of Coleman (1990) and Davig
(2004). This global approximation method allows us to model the occasionally-binding zero
   1
    We specify the stochastic processes in levels, rather than in logs, to prevent the volatility σ a from impacting
average value of at through a Jensen’s inequality effect. In the model solution, at always remains significantly
greater than zero. To ensure that the volatility stays positive, we impose a lower bound σ a = 0.0005 on the
volatility in both the model solution and simulations.

                                                        10
lower bound constraint in an environment where ex ante uncertainty matters for macroeconomic
outcomes. Our results show that global methods are crucial in deriving the full set of policy
implications from the interactions of uncertainty and the zero lower bound. This method
discretizes the state variables on a grid and solves for the policy functions which satisfy all the
model equations at each point in the state space. Appendix B contains the details of the policy
function iteration algorithm.


3.8    Calibration
Table 1 lists the calibrated parameters of the model. We calibrate the model at quarterly fre-
quency. Since the model shares features with the models of Ireland (2003) and Ireland (2011),
we calibrate many of our parameters to match his estimates. To assist in numerically solving
the model, we introduce a multiplicative constant into the production function to normalize
output Y to equal one at the deterministic steady state. We choose steady-state hours worked
N and the model-implied value for η such that the model has a Frisch labor supply elasticity
of two. Household risk aversion over the consumption-leisure basket σ is 2. The value for σ
implies an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 0.5, which is consistent with the empirical
estimates of Basu and Kimball (2002).


    The crucial parameters in our calibration are the parameters that control to stochastic
processes for the demand shocks. In conjunction with the monetary policy reaction function,
these parameters control the amount of uncertainty about the future endogenous variables
faced by the economy. For our initial baseline model, we set the unconditional volatility for
                                                     a
σ a = 0.01 and the uncertainty shock volatility σ σ = 0.005. Thus, a one-standard deviation
uncertainty shock increases the volatility of the shocks hitting the economy by 50 percent.
However, even after a multiple standard deviation shock uncertainty shock, the volatility of
the demand shocks in this baseline economy is significantly smaller than the unconditional
maximum likelihood estimate of Ireland (2011). We discuss the rationale for this calibration in
detail in Section 4.7.


4     Uncertainty Shocks and the Zero Lower Bound
4.1    Increased Uncertainty Without Change in Realized Volatility
We begin by analyzing the effects of an increase in uncertainty about the future shocks hit-
ting the economy. For these initial impulse responses, we simulate a one standard deviation
uncertainty shock, but assume that the economy is hit by no further shocks. This assumption

                                                11
isolates the effects of higher uncertainty about the future without any change in actual realized
shock volatility. Figure 1 plots these traditional impulse responses both at the steady state
and the zero lower bound. Holding the level of the discount factor shock constant at steady
state, a 50 percent increase in the expected volatility of the demand shock causes a one basis
point decline in the output gap and a three basis point fall in inflation. Despite the increase in
expected shock volatility, households understand that the central bank can effectively stabilize
the economy if bad shocks are realized. The ability of the central bank to lower its nominal
policy rate limits the spillovers to the macroeconomy.


   To compute the traditional impulse response at the zero lower bound, we generate two time
paths for the economy. In the first time path, we simulate a large negative first moment demand
shock, which causes the zero lower bound to bind for about eight quarters. In the second time
path, we simulate the same large negative first moment demand shock, but also simulate a
one standard deviation uncertainty shock. We compute the percent difference between the two
time paths as the traditional impulse response to the uncertainty shock at the zero lower bound.


   The inability of the monetary authority to offset the uncertainty shock magnifies the de-
clines in output and inflation by over an order of magnitude. When the monetary authority is
constrained by the zero lower bound, a one standard deviation uncertainty shock causes nearly
a one-half percent decline in both the output gap and inflation. Even without any change in
actual realized volatility, higher uncertainty about the future can be highly destabilizing at the
zero lower bound. The results show that any amount of uncertainty about future shocks can
assume much greater importance depending on the current economic conditions.


4.2    Expected Distributions of Future Outcomes
Figure 1 shows that the zero lower bound greatly amplifies the negative effects of the uncer-
tainty shock. However, these traditional impulse responses mask the underlying reasons why
uncertainty shocks cause larger contractions at the zero lower bound. Therefore, we now use
simulations to show the ex ante distributions of future outcomes that households expect when
making their decisions. These results show the exogenous shock volatility transmits to the en-
dogenous volatility of output and inflation. We show that the spillovers to the macroeconomy
of higher uncertainty crucially depend on the monetary policy reaction function. Unlike the
previous experiments, these alternative impulse responses contain the effects of both higher
uncertainty about the future and higher realized shock volatility.


   To compute the expected distributions of possible outcomes, we follow the “generalized im-

                                               12
pulse response” method of Koop, Pesaran and Potter (1996). In addition to simulating the
uncertainty shock, we now draw shocks randomly for the life of the impulse response using
Equations (13) and (14). We repeat this procedure 50,000 times for both the responses around
the steady state and those around the zero lower bound. Figure 2 plots the mean and 80%
prediction intervals for the simulations both at and away from the zero lower bound. These
intervals show the ex ante distribution of future outcomes that households expect when making
their decisions. These alternative responses are also consistent with the rational expectations
assumption in the model, since the distribution of actual shocks hitting the economy matches
the distribution expected by households.2


       Away from the zero lower bound, the central bank’s Taylor (1993)-type policy rule greatly
curtails the spillovers to the macroeconomy. Despite the increase in the exogenous shock volatil-
ity, the economy experiences very little increase in the endogenous volatility of output and
inflation. By responding to movements in inflation and the output gap, the central bank offsets
adverse shocks using its nominal policy rate. Since the central bank remains unconstrained,
their ability to offset shocks is symmetric and thus the conditional mean and skewness remain
largely unchanged. Away from the zero lower bound, the uncertainty shock simply adds noise
to the expectations of future output and inflation without causing a significant economic con-
traction.


       For the same time path of exogenous shock volatility, the zero lower bound endogenously
generates large increases in the volatility of output and inflation. Under its simple policy rule,
the central bank cannot lower its nominal policy rate to offset contractionary shocks. Since the
monetary authority can no longer play its usual stabilizing role, adverse exogenous shocks imply
much higher realized volatility in output and inflation. However, the Taylor (1993)-type policy
rule implies that the monetary authority will offset expansionary shocks with higher nominal
rates. This asymmetric response to shocks endogenously shifts the distribution of outcomes
faced by households at the zero lower bound. Since large declines in output and inflation are
more likely than the offsetting positive outcomes, the zero lower bound also endogenously causes
declines in the conditional mean and implies negative skewness in future outcomes. Households
internalize these possible future outcomes, which induces significant precautionary saving. This
decline in aggregate demand leads to sizable contractions in output and inflation at the zero
lower bound at impact. In addition, the duration of the zero lower bound episode is highly
   2
    Under a first-order linearized solution, the mean of the generalized impulse response in Figure 2 would equal
the traditional impulse response in Figure 1. However, the nonlinear zero lower bound constraint amplifies
contractionary shocks, which induces significant asymmetry when additional shocks hit the economy.



                                                       13
uncertain and may persist even four years after the initial shock. Although the uncertainty
shock is relatively short-lived with a half-life of about 4 quarters, the endogenous volatility
generated by the zero lower persists for a significant period. At the zero lower bound, higher
uncertainty about the future can cause a significant contraction in economic activity.


4.3    Inspecting the Mechanisms
Our previous results show that the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound
amplifies and propagates contractionary shocks. We now further inspect the transmission mech-
anisms of higher uncertainty to the macroeconomy. Under a standard Taylor (1993)-type policy
rule, we show that the effects of ex ante uncertainty can be decomposed into two distinct mech-
anisms: (1) precautionary saving and working by households and (2) a bias in the monetary
policy rule which causes higher nominal interest rates on average. We show that the form of the
monetary policy reaction function is crucial in determining how these two mechanisms affect
the macroeconomy.


4.4    Precautionary Labor Supply & Labor Demand
This section shows how precautionary saving by households lowers output and inflation in the
macroeconomy. A more volatile and negatively-skewed expected distribution of consumption
induces precautionary saving by the representative household through Equation (2). Since con-
sumption and leisure are both normal goods, lower consumption also induces “precautionary
labor supply,” or a desire to supply more labor for an given level of the real wage. Figure 3 illus-
trates this effect graphically in real wage and hours worked space. Denoting the forward-looking
marginal utility of wealth by λt , an increase in uncertainty raises λt , shifting the household la-
bor supply curve outward through a negative wealth effect. This shift in labor supply lowers
the real wage, and hence the marginal cost of production. If prices adjust slowly to changing
marginal costs, however, firms’ markups over marginal cost rise when the household increases
its desired labor supply. At a given level of the real wage, an increase in markups decreases the
demand for labor from firms.


   The equilibrium increase in markups depends crucially on the behavior of the monetary
authority. Even in a model without a zero lower bound constraint, Basu and Bundick (2012)
shows that labor demand may decrease so much that equilibrium hours worked actually fall
after an increase in uncertainty about the future. Since labor is the only input into production
in the simple model of this paper, a decline in hours worked implies that output must fall. The
zero lower bound further exacerbates this effect since the central bank is unable to offset the


                                                14
increase in markups reducing its policy rate. Thus, the endogenous volatility generated by the
zero lower bound leads to further precautionary saving, which results in still higher markups
and lower output.


4.5       Contractionary Bias in the Nominal Interest Rate
In addition to the precautionary working mechanism, the interaction between ex ante un-
certainty and the zero lower bound can produce an additional source of fluctuations. This
additional amplification mechanism, which we define as the contractionary bias in the nominal
interest rate distribution, can dramatically affect the economy when uncertainty increases at
the zero lower bound. The contractionary bias emerges when the zero lower bound prevents
the monetary authority from attaining its inflation goal on average.


       For this discussion, assume monetary policy sets its desired policy rate using the following
simple rule:                                                        
                                           rtd   = r + φπ πt − π                                         (15)
                                                                
                                                 rt = max 0, rtd                                         (16)

For a given monetary policy rule, the volatility of the exogenous shocks determines the volatil-
ity of inflation. Through the monetary policy rule in Equation (15), the volatility of inflation
dictates the volatility of the desired nominal policy rate. However, since the zero lower bound
left-truncates the actual policy rate distribution, more volatile desired policy rates lead to higher
average actual policy rates. Figure 4 illustrates this effect by plotting hypothetical distribu-
tions of the desired and actual nominal interest rate distributions under low and high levels of
exogenous shock volatility. The plot shows that the average actual policy rate is an increasing
function of the volatility of the exogenous shocks when monetary policy follows a simple Taylor
(1993)-type rule.3


       Changes in this contractionary bias caused by higher uncertainty have dramatic general-
equilibrium effects on the economy. Figure 5 plots the average Fisher relation r = π + rr
and the average policy rule under both high and low levels of exogenous shock volatility. The
upper-right intersection of the monetary policy rule and the Fisher relation dictates the normal
general-equilibrium average levels of inflation and the nominal interest rate. An increase in
   3
    Reifschneider and Williams (2000) first discuss this phenomenon and Mendes (2011) analytically proves this
result using a simple New Keynesian model. Nakov (2008) and Nakata and Schmidt (2014) also describe this
deflationary bias when monetary policy does not attain its inflation target on average when monetary policy is
conducted optimally under discretion.


                                                       15
shock volatility shifts the policy rule inward and increases the average nominal interest rate
for a given level of inflation. Higher volatility thus raises the average real interest rate, which
reduces average output and inflation in the economy. Even if households are risk-neutral, so the
precautionary effects discussed in the previous sub-section cease to apply, the contractionary
bias implies lower output and inflation through the interaction between higher volatility, the
monetary policy rule, and the zero lower bound.


4.6    Quantifying the Mechanisms
We now quantify the effects of the precautionary labor supply and contractionary bias channels.
Following the insights in Reifschneider and Williams (2000), slight alterations to our baseline
policy rule in Equation (11) can eliminate the contractionary bias mechanism. For example,
adding a small weight on the price level automatically removes the contractionary bias. We
now assume that the monetary authority conducts policy using the following simple rule:
                                                              
                       rtd = r + φπ πt − π + φx xt + φpl pt − p∗                        (17)
                                                       
                                                      d
                                         rt = max 0, rt                                       (18)

where pt is the log of the price level and p∗ is the central bank’s price level target. This ad-
ditional term ensures a stable long-run price level by offsetting any deflation with equivalent
inflation in the future, thus ensuring that the central bank achieves its inflation target on aver-
age. As discussed earlier, this result contrasts with a simple Taylor (1993)-type rule where the
zero lower bound causes the average rate of inflation to be below target. This history-dependent
rule prevents expectations of nominal rates from rising simply because the zero lower bound
binds in a few more states of the world after an increase in exogenous volatility. We set the
central bank’s response to the price level φpl = 0.1.


   Both the precautionary labor supply and contractionary bias mechanisms are quantitatively
significant. Figure 6 replicates the previous traditional impulse responses at the zero lower
bound from Section 4.1 both with and without the response to the nominal price level. This
exercise allows us to differentiate the effects of precautionary labor supply from those resulting
from the contractionary bias channel. Of the 0.45 percent decline in output, about one-third
of the decline is attributed to the precautionary saving channel and roughly two-thirds is due
to the contractionary bias mechanism. Our results show that the exact form of the monetary
policy rule, and how it affects the ex ante average nominal rate, is crucial for determining the
general-equilibrium effects of uncertainty at the zero lower bound.



                                                16
4.7       Should We Remove the Contractionary Bias?
We now show that the destabilizing effects of the contractionary bias may be so powerful that an
equilibrium actually fails to exist. When the monetary authority responds only to inflation and
output, Figure 5 shows that an increase in exogenous shock volatility shifts the policy rule to
the left and increases the average nominal interest rate. For sufficiently high levels of volatility,
however, the policy rule shifts far enough such that it no longer intersects the Fisher relation.
In this situation, a rational-expectations equilibrium fails to exist because the contractionary
bias is too large.


       We find that this non-existence result under a Taylor (1993)-type policy rule is not a the-
oretical curiosity; non-existence occurs if we set the volatility of the exogenous shocks large
enough such that the model can match the data. Recall that for our initial model, we set
                                                                                                    a
the unconditional volatility for σ a = 0.01 and the uncertainty shock volatility σ σ = 0.005.
If we increase the volatility of the shocks much higher than this level, our numerical solution
procedure fails, which is consistent with the non-existence of an equilibrium. However, if we
include a small weight on the price level in the monetary policy rule, we are able to solve the
model for any level of exogenous shock volatility. Maintaining this lower volatility calibration
allows us to solve the model under both policy rules, and decompose the relative contributions
of the precautionary working and contractionary bias channels.


       Existence of a rational-expectations equilibrium is a desirable property for economists, but
it need not hold in the world. Suppose that the world is exactly as described by the model
with the simple Taylor rule of Equation (11). What would happen if the exogenous shock
volatility increases past the level that causes equilibrium non-existence? We can only analyze
this case heuristically. However, intuition suggests that after the increase in expected volatility,
households would realize that the ex ante real rate is higher since the zero lower bound binds
in a greater number of states. Thus, they would reduce consumption. But the reduction in
consumption would lower inflation and thus the average nominal interest rate, making the zero
lower bound bind in even more states. Therefore, households would further reduce consump-
tion. This process would continue without converging, until production in the economy had
been driven to a vanishingly low level. Thus, fluctuations in uncertainty can create an economic
disaster at the zero lower bound, unless the monetary authority switches to a better policy rule
than the simple Taylor (1993) rule.4
   4
    While this economic mechanism is simple to explain, it is difficult to uncover its quantitative implications.
To examine the effect of the contractionary bias, the model must incorporate ex ante uncertainty and be solved
using a global solution method. Thus, our simple model is an ideal vehicle for exploring these potentially


                                                       17
    How should we proceed having identified this channel by which uncertainty at the zero lower
bound can have near-infinite economic consequences? We choose a very conservative path in
the remainder of the paper, by focusing on monetary policy specifications that remove the con-
tractionary bias channel. We implement this modeling choice for two reasons. First, as we show
in the next section, our simple model requires considerably larger exogenous shock volatility
than we have used so far if we want to match the unconditional and conditional volatility in key
macroeconomic aggregates. However, a rational-expectations equilibrium fails to exist for that
calibration if we use a standard Taylor (1993)-type policy rule. Therefore, we use the policy
rule in Equation (17) with its response to the price level as our baseline policy rule throughout
the rest of the paper. Second and more importantly, the contractionary bias channel is a conse-
quence of examining changes in uncertainty under a particular simple monetary policy rule. For
reasons we discuss next, that particular rule probably does not represent the actual conduct of
Federal Reserve policy at the zero lower bound. To understand the correct quantitative effects
of uncertainty shocks, we need to use a more realistic specification of monetary policy.


    We think that Taylor (1993)-type policy rules that only respond to inflation and output
are not good descriptions of recent Federal Reserve policy for two reasons. First, these rules
have a highly counterfactual property: They imply that the central bank stops responding to
the economy once it hits the zero lower bound. Even if the economy is continually hit by
bad shocks at the zero lower bound, the central bank will not respond to the economy until
conditions improve. This assumption is inconsistent with many actions by policymakers, which
have relied on “unconventional” policy tools such as forward guidance about the future conduct
of policy and quantitative easing to help stabilize the economy at the zero lower bound.5 By
including a history-dependent state variable like the price level in its policy rule, agents in the
economy understand that the central bank will respond to economic outcomes by adjusting the
future path of policy. Second, models with simple Taylor rules imply that inflation rates should
fall significantly when the economy hits the zero lower bound, but US inflation rates have been
surprisingly stable.


    We view the incorporation of the price level response as a minimum deviation from standard
assumptions that allow us to remove the contractionary bias and allow the central bank to con-
extreme consequences of relatively small uncertainty shocks.
   5
     Bundick (2014) discusses this issue in detail and shows that the counterfactual non-response property
implicit in simple Taylor-type rules can drive many of the striking results of Eggertsson (2010), Eggertsson
(2012) and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011), including their estimates of large fiscal multipliers and
the contractionary effects of increases in full-employment output.


                                                     18
tinue to respond to the economy at the zero lower bound. A potential criticism of our extended
monetary policy specification is that the Federal Reserve has adopted a numerical target for
inflation, not the nominal price level. Thus, one could argue that our new baseline policy rule
may also fail to be a good description of recent monetary policy behavior. While the Fed-
eral Reserve has not explicitly adopted a price-level target, we believe that many equilibrium
features of this history-dependent rule are consistent with recent central bank behavior. As
mentioned previously, the stability of recent inflation provides some evidence that the Federal
Reserve has reduced the contractionary bias enough prevent disequilibrium in the actual econ-
omy. In addition, in the following section, we show that the moments implied by this simple
model under this rule are consistent with both the unconditional and stochastic volatility of
key macroeconomic aggregates.


    Since we are removing an amplification mechanism, our results throughout the rest of the
paper will represent a lower bound on the effects of changes in uncertainty at the zero lower
bound. This fact is particularly important to bear in mind when comparing our quantitative
estimates of the effects of uncertainty shocks to the analysis of other real shocks at the zero
lower bound.


5     Empirical and Model-Implied Moments
We now return to one of the key questions laid out in the Introduction: Are uncertainty shocks
important drivers for real activity and inflation? The answer to this question, however, crucially
depends on our assumed calibration for the exogenous shock processes. Therefore, we want to
ensure that our calibration is reasonable. Given that uncertainty shocks and the zero lower
bound generate stochastic volatility in the output gap and inflation, a key litmus test for our
model will be its ability to match the time-varying volatility in the data of these key macro
aggregates. In this section, we discuss our calibration in detail and argue that the combination
of uncertainty shocks and the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound help the
model explain key features of the recent data.


    To evaluate the model calibration, we compare its simulated moments with their data coun-
terparts along three dimensions. First, we assess the model’s ability to match the unconditional
volatility in the data as measured by the sample standard deviation. Second, we evaluate the
amount of stochastic volatility in key macro aggregates in both the data and in the model.
Finally, we examine the model’s ability to generate zero lower bound episodes of similar fre-
quency to the most recent macroeconomic data. We use data on the output gap, inflation,


                                                 19
and the nominal federal funds rate from 1984-2013. We measure potential output using the
Congressional Budget Office estimate and compute the output gap as the percent deviation
between actual and potential output. We use the annualized quarterly percent change in the
GDP deflator as our measure of inflation.


      We estimate stochastic volatility using a simple model-free and non-parametric method
based on rolling sample standard deviations. Given a series of simulated or actual data, we
estimate a rolling 5-year standard deviation. This procedure provides a time-series of realized
volatility estimates for the given data series. Then, we compute the standard deviation of this
time-series of estimates. This simple measure provides an estimate of the stochastic volatility
in the data series. If the actual data were homoskedastic, the estimates of the 5-year rolling
standard deviations should show little volatility and the resulting statistic would be near zero.


      To compare the distance between the model-implied moments and their empirical coun-
terparts, we generate small sample bootstrapped confidence intervals from the model. Our
empirical moments come from a 30-year sample of quarterly data. We want to determine the
likelihood that the moments from this given 30-year sample of data could be generated by our
baseline model. To compute the confidence interval for each moment, we simulate the model
economy for 30 years after an initial burn in sample of 500 periods.6 Then, we compute and
save all the desired model-implied moments using this small sample of simulated data. We
repeat this exercise 1000 times, which provides us with a series of small sample estimates for
each moment of interest. In our results, we report the mean and the 90% confidence interval
of the estimates for each moment. If the empirical moment falls outside of this model-implied
confidence interval, it is highly statistically unlikely that the model is able to generate moments
consistent with the data.

                                                                        a
      We calibrate the exogenous shock volatilities σ a and σ σ such that the model-implied mo-
ments are as close as possible to their empirical counterparts. Table 2 shows the empirical and
model-implied moments as well as their small sample 90% bootstrapped confidence intervals.
                                                                                                 a
Under the monetary policy rule in Equation (17), we find that setting σ a = 0.02 and σ σ = 0.01
allows the model-implied moments to be consistent with the unconditional volatility in the re-
cent data.7 We are able to closely match the unconditional volatility of inflation. In addition,
the standard deviations for the output gap and nominal interest rate in the data lie well within
the confidence intervals generated by the model.
  6
      Simulating and dropping this initial sample removes any influence of initial conditions.
  7
      All other parameters are calibrated to the values listed in Table 1.



                                                        20
      Our calibrated model can closely match the stochastic volatility in the data. Since 1984, the
output gap, inflation, and the nominal interest rate in the data all display significant amounts
of stochastic volatility. The 5-year rolling standard deviations for the output gap and the short-
term policy rate typically fluctuate by over 75 basis points, while the estimates for inflation
varies by roughly 50 basis points. The model-implied stochastic volatility for all three variables
are close to their counterparts in the data.


      Finally, the calibrated simple model spends an amount of time at the zero lower bound
similar to the recent experience of the United States. Over the 1984-2013 sample period, the
United States economy five years at the zero lower bound.8 From a 30-year simulation, our
economy averages just over three years at the zero lower bound. However, the confidence inter-
val shows an incredible amount of uncertainty about the amount of time the economy is stuck
at the zero lower bound. In some simulations, the monetary authority is hardly constrained by
the zero lower bound for a given 30-year period. In other simulations, however, the economy
can spend over seven years at the zero lower bound. Thus, the actual data falls well within this
wide confidence interval generated by the model.


      This wide confidence interval for the time at the zero lower bound is consistent with the
recent experience of the United States. Since hitting the zero lower bound, policymakers have
expressed a great deal of uncertainty when the economy will liftoff from the zero lower bound.
Figure 7 plots expected liftoff date for each FOMC participant from the January 2012 Survey
of Economic Projections. The Survey shows an almost uniform distribution of possible liftoff
dates from less than one year to almost four years in the future. This empirical evidence is
consistent with the wide confidence interval in Table 2 and the conditional distributions for
the nominal rate in Figures 2 and 8. While this dispersion in policymakers’ views does not
perfectly align with the representative policymaker structure in the model, this cross-sectional
evidence suggests that accurately predicting the amount of time at the zero lower bound may
be extraordinarily difficult. Even in the full-information rational expectations setting of our
model, the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound makes forecasting equilib-
rium outcomes very difficult.


      We now want to assess the relative contributions of the uncertainty shocks and the zero lower
bound in generating the model’s fluctuations in the key macro variables. However, since our
model contains two highly nonlinear elements (uncertainty shocks and the zero lower bound),
  8
      We define being at the zero lower bound as an annualized nominal policy rate less than 25 basis points.


                                                       21
we cannot do a simple variance decomposition as in a linear model. Therefore, we answer this
question by solving two alternative versions of our baseline model. In the first alternative, we
                                                                       a
turn off the stochastic volatility in the exogenous shocks (σ σ = 0) leaving all other parameters
unchanged. In the second variant, we solve a version of our baseline model with stochastic
shock volatility, but do not impose the zero lower bound constraint in Equation (18). These
two alternative models allow us to see the relative contribution of the exogenous uncertainty
shocks and the zero lower bound in generating the moments of the model. The fourth and fifth
columns of Table 2 show the moments implied under these two alternative models.


       Time-variation in the exogenous shock volatility is responsible for roughly 40% of the un-
conditional volatility of output and inflation and over 60% of their time-varying volatility. To
compute the relative importance of the uncertainty shocks, we compare the change in each
moment relative to the baseline model. For example, the unconditional volatility of the out-
put gap falls by (0.93 - 1.70) ÷ 1.7 = 45% when uncertainty shocks are absent in the model.
Without the exogenous uncertainty shocks, both the unconditional and stochastic volatility
in the endogenous macro variables falls dramatically. In almost all of the moments, the em-
pirical moment falls outside of the confidence interval for the model without uncertainty shocks.


       In addition, uncertainty shocks are responsible for the model’s ability to generate significant
periods at the zero lower bound. The model with constant shock volatility struggles to generate
significant periods of time at the zero lower bound. Without uncertainty shocks, the model
may not even encounter the zero lower bound in a given 30-year period. Even if the economy
realizes a bad sequence of shocks such that monetary policy becomes constrained, the amount
of time spent at the zero lower bound is significantly less than the actual data and far less
uncertain.


       The zero lower bound contributes about 20% to the unconditional volatility of output and
inflation and at least 30% to their time-varying volatility. The simple model struggles to gen-
erate significant fluctuations in the output gap and inflation if monetary policy always remains
unconstrained. Without the zero lower bound, the unconditional and stochastic volatility in
the key macro aggregates greatly declines and the moments in the data again fall outside
the model-implied confidence intervals.9 Taken together, our results indicate that both time-
   9
    Our estimate of the zero lower bound’s contribution to the unconditional volatility of output is in line with
the work of Ireland (2011) and Gust, López-Salido and Smith (2013). Using likelihood-based methods, these
papers to show that output would have been about 20% higher if monetary policy was not constrained during
the Great Recession.



                                                       22
varying exogenous shock volatility and the endogenous volatility generated by zero lower bound
are important in matching features of the recent macroeconomic data.


6     Optimal Response to Endogenous Volatility
Our previous findings argue that the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound
can be an important driver of inflation and real activity. In this section, we examine how an op-
timal policymaker under commitment responds when the economy faces significant uncertainty
about the future. In absence of the zero lower bound, optimal monetary policy can always fully
stabilize the economy for any given level of exogenous shock volatility. Therefore, we focus our
analysis on the macroeconomic outcomes when the economy hits the zero lower bound. Despite
being constrained by the zero lower bound, we show that properly designed forward guidance
can limit the spillovers to the macroeconomy.


    We begin by examining optimal monetary policy and then examine the added benefits
of optimal government spending financed via lump-sum taxation. Appendix C outlines the
optimal policy problem and its associated solution. Figure 8 plots the expected distribution
of outcomes at the zero lower bound under each alternative policy as well as the simple policy
rule given by Equation (17).


6.1    Optimal Monetary Policy Under Commitment
Under optimal monetary policy, the central bank can attenuate the endogenous volatility gen-
erated by the zero lower bound. The central bank achieves this outcome via two channels: (1)
lowering the expected path of real interest rates and (2) stabilizing the conditional distribution
of household consumption. If a bad shock is realized, the central bank commits to lowering
the expected path of future nominal interest rates. Lower nominal rates, for any given level of
expected inflation, lowers the path of real interest rates through the Fisher relation. As detailed
in Equation (4), a lower path of real rates raises consumption (and the output gap) even if the
monetary authority remains constrained.


    In addition to affecting the expected path of real rates, the central bank uses expectations
about future policy to influence the conditional distribution of household consumption. If the
economy is hit by contractionary shocks at the zero lower bound, the central bank will continue
to respond to the economy using forward guidance about the future path of policy. House-
holds fully internalize this commitment to help stabilize the economy if bad shocks are realized.


                                                23
Thus, this state contingent policy response stabilizes the household’s expected distribution of
consumption. The middle row of Figure 8 shows that the lower real rates and the more stabile
distribution of future consumption significantly limits the spillovers from the uncertainty shock
to the macroeconomy. As opposed to falling by roughly half of a percent under the simple
policy rule, the mean response of the output gap falls by less than 10 basis points at impact
when policy is conducted optimally.


   However, the central bank cannot fully eliminate the endogenous volatility generated by the
zero lower bound. The distribution of possible outcomes for both the output gap and inflation
still show significant fluctuations after the uncertainty shock. In an effort to stabilize the econ-
omy, the central bank maintains a zero nominal policy for an extended period of time. Even
under optimal policy, the economy may experience fluctuations and remain stuck at the zero
lower bound for four years after the initial shock. However, the central bank is able to limit
some of the spillovers to the macroeconomy. The distribution of the output gap remains much
more symmetric and less diffuse under optimal policy when compared with the simple policy
rule. Under the simple policy rule, the possible outcomes for inflation are volatile, negatively-
skewed, and its distribution is highly correlated with the exogenous shock volatility. Under
optimal policy, however, the outcomes for inflation are very concentrated around zero for the
first year after the shock but then expand modestly with a slightly higher mean and positive
skewness for the next few years.


   These distribution of outcomes for inflation provides the key insight into the trade-offs
faced by the central bank. At impact, the central bank understands that the economy faces the
possibility of very bad outcomes due to the uncertainty shock and its endogenous amplification
through the zero lower bound. However, the central bank also understands that the higher
uncertainty is not permanent as shocks should eventually return to their steady state values.
Therefore, the policymaker faces a trade-off between the medium-run distribution of inflation
versus the short-run distributions of output and inflation. The central bank optimally accepts a
higher and more volatile distribution of future inflation in the future to help offset the downside
risks generated by the zero lower bound. The central bank commits to keeping interest rates at
zero throughout the life of the uncertainty shock even if the economy experiences significantly
expansionary shocks. By keeping rates low, even in the face of expansionary shocks, the central
bank tolerates the higher inflation in the medium-run in order to establish a floor under inflation
expectations.




                                                24
6.2    Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
Even under optimal monetary policy, higher uncertainty at the zero lower bound can cause sig-
nificant fluctuations for the economy. Fiscal policy may play a significant role in stabilizing the
economy in this scenario. We assume that the policymaker has access to government spending
financed via lump-sum taxation. Figure 7 shows the distribution of possible outcomes under
jointly optimal fiscal and monetary policy under commitment.


    Access to state-contingent government spending helps stabilize the real economy during pe-
riod of heightened uncertainty and allows for more effective stabilization of the future inflation.
At the onset of the uncertainty shock, optimal government spending increases modestly on
average. However, the distribution of possible outcomes for government spending is volatile
and slightly positively-skewed after the uncertainty shock. Thus, when the nominal interest
rate is constrained, the optimal policymaker uses government spending in a state-contingent
manner to help offset shocks that hit the economy. As a result, the distribution of outcomes
for the output gap become more stabilized when the policymaker has access to state-contingent
government spending. In addition, after the uncertainty shock subsides, the optimal policy
slightly lowers government spending on average but continues to use it to offset shocks. Access
to this additional policy instrument allows the policymaker to assume less inflation risk and
provides more effective stabilization of the medium-run outcomes for the macroeconomy.


7     Discussion and Connections with Literature
Rigorous modeling of the zero lower bound using a global solution method is difficult, especially
when the model contains many state variables. This difficultly has lead some researchers, such
as Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2013) and Erceg and Lindé (2014), to rely on shooting-type
algorithms rather than the global solution methods we employ in this paper. These methods
provide quantitative predictions regarding the effect of the zero lower bound but don’t suffer
from the curse of dimensionality that plagues global methods. At their core, however, both
of these works also use a similar structure for nominal rigidities and assume monetary policy
follows a standard Taylor (1993)-type rule. Thus, our discussion regarding the contractionary
bias and equilibrium existence fully applies to those papers. However, these shooting-type so-
lution methods are unable to investigate these effects and thus cannot derive a full set of policy
implications. We view our work, however, as complementary in the following sense: Using our
results, researchers wishing to solve models with many state variables can use these shooting-
type algorithms but assume monetary policy rules that remove the contractionary bias. This
assumption maintains tractability which removing the potential for equilibrium non-existence

                                                25
in the “true” model. As we discuss earlier, we argue the equilibrium properties of these rules
are more consistent with recent central bank behavior.


       Our discussion of the contractionary bias helps explain the solution difficulty and mecha-
nisms at work in some recent papers in the literature. Recent work by Fernández-Villaverde
et al. (2012), Richter and Throckmorton (2014), Nakata (2012), and Johannsen (2013) all solve
a similar nonlinear New-Keynesian model with global methods but assume that monetary pol-
icy follows a standard Taylor (1993) rule. Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2012) and Richter and
Throckmorton (2014) both report difficultly solving their model if they increase the volatility
of the exogenous shocks. Our results show that this solution difficulty is likely caused by the
contractionary bias being too large to be consistent with a rational-expectations equilibrium.
Nakata (2012) and Johannsen (2013) show that higher demand and fiscal uncertainty at the
zero lower bound greatly depresses the economy.10 However, neither of these papers make any
adjustments for the contractionary bias. Therefore, their results contain the effects of both the
contractionary bias and precautionary working mechanisms.11


       This study is closest to recent work by Plante, Richter and Throckmorton (2014). Using a
similar model but with constant shock volatility, they show that the zero lower bound endoge-
nously generates increased forecast errors about future economic outcomes. Our work differs
from theirs in three key respects. First, we characterize the two key mechanisms through which
uncertainty about future shocks interacts with the zero lower bound. In addition, Table 2
shows that the simple model struggles to match key features of the data without time-varying
exogenous shock volatility. Finally, we examine the optimal response of monetary and fiscal
policy to the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound. Nakata (2013) also stud-
ies optimal government spending and monetary policy at the zero lower bound. He compares
a deterministic economy (σ a = 0) to an economy with uncertainty (σ a > 0) and shows that
optimal government spending under discretion increases when the economy faces uncertainty
about the future.


       We view our work as highly complementary to other recent work on the Great Recession and
  10
     Johannsen (2013) uses a standard New-Keynesian model, but also incorporates physical capital. In Ap-
pendix D.2, we show that our results are very similar if we include capital in our model.
  11
     This paper is also related to work by Adam and Billi (2006) and Nakov (2008), which use a linearized New-
Keynesian model, but solve the model using a global solution method. Thus, the models in these papers are
able to capture changes in the conditional mean caused by the presence of uncertainty at the zero lower bound.
However, households in their models do not take into account the higher-order moments of consumption, which
we show are quantitatively important.



                                                     26
business-cycle models. For example, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2014) argues that
the interaction between financial frictions and the zero lower bound is crucial for understanding
the economics during the recent recession and recovery. However, they reach this conclusion
using a model solution method which relies on certainty equivalence. By contrast, our work
allows for uncertainty about future shocks to interact with the zero lower bound to produce
significant contractions in economic activity and a highly uncertainty liftoff date from the zero
lower bound.


7.1    Optimal Tax Policy & Fiscal Policy Implementation
Optimal interest rate and government spending policy can be effective in limiting the en-
dogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound. Recent work by Correia et al. (2013)
suggests that optimal tax policy can highly effective and more efficient at overcoming the zero
lower bound constraint. If we incorporate time-varying consumption and labor taxes in our
framework, Equations (6) and (7) would be modified as follows:

                                    1 − η 1 + τtc Ct     Wt
                                                n
                                                       =                                      (19)
                                      η 1 − τ t 1 − Nt   Pt
                                                             !1−σ          !       !
                    a
                       t+1 1 + τt
                                 c       η
                                        Ct+1 (1 − Nt+1 )1−η           Ct         Rt 
             1 = Et β                                                                         (20)
                               c
                    at 1 + τt+1           η
                                         Ct+  (1 − Nt )1−η           Ct+1       Πt+1 

Equation (20) shows that a policymaker can offset a decline in aggregate demand (fall in at )
by either lowering its nominal policy rate Rt or by lowering current consumption taxes τtc . If
the policymaker alters its consumption tax policy, they must also raise labor taxes τtn to pre-
vent distortions in the household’s intratemporal first-order condition. Correia et al. (2013)
shows that optimal tax policy can fully circumvent the zero lower bound constraint if the pol-
icy has enough flexibility in its tax instruments and the policymaker can effectively respond
to business-cycle fluctuations. Due to the political economy issues surrounding consumptions
taxes, however, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011) express doubts about the ability of
fiscal policy to implement the time-varying taxes needed to implement these proposals. Indeed,
the uncertainty and delay surrounding Japan’s recent consumption tax increase highlights these
implementation issues.


   Our results suggest that higher uncertainty further exacerbates the implementation of time-
varying optimal tax policy. Equation (20) shows that more volatile demand shocks will require a
concurrent increase in the volatility of the tax rates. More volatile taxes increase the likelihood
that the negative taxes will be required to implement the optimal policy. In addition, our

                                                27
results under optimal government spending show that implementation in an environment with
uncertainty shocks may require highly state-contingent policy. In the online Appendix, Table
D.1 compares the unconditional and stochastic volatility of government spending under optimal
fiscal and monetary policy. The small-sample confidence intervals provide some insight into the
types of outcomes required to implement optimal policy. When the economy doesn’t hit the
zero lower bound too often, the left boundary of the confidence interval shows that government
spending is nearly constant and shows no stochastic volatility. However, when the economy
spends a large fraction at the time at the zero lower bound, the upper tail of the interval
shows that government spending is highly volatile on average and shows significant stochastic
volatility. Thus, the presence of uncertainty shocks requires the optimal policymaker to be
highly state-contingent in responding to the economy.


7.2       Comparison with News Shocks
Recent work by Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) and others argues that news about the future can
be a key driver of business cycles. News shocks, like our uncertainty shock, change expectations
about future shocks for the economy without a change in current fundamentals. In this section,
we show that an uncertainty shock at the zero lower bound acts like a negative news shock
about the future mean of fundamentals coupled with an endogenous increase in the variance
                                                                    12
and decline in the skewness of expected future outcomes.


       To formally compare uncertainty and news shocks, we solve a version of our model using
the following stochastic process for demand shocks:

                               at+1 = (1 − ρa ) a + ρa at + σ c εat+1 + σ n εat                      (21)

This alternative process for aggregate demand features contemporaneous and 1-period ahead
news shocks but constant volatility. To compare with our uncertain shock results, we simulate
the same decline in aggregate demand in both the uncertainty and news shock economies. Then,
we choose the news shock such that both economies have the same expected mean output gap.
Figure 9 shows the expected distribution of outcomes for both the news and uncertainty shock
economies.


       The endogenous volatility created by the zero lower bound implies significantly higher fluctu-
ations for the uncertainty shock economy. Returning to the intuition from Equation (2), a more
  12
    Recent work by Ilut and Schneider (2014) argues that exogenous shocks to the “worst-case” shock dis-
tribution are a key driver of business cycles. In loose terms, the zero lower bound endogenously generates
time-variation in the worst-case outcome by shifting the entire distribution of future consumption.

                                                     28
volatile and negatively-skewed expected output gap produces larger output losses today even
if the conditional means are equivalent. In addition, the 1-year ahead output gap shows that
the zero lower bound greatly propagates the negative effects of the uncertainty shock. Thus, an
uncertainty shock at the zero lower bound produces larger initial losses and its negative effects
are significantly more propagated than a similarly-calibrated news shocks.


8     A Solution to the Forward Guidance Puzzle
Our results suggest that the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound has im-
portant implications for household decisions. Thus, our results may provide an explanation for
“Forward Guidance Puzzle” discussed in Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson (2013). Using a
similar model with nominal rigidities, they argue that the economy is too responsive to exoge-
nous changes in interest rates. However, they reach this conclusion using a first-order linearized
model. Under this assumption, households do not take into account the uncertainty about fu-
ture consumption. We argue that this omitted variable may be crucially important when the
economy is stuck at the zero lower bound. Households care about both the current real rate
and the distribution of expected future consumption. Thus, current consumption responds less
to an exogenous decline in interest rates if expected future consumption also becomes more
volatile and negatively-skewed.


    To illustrate this idea, we make two changes to our baseline model. First, we replace our
rule in Equation (17) with the following specification for monetary policy:
                                                        
                      d                   d
                     rt = 1 − φr r + φr rt−1 + φπ πt − π + φx xt + σ r εrt                   (22)
                                                       
                                        rt = max 0, rtd                                      (23)

Away from the zero lower bound, this policy rule acts like a Taylor (1993)-type policy rule with
interest-rate smoothing and εrt is an exogenous monetary policy shock. When the economy
encounters the zero lower bound, however, this history-dependent rule lowers the future path
of policy to help offset the previous higher-than-desired nominal rates caused by the nominal
constraint. Households fully internalize this future conduct of policy. When desired rates are
less than zero, an exogenous shock to the desired rate acts like an exogenous extension of the
zero lower bound episode. In addition to changing our monetary policy rule, we replace our
uncertainty shock process with two time-invariant calibrations. We denote the first calibration
as the perfect foresight calibration with σ a = σ r = 0 and the second calibration as our under
uncertainty calibration σ a = 0.03, σ r = 0.0025. These alterations help make our framework


                                               29
similar to the experiments in the previous literature.


       We begin by simulating a large decline in aggregate demand such that both the perfect fore-
sight and uncertainty economies hit the zero lower bound. After the initial shock, we assume
that both economies experience no further shocks. We pick the initial demand shock for each
economy such that they both experience the same length zero bound episode in equilibrium.
We refer to this simulation as the baseline scenario for each economy. We now examine an ex-
ogenous extension of the zero lower bound episode. Using the same initial shocks, we simulate
a new time path for each economy but also simulate a large negative shock to the desired rate
in period nine such that both economies remain at the zero lower bound for an additional few
quarters. As with the initial demand shock, we pick the monetary policy shock such that the
equilibrium path of the nominal interest rate is the same in both economies.


       The endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound greatly diminishes the econ-
omy’s response. At the announcement of interest rate change, Figure 9 shows that the perfect
foresight economy surges with a four percent increase in the output gap and a two percent
increase in inflation. For the same path of nominal rates, however, the presence of uncertainty
attenuates the response of the economy by roughly half. Equation (4) helps provide the intu-
ition for these results. The exogenous extension lowers the path of real interest rates. Under
perfect foresight, the household’s consumption decision only depends on the path of real inter-
est rates. Under uncertainty, however, the extension also increases the endogenous volatility
through the asymmetric ability to offset shocks. This precautionary saving curtails the house-
hold’s response to the change in interest rates and affects the transmission of policy shock to
the macroeconomy.13


9        Conclusions
This paper highlights the interactions between the zero lower bound and expectations about
future shocks. Our results suggest that even small probabilities of bad outcomes can be desta-
bilizing. To stabilize the economy, the central bank must effectively communicate to households
that it will respond using its available policy tools if bad shocks are realized. We also show that
the form of the monetary policy rule is crucially important even when the economy is at the
  13
    McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) shows a similar result when households face idiosyncratic, rather
than aggregate, uncertainty about future consumption. Vavra (2012) and Aastveit, Natvik and Sola (2013) also
find that the responses to exogenous policy shocks may change depending on the state of the economy. However,
both of these papers are silent on the effects of the zero lower bound, which currently remains a real constraint
on many central banks.

                                                       30
zero lower bound. Rules with good descriptive and normative properties in the past may cause
catastrophic outcomes and not be representative of actual policy at the zero lower bound.




                                             31
References
Aastveit, Knut Are, Gisle James Natvik, and Sergio Sola. 2013. “Macroeconomic
  Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy.” Working Paper.

Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi. 2006. “Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment
  with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
  38(7): 1877–1905.

Basu, Susanto, and Brent Bundick. 2012. “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective
  Demand.” Working Paper.

Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball. 2002. “Long-Run Labor Supply and the Intertem-
  poral Substitution for Consumption.” Working Paper.

Bloom, Nicholas. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica, 77(3): 623–685.

Bundick, Brent. 2014. “Real Fluctuations at the Zero Lower Bound.” Working Paper.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2014. “Un-
  derstanding the Great Recession.” Working Paper.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “When Is the
  Government Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1): 78–121.

Coleman, Wilbur John. 1990. “Solving the Stochastic Growth Model by Policy Function
  Iteration.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 8(1): 27–29.

Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2013. “Un-
  conventional Fiscal Policy at the Zero Bound.” American Economic Review, 103(4): 1172–
  1211.

Davig, Troy. 2004. “Regime-Switching Debt and Taxation.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  51(4): 837–859.

Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Christina Patterson. 2013. “The Forward
  Guidance Puzzle.” Working Paper.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2010. “What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?” NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2012. “Was the New Deal Contractionary.” American Economic Re-
  view, 102(1): 524–555.

                                             32
Erceg, Christopher, and Jesper Lindé. 2014. “Is There a Fiscal Free Lunch in a Liquidity
  Trap.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(1): 73–107.

Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Grey Gordon, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, and Juan
  Rubio-Ramı́rez. 2012. “Nonlinear Adventures at the Zero Lower Bound.” Working Paper.

Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan
  Rubio-Ramı́rez. 2013. “Fiscal Uncertainty and Economic Activity.” Working Paper.

Gust, Christopher, David López-Salido, and Matthew E. Smith. 2013. “The Empirical
  Implications of the Interest-Rate Lower Bound.” Working Paper.

Ilut, Cosmin, and Martin Schneider. 2014. “Ambiguous Business Cycles.” American Eco-
  nomic Review. Forthcoming.

Ireland, Peter N. 2003. “Endogenous Money or Sticky Prices.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 50: 1623–1648.

Ireland, Peter N. 2011. “A New Keynesian Perspective on the Great Recession.” Journal of
  Money, Credit, and Banking, 43(1): 31–54.

Jaimovich, Nir, and Sergio Rebelo. 2009. “Can News about the Future Drive the Business
  Cycle.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 99(4): 1097–1118.

Johannsen, Benjamin K. 2013. “When are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Uncertainty Large?”
  Working Paper.

Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2010. “Monetary Policy, Labor Markets, and Uncertainty.” Speech
  on November 22, 2010.

Koop, Gary, M. Hashem Pesaran, and Simon M. Potter. 1996. “Impulse Response
  Analysis in Nonlinear Multivariate Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 74: 119–147.

Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2014. “Uncertainty Shocks are Aggregate Demand Shocks.”
  Working Paper.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2014. “The Power of Forward
  Guidance Revisited.” Working Paper.

Mendes, Rhys R. 2011. “Uncertainty and the Zero Lower Bound: A Theoretical Analysis.”
  Working Paper.



                                              33
Nakata, Taisuke. 2012. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy With Occasionally Binding
  Zero Bound Constraints.” Working Paper.

Nakata, Taisuke. 2013. “Uncertainty at the Zero Lower Bound.” Working Paper.

Nakata, Taisuke, and Sebastian Schmidt. 2014. “Conservatism and Liquidity Traps.”
  Working Paper.

Nakov, Anton. 2008. “Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the
  Nominal Interest Rate.” International Journal of Central Banking, 4(2): 73–127.

Plante, Michael, Alexander W. Richter, and Nathaniel A. Throckmorton. 2014.
  “The Zero Lower Bound and Endogenous Uncertainty.” Working Paper.

Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy
  in a Low-Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 32(4): 936–966.

Richter, Alexander W., and Nathaniel A. Throckmorton. 2014. “The Zero Lower
  Bound: Frequency, Duration, and Numerical Convergence.” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics:
  Contributions. Forthcoming.

Rotemberg, Julio J. 1982. “Sticky Prices in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy,
  90: 1187–1211.

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2012. “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-
  2009 Recession.” Working Paper.

Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Con-
  ference Series on Public Policy, 39: 195–214.

Vavra, Joseph. 2012. “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and
  an Ss Interpretation.” Working Paper.




                                              34
            Table 1: Calibration of Baseline Model Parameters

Parameter                   Description                     Calibrated Value


    β                Household Discount Factor                    0.99
   φP           Adjustment Cost to Changing Prices               160.0
   Π                 Steady State Inflation Rate                 1.000
    σ       Parameter Affecting Household Risk Aversion           2.0
    η       Consumption Share in Period Utility Function          0.24
    θ       Elasticity of Substitution Intermediate Goods         6.0
   φπ            Central Bank Response to Inflation               1.5
   φx          Central Bank Response to Output Gap                0.25
   ρa               Preference Shock Persistence                  0.85
   ρσ a            Uncertainty Shock Persistence                  0.85
   σa               Steady State Shock Volatility                 0.01
       σa
   σ                Uncertainty Shock Volatility                 0.005




                                    35
                         Table 2: Empirical and Model-Implied Moments

                                      Data            Baseline    No Stochastic     No Zero Lower
 Moment                            1984 - 2013        Model      Shock Volatility      Bound


 Unconditional Volatility
   x                                  2.52              1.70          0.93              1.24
                                                  (0.89, 3.00)     (0.72, 1.21)      (0.80, 1.79)
   π                                  0.98              1.03          0.62              0.83
                                                  (0.62, 1.58)     (0.49, 0.77)      (0.55, 1.17)
   r                                  2.91              2.42          1.89
                                                  (1.70, 3.28)     (1.53, 2.29)


 Stochastic Volatility
   x                                  0.77              0.73          0.23              0.41
                                                  (0.28, 1.57)     (0.12, 0.38)      (0.22, 0.70)
   π                                  0.49              0.40          0.14              0.28
                                                  (0.19, 0.77)     (0.09, 0.22)      (0.15, 0.48)
   r                                  0.74              0.72          0.40
                                                  (0.41, 1.16)     (0.25, 0.58)


 Quarters at Zero Lower Bound          20               13              5
                                                      (2, 29)        (0, 13)

Note: Unconditional volatility is measured with the sample standard deviation. Stochastic
volatility is measured by the standard deviation of the time-series estimate for the 5-year
rolling standard deviation. The 90% small sample bootstrapped confidence intervals are given
in parenthesis.




                                                 36
                            Figure 1: Impulse Responses to Demand Uncertainty Shock



                       Output Gap                                           Inflation                                      Real Interest Rate
             0.1                                               0.1                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                    Steady State
                                                                                                                                    Zero Lower Bound
              0                                                 0
                                                                                                               0.4
            −0.1                                         −0.1
  Percent




                                               Percent




                                                                                                  Percent
            −0.2                                         −0.2                                                  0.2


            −0.3                                         −0.3
                                                                                                                      0
            −0.4                                         −0.4


            −0.5                                         −0.5                                               −0.2
                   4    8     12     16   20                         4      8     12    16   20                            4    8      12     16       20




                       Price Level                                       Shock Volatility                                 Nominal Interest Rate
             0.2                                               60                                                     5


                                                               50
                                                                                                                      4
              0
                                                               40
                                                                                                                      3
  Percent




                                                     Percent




                                                                                                            Percent




            −0.2                                               30
                                                                                                                      2
                                                               20
            −0.4
                                                                                                                      1
                                                               10


            −0.6                                                0                                                     0
                   4    8     12     16   20                         4      8     12    16   20                            4    8      12     16       20




Note: The output gap, price level, and shock volatility responses are plotted as percent devi-
ations. The real interest rate and inflation are plotted in annualized percent deviations. The
nominal interest rate is plotted in annualized percent.




                                                                             37
                  Figure 2: Expected Distributions of Possible Outcomes After Uncertainty Shock



                                       Away From Zero Lower Bound
                         Output Gap                                  Inflation                           Nominal Interest Rate
              1                                            0.5                                       8
                                                                                                              Mean Simulation
                                                                                                              80% Prediction Interval
                                                            0                                        6
              0
   Percent




                                                Percent




                                                                                           Percent
                                                          −0.5                                       4

             −1
                                                           −1                                        2



             −2                                           −1.5                                       0
                     4    8   12      16   20                    4   8    12     16   20                  4     8      12     16        20




                                                 At Zero Lower Bound
                         Output Gap                                  Inflation                           Nominal Interest Rate
              1                                            0.5                                       8



                                                            0                                        6
              0
   Percent




                                                Percent




                                                                                           Percent




                                                          −0.5                                       4

             −1
                                                           −1                                        2



             −2                                           −1.5                                       0
                     4    8   12      16   20                    4   8    12     16   20                  4     8      12     16        20




Note: The output gap response is plotted in percent deviations. The inflation response is
plotted in annualized percent deviations and the nominal interest rate is plotted in annualized
percent.




                                                                     38
          Figure 3: Transmission of Precautionary Labor Supply to Macroeconomy

                                                                        LS (!t )
                           Wt




                                                                              LD (     )


                                                                              LD (µt )



                                                                                       Nt


                             Figure 4: Nominal Interest-Rate Distributions

Density                                                       Density
                                                                                    Low Uncertainty
                                   Low Uncertainty
                                                                                           Higher Volatility
                                                                                           Increases Mean


                                          High Uncertainty
                                                                                                   High Uncertainty




                      0                 Desired Policy Rate         0                            Actual Policy Rate



              Figure 5: General-Equilibrium Effects of the Contractionary Bias


r                         Policy Rule                         r                    Policy Rule
                          Under High                                               Under High
                          Uncertainty                                              Uncertainty




                                               Policy Rule                                              Policy Rule
    Fisher Relation                                                                                     Under Low
                                               Under Low
                                               Uncertainty                                              Uncertainty
                                                                              Fisher Relation
0                                                             0

                                                     π                                                         π

                                                             39
            Figure 6: Quantifying the Precautionary Saving and Contractionary Bias Channels



                                              Output Gap                                            Inflation                                           Real Interest Rate
           0.2                                                                         0.2                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                            Precautionary Saving
                                                                                                                                                            Only
                                                                                                                                            0.6             Precautionary Saving &
                   0                                                                    0                                                                   Contractionary Bias

                                                                                                                                            0.4
Percent




                                                                       Percent




                                                                                                                               Percent
          −0.2                                                                   −0.2
                                                                                                                                            0.2

          −0.4                                                                   −0.4
                                                                                                                                                   0


          −0.6                                                                   −0.6                                                    −0.2
                                          4    8       12    16   20                         4      8       12   16   20                                4     8     12     16        20




                                              Price Level                                        Shock Volatility                                      Nominal Interest Rate
           0.2                                                                         60                                                          5


                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                                   4
                   0
                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                   3
Percent




                                                                             Percent




                                                                                                                                         Percent

          −0.2                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                       20
          −0.4
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                       10


          −0.6                                                                          0                                                          0
                                          4    8       12    16   20                         4      8       12   16   20                                4     8     12     16        20




            Figure 7: Policymakers’ Expectations of Zero Lower Bound Liftoff in January 2012

                                                            Appropriate Timing of Policy Firming
                                     10
                                     9
                                     8
            Number of Participants




                                     7
                                     6
                                                                                                        5
                                     5
                                                                                                                           4
                                     4
                                                   3                   3
                                     3
                                                                                                                                                               2
                                     2
                                     1
                                     0
                                               2012                2013                             2014              2015                                   2016


                                                                                                     40
             Figure 8: Expected Distributions of Possible Outcomes Under Alternative Policies

                              Simple Monetary Policy Rule
                      Output Gap                                 Inflation                               Nominal Interest Rate
              1                                        0.5                                             10
                                                                                                                 Mean Simulation
                                                                                                                 Prediction Interval
                                                                                                        8
              0                                         0
   Percent




                                            Percent




                                                                                             Percent
                                                                                                        6

                                                                                                        4
             −1                                       −0.5
                                                                                                        2

             −2                                        −1                                               0
                  4     8    12   16   20                    4   8     12    16   20                         4   8   12    16   20



                                   Optimal Monetary Policy
                      Output Gap                                 Inflation                               Nominal Interest Rate
              1                                        0.5                                             10

                                                                                                        8
              0                                         0
   Percent




                                            Percent




                                                                                             Percent    6

                                                                                                        4
             −1                                       −0.5
                                                                                                        2

             −2                                        −1                                               0
                  4     8    12   16   20                    4   8     12    16   20                         4   8   12    16   20



                            Optimal Fiscal & Monetary Policy
                      Output Gap                                 Inflation                              Government Spending
              1                                        0.5                                             0.4


                                                                                                       0.2
              0                                         0
   Percent




                                            Percent




                                                                                       Percent




                                                                                                        0

             −1                                       −0.5
                                                                                                 −0.2


             −2                                        −1                                        −0.4
                  4     8    12   16   20                    4   8     12    16   20                         4   8   12    16   20

Note: The output gap and government spending responses are plotted in percent deviations.
The inflation response is plotted in annualized percent deviations and the nominal interest
rate is plotted in annualized percent.
                                                                  41
                       Figure 9: Expected Output Gap Distribution at Zero Lower Bound
                      1−Quarter Ahead Output Gap                                                                   1−Year Ahead Output Gap
             1                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                       Uncertainty Shock
                                                                                                                                                       News Shock
            0.8
                                                                                                         3
                  Uncertainty Mean: −0.35                                                                     Uncertainty Mean: −0.25

            0.6   News Mean: −0.35                                                                            News Mean: −0.11
  Density




                                                                                               Density
                                                                                                         2
            0.4

                                                                                                         1
            0.2


             0                                                                                           0
             −8       −6       −4     −2            0                  2       4                         −4     −3                 −2         −1        0          1        2
                                     Percent                                                                                                 Percent




                               Figure 10: Uncertainty and the Forward Guidance Puzzle

                                                                  Perfect Foresight
                       Output Gap                                                  Inflation                                            Nominal Interest Rate
             6                                                     2                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                Baseline Scenario
             4                                                                                                                                  Exogenous Extension
                                                                   1                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                Zero Lower Bound
             2
                                                                   0                                                           4
             0
Percent




                                                        Percent




                                                                                                                     Percent




            −2                                                    −1                                                           3

            −4
                                                                  −2                                                           2
            −6
                                                                  −3                                                           1
            −8

          −10                                                     −4                                                           0
                  4        8    12    16       20                          4       8    12               16   20                         4       8     12     16       20




                                                                  Under Uncertainty
                       Output Gap                                                  Inflation                                            Nominal Interest Rate
             6                                                     2                                                           6

             4
                                                                   1                                                           5
             2
                                                                   0                                                           4
             0
Percent




                                                        Percent




                                                                                                                     Percent




            −2                                                    −1                                                           3

            −4
                                                                  −2                                                           2
            −6
                                                                  −3                                                           1
            −8

          −10                                                     −4                                                           0
                  4        8    12    16       20                          4       8    12               16   20                         4       8     12     16       20



                                                                                   42
                              For Online Publication
                                   Technical Appendix

A     Derivation of Equations From Intuition Section
This section provides a detailed derivation of the equations from Section 2 of the main text.
Using the consumption Euler equation in Equation (1), complete the following steps to derive
Equation (2):

  1. Multiply and divide the right side of the Euler equation by the steady state values of
     the real interest rate RR and consumption C raised to the power −σ. Apply the natural
     logarithm and exponential functions inside the conditional expectations. Denote X̂t =
     log(Xt /X) to write the variables in log-deviations from steady state.
                         (              −σ )       (        σ         −σ )
                                                          R
                                
                                  C t+1                R  t    C t    C t+1
                  1 = Et βRtR                  = Et
                                   Ct                  RR      C        C
                              (                                             !)
                                            RtR
                                                             
                                                           Ct+1            Ct
                     1 = Et       exp log         − σlog          +  σlog
                                            RR              C              C
                                                                    
                                                    R
                                     1 = Et exp R̂t + σ Ĉt − σ Ĉt+1

  2. Reorganize, divide by the time t variables, and take the logarithm of both sides.
                                   n                             o
                            1 = Et exp R̂tR + σ Ĉt exp −σ Ĉt+1
                                                 −1     n            o
                                  exp R̂tR + σ Ĉt      = Et exp −σ Ĉt+1
                                                      n             o
                                  −R̂tR − σ Ĉt = log Et exp −σ Ĉt+1
                          
  3. Replace exp −σ Ĉt+1 with its Taylor series expansion around Ĉt+1 = 0 and take condi-
     tional expectations at time t.
                                                                              
                                                     1 2 2        3 3
                 −R̂tR− σ Ĉt = log Et 1 − σ Ĉt+1 + σ Ĉt+1 − σ Ĉt+1 + . . .
                                                     2
                                                                                   
                    R                              1 2     2      3     3
                 −R̂t − σ Ĉt = log 1 − σEt Ĉt+1 + σ Et Ĉt+1 − σ Et Ĉt+1 + . . .
                                                   2




                                                  1
4. Define Z = σEt Ĉt+1 − 21 σ 2 Et Ĉt+1
                                      2
                                          +σ 3 Et Ĉt+1
                                                    3
                                                          # 4 
                                                        −O Ct+1 and use the Taylor series expansion
   of log(1 − Z) = −Z − (1/2)Z 2 − (1/3)Z 3 − O (Z 4 ) to expand the previous equation.
   To compute a third-order approximation, drop all terms that are fourth-order or above.
   Reorganize the remaining terms to form the conditional variance and conditional skewness:
                                                               2
                                                 2
                               Vart Ĉt+1 = Et Ĉt+1 − Et Ĉt+1
                                                                            3
                                          3           2
                       Skewt Ĉt+1 = Et Ĉt+1 − 3Et Ĉt+1 Et Ĉt+1 + Et Ĉt+1 .
                                                 1                1
                    −R̂tR − σ Ĉt = −σEt Ĉt+1 + σ 2 Vart Ĉt+1 − σ 3 Skewt Ĉt+1
                                                 2                6
                                      1 R 1                     1 2
                      Ĉt = Et Ĉt+1 − R̂t − σVart Ĉt+1 + σ Skewt Ĉt+1
                                      σ        2                6
5. Denote variables in logs using lowercase letters and normalize steady state consumption
   C to equal one to derive Equation (2):
                                    1 r      1             1
                   ct = Et ct+1 −     rt − rr − σ Vart ct+1 + σ 2 Skewt ct+1
                                    σ          2             6

6. Define a flexible-price version of the previous equation. Subtract the flexible-price version
   from the actual approximated Euler equation in Step 5. Note in a model with only
   discount factor shocks, flexible-price consumption is constant since prices always fully
   adjust. Define the data-consistent output gap xt as the deviation of consumption from
   steady state:
                                    1 r       1             1
                   xt = Et xt+1 −     rt − rtn − σ Vart xt+1 − σ 2 Skewt xt+1
                                    σ           2             6




                                               2
B      Numerical Solution Method
To analyze the impact of uncertainty at the zero lower bound, we solve the model using the
policy function iteration method of Coleman (1990). This global approximation method allows
us to model the occasionally-binding zero lower bound constraint. This section provides the
details of the algorithm when monetary policy follows the simple policy rule in Equation (17)
and (18) in the main text. The algorithm is implemented using the following steps:

    1. Discretize the state variables of the model: {at × σta × Pt−1 }

    2. Conjecture initial guesses for the policy functions of the model Nt = N (at , σta , Pt−1 ),
       Πt = Π(at , σta , Pt−1 ), Rt = R(at , σta , Pt−1 ), and RtR = RR (at , σta , Pt−1 ).

    3. For each point in the discretized state space, substitute the current policy functions into
       the equilibrium conditions of the model. Use interpolation and numerical integration
                                                 a
       over the exogenous state variables at+1 × σt+1 to compute expectations for each Euler
       equation. This operation generates a nonlinear system of equations. The solution to this
       system of equations provides an updated value for the policy functions at that point in
       the state space. The solution method enforces the zero lower bound for each point in the
       state space and in expectation.

    4. Repeat Step (3) for each point in the state space until the policy functions converge and
       cease to be updated.

We implement the policy function iteration method in FORTRAN using the nonlinear equation
solver DNEQNF from the IMSL numerical library. When monetary policy follows an alternative
specification, the state variables and Euler equations are adjusted appropriately.




                                                        3
C      Optimal Policy
C.1      Optimal Monetary Policy Under Commitment
The optimal monetary policy maker under commitment aims to maximize the representative
household’s utility subject to the constraints of the economy. Some of the constraints include
expectations of future variables. Following Khan, King and Wolman (2003), we introduce
lagged Lagrange multipliers to make the solutions time-invariant. The augmented Lagrangian
for the optimal policy problem under commitment can be written as follows:
                              ( ∞                                1−σ
                                                  (1 − Nt+s )1−η
                                             # η
                               X  at+s  Ct+s
                                      s
L =       min       max∞ Et         β
        {ωt+s }∞
               s=0 {dt+s }s=0
                                s=0
                                         at          1−σ
                                              2    !
                                  φP Πt+s
        +ω1t+s Yt+s − Ct+s −                − 1 Ct+s
                                    2    Π
                                     !
        +ω2t+s Nt+s − Φ − Yt+s
                                                !
                 R     1 − η
        +ω3t+s Wt+s −        Ct+s (1 − Nt+s )−1
                         η
                                                         !                                              !
                                       Π t+s         Π  t+s
        +ω4t+s (θ − 1) − θWtR + φP           −1                  at+s C η(1−σ)−1 (1 − Nt+s )(1−η)(1−σ) Yt+s
                                         Π             Π
                                      !                                               !
                      Πt+s          Πt+s
        −ω4t+s−1 φP        −1                  at+s C η(1−σ)−1 (1 − Nt+s )(1−η)(1−σ) Yt+s
                        Π            Π
                                                        !
        +ω5t+s at+s C η(1−σ)−1 (1 − Nt+s )(1−η)(1−σ) Rt+s
                                                      −1


                                                                  !
        −ω5t+s−1 at+s C η(1−σ)−1 (1 − Nt+s )(1−η)(1−σ) Πt+s
                                                        −1


                            !)
        +ω6t+s Rt+s − 1          ,


          
where dt = Yt , Ct , Nt , WtR , Πt , Rt is the set of decision variables and
ωt = {ω1t , ω2t , ω3t , ω4t , ω5t , ω6t } is the vector of Lagrange multipliers. The final constraint im-
poses the zero lower bound constraint since the gross nominal policy rate Rt must be greater
than or equal to one. After solving for the first-order conditions, the optimal policy problem is
solved using the algorithm outlined in Appendix B. To determine the equilibrium real interest
rate RtR , we also include the Euler equation for a zero net supply real bond as well. The algo-
rithm solves for the policy functions for Nt = N (at , σta , ω4t−1 , ω5t−1 ), Πt = Π(at , σta , ω4t−1 , ω5t−1 ),

                                                       4
Rt = R(at , σta , ω4t−1 , ω5t−1 ), RtR = RR (at , σta , ω4t−1 , ω5t−1 ), ω4t = ω4 (at , σta , ω4t−1 , ω5t−1 ), and
ω5t = ω5 (at , σta , ω4t−1 , ω5t−1 ) on a discretized state space for {at × σta × ω4t−1 × ω5t−1 }.


C.2      Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy Under Commitment
To solve for jointly optimal fiscal and monetary policy under commitment, we make two changes
to the previous Lagrangian from Section C.1. We include utility from government spending in
the period utility function of the representative household:
                                                              1−σ
                                         η
                                             (1 − Nt+s )1−η
                                    #
                                        Ct+s                           G1−σ
                                                                     +ψ t ,
                                                1−σ                    1−σ
where we choose ψ to pin down steady state G/Y to be 20 percent. In addition, the national
income accounting identity in the first constraint now includes government spending:
                                                                    2
                                                 φP Πt+s
                          Yt+s = Ct+s + Gt+s +                  − 1 Ct+s ,
                                                  2        Π
                                           
where the set of decision variables is dt = Yt , Ct , Nt , WtR , Πt , Rt , Gt .




                                                        5
D        Additional Results & Extensions
D.1      Model-Implied Moments Under Alternative Policies
Table D.1 computes the moments from our empirical calibration exercise under both our baseline
policy rule as well as optimal monetary and fiscal policy. These results echo the findings of
the conditional impulse responses in Figure 8 of the main text. Optimal monetary policy can
greatly attenuate, but not eliminate, fluctuations in output and inflation. To implement these
improved outcomes for the economy, the central bank may have to maintain a zero nominal
policy rate for an extended period. In a 30-year simulation, the economy may spend as much
as 10 years at the zero lower bound. Access to state-contingent government spending helps
further attenuate the endogenous volatility in the output gap.


D.2      Incorporating Physical Capital
Our previous results show that precautionary saving by households leads to significant con-
tractions in real activity and prices at the zero lower bound. However, a potential criticism of
our results is that households do not have the ability to save in equilibrium. In our baseline
model, households hold zero net supply real and nominal bonds. Higher uncertainty about
future consumption increases the desired saving by households. To clear the bond markets, the
rates of return on these zero net supply assets must fall. We now address this concern by adding
physical capital to the model. We provide a detailed description of the key model equations
below and Figure D.1 plots the effect of a one standard deviation uncertainty shock both at
and away from the zero lower bound. These results show a very similar decline in total output
to the model without physical capital. Even when we incorporate an elastic asset for saving,
the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound can generate a large decline in
output and all its components.
    For the model with capital, we add or modify the following equations from our baseline
model.


Intermediate-goods producing firm production function:
                                          −θ
                                  Pt (i)
                                                 Yt ≤ Kt (i)α [Zt Nt (i)]1−α
                                   Pt

Capital accumulation equation subject to adjustment costs:
                                                     2 !
                                        φK It (i)
                    Kt+1 (i) = 1 − δ −            −δ       Kt (i) + It (i)
                                         2 Kt (i)


                                                        6
Intermediate-goods producing firm first-order conditions for labor and capital demand:
                            Wt
                               Nt (i) = (1 − α)Ξt Kt (i)α [Zt Nt (i)]1−α                       (1)
                            Pt

                              RtK
                                  Kt (i) = αΞt Kt (i)α [Zt Nt (i)]1−α                        (2)
                               Pt
Household first-order conditions for capital and investment:
        (                                                 2                        !!)
             λt+1      K                    φ K    I t+1                I t+1       I t+1
qt = Et    β          Rt+1 + qt+1 1 − δ −                − δ + φK             −δ
              λt                             2 Kt+1                     Kt+1        Kt+1
                                                                                           (3)
                                     1                It
                                       = 1 − φK          −δ                                  (4)
                                    qt              Kt
where Kt (i) denotes physical capital, and qt is the price of a marginal unit of installed capital.
RtK /Pt is the marginal revenue product of capital, which is paid to the owners of the capital
stock. Our adjustment cost specification is similar to the specification used by Jermann (1998)
and Ireland (2003), and allows Tobin’s q to vary over time. We calibrate φK = 20, which implies
an elasticity of It /Kt to qt of 2. Figure D.1 shows the effects of an increased in expected shock
volatility without any change in realized shock volatility both at and away from the zero lower
bound. In producing Figure D.1, we follow the same procedure outlined in Section 4.1 of the
main text.




                                                 7
References
Coleman, Wilbur John. 1990. “Solving the Stochastic Growth Model by Policy Function
  Iteration.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 8(1): 27–29.

Ireland, Peter N. 2003. “Endogenous Money or Sticky Prices.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 50: 1623–1648.

Jermann, Urban J. 1998. “Asset Pricing in Production Economies.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 41(2): 257–275.

Khan, Aubhik, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman. 2003. “Optimal Monetary
  Policy.” Review of Economic Studies, 70(4): 825–860.




                                              8
                Table D.1: Model-Implied Moments Under Alternative Policies



                                    Baseline Simple    Optimal Monetary      Optimal Monetary &
 Moment                               Policy Rule            Policy              Fiscal Policy


 Unconditional Volatility
   x                                      1.70                0.51                    0.40
                                      (0.89, 3.00)        (0.03, 1.39)            (0.03, 1.08)
   π                                      1.03                0.14                    0.13
                                      (0.62, 1.58)        (0.01, 0.42)            (0.01, 0.40)
   r                                      2.42                2.65                    2.63
                                      (1.70, 3.28)        (1.87, 3.60)            (1.87, 3.59)
   g                                                                                  0.17
                                                                                  (0.01, 0.47)


 Stochastic Volatility
   x                                      0.73                0.39                    0.30
                                      (0.28, 1.57)        (0.03, 1.00)            (0.02, 0.78)
   π                                      0.40                0.10                    0.09
                                      (0.19, 0.77)        (0.01, 0.29)            (0.01, 0.27)
   r                                      0.72                0.78                    0.78
                                      (0.41, 1.16)        (0.46, 1.24)            (0.45, 1.24)
   g                                                                                  0.12
                                                                                  (0.01, 0.35)


 Quarters at Zero Lower Bound              13                  19                      18
                                        (2, 29)              (2, 44)                (2, 43)


Note: Unconditional volatility is measured with the sample standard deviation. Stochastic
volatility is measured by the standard deviation of the time-series estimate for the 5-year rolling
standard deviation. The economy is considered at the zero lower bound if the policy rate falls
below 25 basis points. The 90% small sample bootstrapped confidence intervals are given in
parenthesis.


                                                  9
                      Figure D.1: Impulse Responses to Uncertainty Shock in Model With Capital



                             Output                                          Consumption                                          Investment
                0.2                                                0.2                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                       Steady State
                                                                                                                                       Zero Lower Bound
                                                                                                                  0.2
                 0                                                  0
                                                                                                                         0
     Percent




                                                   Percent




                                                                                                     Percent
               −0.2                                          −0.2                                              −0.2


                                                                                                               −0.4
               −0.4                                          −0.4
                                                                                                               −0.6


               −0.6                                          −0.6                                              −0.8
                       4    8    12      16   20                         4      8     12   16   20                            4    8      12     16       20




                           Price Level                                       Shock Volatility                                Nominal Interest Rate
                 0                                                 60                                                    5


                                                                   50
                                                                                                                         4
           −0.05
                                                                   40
                                                                                                                         3
 Percent




                                                         Percent




                                                                                                               Percent




               −0.1                                                30
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                   20
           −0.15
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                   10


               −0.2                                                 0                                                    0
                       4    8    12      16   20                         4      8     12   16   20                            4    8      12     16       20




Note: The output, consumption, investment, price level, and shock volatility responses are
plotted as percent deviations. The nominal interest rate is plotted in annualized percent.




                                                                                 10
