                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF VERTICAL INTEGRATION IN MULTICHANNEL
                         TELEVISION MARKETS

                                      Gregory S. Crawford
                                         Robin S. Lee
                                      Michael D. Whinston
                                         Ali Yurukoglu

                                       Working Paper 21832
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21832


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2015, Revised April 2017




We would like to thank the editor, five anonymous referees, and numerous individuals and
seminar participants for helpful comments; and ESRC Grant RES-062-23-2586 (Crawford), the
NYU Stern Center for Global Economy and Business (Lee), and the Toulouse Network for
Information Technology and the NSF (Whinston) for support. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21832.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Gregory S. Crawford, Robin S. Lee, Michael D. Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets
Gregory S. Crawford, Robin S. Lee, Michael D. Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 21832
December 2015, Revised April 2017
JEL No. L13,L42,L51,L82

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the welfare effects of vertical integration of regional sports networks (RSNs) with
programming distributors in U.S. multichannel television markets. Vertical integration can
enhance efficiency by reducing double marginalization and increasing carriage of channels, but
can also harm welfare due to foreclosure and incentives to raise rivals' costs. We estimate a
structural model of viewership, subscription, distributor pricing, and affiliate fee bargaining using
a rich dataset on the U.S. cable and satellite television industry (2000-2010). We use these
estimates to analyze the impact of simulated vertical mergers and divestitures of RSNs on
competition and welfare, and examine the efficacy of regulatory policies introduced by the U.S.
Federal Communications Commission to address competition concerns in this industry.

Gregory S. Crawford                               Michael D. Whinston
University of Zurich                              Sloan School of Management
gregory.crawford@econ.uzh.ch                      and Department of Economics
                                                  Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Robin S. Lee                                      100 Main St
Department of Economics                           Cambridge, MA 02142
Harvard University                                and NBER
Littauer Center 120                               whinston@mit.edu
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                          Ali Yurukoglu
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu                          Graduate School of Business
                                                  Stanford University
                                                  Stanford, CA 94305
                                                  and NBER
                                                  ayurukog@stanford.edu
              The Welfare Effects of Vertical Integration
                 in Multichannel Television Markets∗
        Gregory S. Crawford†         Robin S. Lee‡          Michael D. Whinston§            Ali Yurukoglu¶

                                                 April 3, 2017



                                                    Abstract
             We investigate the welfare effects of vertical integration of regional sports networks (RSNs)
         with programming distributors in U.S. multichannel television markets. Vertical integration
         can enhance efficiency by reducing double marginalization and increasing carriage of channels,
         but can also harm welfare due to foreclosure and incentives to raise rivals’ costs. We estimate
         a structural model of viewership, subscription, distributor pricing, and affiliate fee bargaining
         using a rich dataset on the U.S. cable and satellite television industry (2000-2010). We use
         these estimates to analyze the impact of simulated vertical mergers and divestitures of RSNs on
         competition and welfare, and examine the efficacy of regulatory policies introduced by the U.S.
         Federal Communications Commission to address competition concerns in this industry.

         Keywords: vertical integration, foreclosure, double marginalization, raising rivals’ costs, cable
         television
         JEL: L13, L42, L51, L82


1        Introduction
The welfare effects of vertical integration is an important but controversial issue. The theoretical
literature on the pro- and anti-competitive impacts of vertical integration is vast (cf. Perry, 1990;
Rey and Tirole, 2007; Riordan, 2008; Bresnahan and Levin, 2013), and typically contrasts potential
efficiencies related to the elimination of double marginalization (Spengler, 1950) and the alignment
of investment incentives (Willamson, 1985; Grossman and Hart, 1986) with the potential for losses
arising from incentives to foreclose rivals and raise their costs (Salop and Scheffman, 1983; Kratten-
maker and Salop, 1986; Hart and Tirole, 1990; Ordover et al., 1990). Despite a growing literature,
empirical evidence on the quantitative magnitudes of these potential effects, and the overall net
welfare impact, is still limited.
    ∗
     We would like to thank the editor, five anonymous referees, and numerous individuals and seminar participants
for helpful comments; and ESRC Grant RES-062-23-2586 (Crawford), the NYU Stern Center for Global Economy
and Business (Lee), and the Toulouse Network for Information Technology and the NSF (Whinston) for support. All
errors are our own.
   †
     Department of Economics, University of Zurich; gregory.crawford@econ.uzh.ch
   ‡
     Department of Economics, Harvard University; robinlee@fas.harvard.edu
   §
     Department of Economics and Sloan School of Management, MIT; whinston@mit.edu
   ¶
     Graduate School of Business, Stanford University; ayurukog@stanford.edu



                                                        1
      This paper quantifies the welfare effects of vertical integration in cable and satellite television
in the context of high-value regional sports programming in the U.S. Whether the ownership of
content by distributors harms welfare has been at the heart of the debate over recently approved
(e.g., Comcast and NBC in 2011), abandoned (e.g., Comcast and Time Warner in 2015), and
proposed (e.g., AT&T and Time Warner in 2016) mergers in the television industry. The attention
that these mergers have attracted is partly due to the industry’s overwhelming reach and size: over
80% of the approximately 120 million television households in the U.S. subscribe to multichannel
television, and the mean individual consumes about four hours of television per day.1 Regional
sports programming is a large part of this industry, receiving $4.1 billion out of over $30 billion
per year in negotiated affiliate fees paid by distributors to all content providers, and an additional
$700 million per year in advertising dollars.2
      Our focus on the multichannel television industry, and in particular regional sports program-
ming, is driven by several factors that create empirical leverage to address this question. First,
there is significant variation across the industry in terms of ownership of regional sports content
by cable and satellite distributors, also referred to as multichannel video programming distributors
(MVPDs). Although this variation is primarily at the national-level for most channels, regional
sports networks (RSNs) are present in smaller geographic areas, and thus there is useful variation
in ownership patterns both across regions and over time. Additionally, the industry is the subject
of significant regulatory and antitrust attention in addition to merger review, including the applica-
tion of “program access rules” and exceptions to this rule, such as the “terrestrial loophole” which
exempted certain distributors from supplying integrated content to rivals.
      There are two key components of our analysis. The first is the construction of a comprehen-
sive dataset on the U.S. multichannel television industry, collected and synthesized from numerous
sources. The dataset comprises aggregate and individual-level consumer viewership and subscrip-
tion patterns, channel ownership and integration status, and prices, quantities, and channel carriage
“lineups” for cable and satellite bundles at the local market level for the years 2000 to 2010.
      The second component is the specification and estimation of a structural model of the multi-
channel television industry that captures consumer viewership and subscription decisions, MVPD
pricing and carriage decisions, and bargaining between MVPDs and content providers. We signif-
icantly extend the model of Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) to construct an empirical framework
suitable for the analysis of vertical integration and mergers. Our model incorporates integrated
firms’ incentives to foreclose rivals’ access to inputs, the potential for double marginalization, and
the possibility of imperfect coordination and internalization within an integrated firm. This last
feature is one of the novel aspects of our approach, as we estimate, rather than impose, the de-
gree to which firms internalize the profits of integrated units when distributors make pricing and
channel carriage decisions, and channels decide to supply or foreclose rival distributors. Given our
  1
     http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2016/nielsen-estimates-118-4-million-tv-homes-in-
the-us--for-the-2016-17-season.html,      http://www.nielsen.com/content/dam/corporate/us/en/reports-
downloads/2016-reports/q3-2016-total-audience-report.pdf, accessed on March 13, 2016.
   2
     SNL Kagan.



                                                     2
goal to evaluate whether vertical integration improves or worsens welfare due to improvements in
internal efficiency or increases in foreclosure of rivals, taking this approach avoids building into our
model the assumption that these two effects actually happen to the extent predicted by theory. For
example, only very simple views of the firm imply that integrated firms behave as if they are under
unitary control, and managers of integrated firms may well either not consider or over-react to the
gains that can be reaped from foreclosure.
   An important input into identifying these effects is our estimates of the change in distribu-
tor profits from the addition or removal of an RSN from any of its programming bundles. We
use the relationship between distributors’ market shares and channel carriage, as well as observed
viewership patterns and negotiated affiliate fees, to infer the relative values consumers place on
different channels. With the estimated profit effects in hand, the pro-competitive effects of vertical
integration are largely identified from the degree to which RSN carriage is higher for integrated dis-
tributors conditional on the RSN’s profitability to the distributor; the anti-competitive foreclosure
effects are identified by lower RSN supply to downstream rivals of integrated RSNs.
   We find that integrated distributors substantially but incompletely internalize the effects of their
pricing and carriage decisions on their upstream channels’ profits: we estimate that only $0.79 of
each dollar of profit realized by its integrated partner is internalized when an integrated MVPD
makes pricing and carriage decisions, or when integrated MVPDs and RSNs bargain with each
other. We also find that integrated RSNs fully (and perhaps more than fully) take into account
the benefits their downstream divisions reap when a rival distributor is denied access to the RSN’s
programming.
   After estimating our model, we leverage its structure to examine the mechanisms through which
pro- and anti-competitive effects of vertical integration might occur. We do so by simulating verti-
cal mergers and divestitures for 26 RSNs that were active in 2007, and examining their effects on
equilibrium firm (carriage, pricing, affiliate fee bargaining and supply) and consumer (subscription,
viewership) decisions. We consider integration scenarios when program access rules—which ensure
that non-integrated rival distributors have access to integrated content—are effectively enforced,
and when they are not. When program access rules are enforced, our counterfactual simulations
capture the pro-competitive effects of integration from improved internalization of pricing and car-
riage decisions within the integrated firm. When program access rules are not enforced, our simu-
lations allow as well for integrated (typically cable) distributors to engage in foreclosure, denying
access to or charging higher prices for their owned RSN to non-integrated rival (typically satellite)
distributors.
   Our results highlight the importance of program access rules in determining the effects of vertical
integration. In counterfactual simulations that enforce program access rules, we find that vertical
integration leads to significant gains in both consumer and aggregate welfare. These benefits
arise due to both lower cable prices (through the reduction of double marginalization) and greater
carriage of the RSN. Averaging results across channels, we find that integration of a single RSN
with effective program access rules in place would reduce average cable prices by 1.2% ($0.67) per


                                                   3
subscriber per month in markets served by the RSN, and increase overall carriage of the RSN by
9.4%. Combined, these effects would yield, on average, a $0.43 increase in total welfare from all
television services, representing approximately 17% of the average consumer willingness to pay for
a single RSN. We also predict that consumer welfare would increase.
       When program access rules are instead not enforced, we find that—at the estimated lower bound
for our “rival foreclosure” parameter—rival distributors would be denied access to an integrated
RSN in 4 of out of 26 cases; for the other 22 cases, the rival distributors continue to have access
but pay on average 18% higher affiliate fees than if program access rules were effectively enforced.
Together, failure to enforce program access rules leads to a reduction in both consumer and total
welfare of 1-2% of the average consumer willingness to pay for a single RSN. We find that the loss
is significantly larger in cases in which the rival distributors are denied access. The foreclosure of
satellite distributors tends to occur when the RSN is owned by a cable distributor whose market
share is large in the geographic region served by the RSN. Our counterfactual results suggest that
satellite distributors are excluded from carrying the RSN when the integrated cable distributor’s
share of households that it could serve exceeds approximately 85%.
       On net, we find that the overall effect of vertical integration in the absence of effective program
access rules—allowing for both efficiency and foreclosure incentives—is to increase consumer and
total welfare on average, resulting in (statistically significant) gains of approximately $0.38-0.39
per household per month, representing 15-16% of the average consumer willingness to pay for an
RSN. In the 4 markets in which rival distributors would be denied access, gains are quite small
and cannot be distinguished from zero, while consumer and total welfare gains are positive and
statistically significant in the 22 cases in which exclusion does not occur in response to vertical
integration. Finally, stemming from the foreclosure and raising rivals’ costs effects discussed above,
rival distributors are predicted to be worse off; satellite surplus, in particular, falls 2.2% when
vertical integration occurs with program access rules, and by 3.2% without these rules in place.
       Despite the richness of our empirical model, the effects that we document are only partial. Most
importantly, our model and analysis does not allow vertical integration to influence investments
made by RSNs and MVPDs (both those that integrate and their rivals).3 As emphasized in the
literature on investment effects of vertical integration (Bolton and Whinston, 1991; Hart, 1995), the
direction of these effects on consumer and aggregate surplus are ambiguous a priori (and remain
an important topic for future research).

Related Literature. Previous work studying the cable industry, including Waterman and Weiss
(1996), Chipty (2001), and Chen and Waterman (2007), have primarily relied on reduced form
cross-sectional analyses for a limited subset of channels and found that integrated cable systems
are more likely to carry their own, as opposed to rival, content.4 An exception is Suzuki (2009)
   3
      For example, we predict that cable-integration of an RSN always has a negative impact on satellite distributors;
this raises the possibility that widespread integration by cable distributors of RSNs might impact satellite distributors’
effectiveness as a competitor to cable to a greater extent than admitted in our analysis.
    4
      Chipty (2001) also estimates a structural demand system to calculate integration effects on consumer welfare.



                                                            4
who studies the 1996 merger between Time Warner and Turner broadcasting. His analysis uses
time series variation in ownership, finding that vertically integrated channels were more likely to be
carried post merger and rival non-integrated channels were less likely to be carried.5 These studies
cannot, however, separate efficiency from foreclosure incentives, nor can they provide estimates of
overall welfare effects. For example, reduced carriage of rival non-integrated channels could reflect
either foreclosure effects or the impact of efficient increases in carriage of integrated channels when
channels are substitutes. We complement this literature on vertical integration in the cable industry
in two ways. First, building a structural model allows us to make welfare statements about the
impact of vertical integration and identify the mechanisms through which the effects work. Second,
we leverage a richer, panel dataset on consumer viewership and bundle subscription, and the pricing,
carriage, and bargaining decisions of channels and distributors.
    This paper also adds to the growing empirical literature on the effects of vertical integration
and other vertical arrangements (e.g. Shepard, 1993; Hastings, 2004; Hastings and Gilbert, 2005;
Hortacsu and Syverson, 2007; Villas-Boas, 2007; Mortimer, 2008; Houde, 2012; Lee, 2013; Conlon
and Mortimer, 2015; Asker, 2016). We build on existing approaches by estimating a model that
explicitly incorporates avenues for vertical integration to improve the efficiency of pricing and
channel carriage decisions, and to generate foreclosure or raise costs of rival distributors; and
by providing estimates of the degree to which integrated firms, in practice, act on each of these
incentives.6 Using these estimates, we are then able to estimate the net welfare impact of vertical
integration that trades off these pro- and anti-competitive effects. Finally, we develop methods
for the estimation and simulation of counterfactual scenarios in vertical markets characterized by
bilateral oligopoly and negotiated prices that can be applied in other related settings.7

Road Map. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide an
overview of the U.S. cable and satellite industry and regional sports networks, and describe the
data that we use in our analysis. We present our model of the industry in Section 3, and detail
its estimation and our parameter estimates in Sections 4 and 5. We then assess the welfare effects
of vertical integration by discussing the implementation of and findings from our counterfactual
simulations in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.


2    Institutional Detail and Data
Our study analyzes the U.S. cable and satellite industry for the years 2000 to 2010 and focuses on
the ownership of “Regional Sports Networks” (RSNs) by cable and satellite distributors. In this
section, we describe the industry’s structure, RSNs, and regulatory policy during this period. We
   5
     See also Caves et al. (2013) who provide evidence that RSN affiliate fees are correlated with downstream MVPD
footprints.
   6
     See also Michel (2013), who examines whether firms jointly maximize profits following a horizontal merger.
   7
     E.g., Ho and Lee (2017) adapt techniques developed in this paper to examine hospital and insurance competition
in health care markets.




                                                        5
then discuss the data that we use to estimate the model. The tables referenced in this section are
contained in Appendix A.

2.1      Industry Structure
In the time period that we study, the vast majority of households in the U.S. were able to subscribe
to a multichannel television bundle from one of three downstream multichannel video programming
distributors (MVPDs): a local cable company (e.g., Comcast, Time Warner Cable, or Cablevi-
sion) or one of two nationwide satellite companies (DirecTV or Dish Network).8 Cable companies
transmit their video signals through a physical wire whereas satellite companies distribute video
wirelessly through a south-facing satellite dish attached to a household’s dwelling. The majority of
distributors’ revenue comes from selling subscriptions to three different bundles of programming:
a limited basic bundle which retransmits over-the-air broadcast stations, an expanded basic bun-
dle containing 40-60 of the most popular channels available on cable (e.g., AMC, CNN, Comedy
Central, ESPN, MTV, etc.), and a digital bundle containing between 10 to 50 more, smaller, niche
channels.9
       Downstream distributors negotiate with content producers over the terms at which the distrib-
utors can offer the content producers’ channels to consumers. These negotiations usually center on
a monthly per subscriber “affiliate fee” that the downstream distributor pays the channel for every
subscriber who has access to the channel, whether the subscriber watches it or not.10

2.2      Regional Sports Networks
RSNs carry professional and college sports programming in a particular geographic region. For
example, the New England Sports Network (NESN) carries televised games of the Boston Red Sox
and the Boston Bruins. Metropolitan areas can have multiple RSNs. For example, in the New
York City metropolitan area, there are four different RSNs: Madison Square Garden (MSG), MSG
Plus, SportsNet NY, and Yankees Entertainment and Sports (YES). Some RSNs also serve multiple
metropolitan areas. For example, the Sun Sports network holds the rights to the Miami Heat and
the Tampa Bay Rays, amongst others.
       According to industry estimates, RSNs command the second-highest per subscriber affiliate
   8
     Telephone MVPDs (primarily consisting of AT&T and Verizon) did not enter a significant number of markets
until 2007, at which point combined they had approximately 1.2 million subscribers according to financial filings; by
the end of 2010, they had 6.9 million out of 100.8 million total MVPD subscribers (FCC, 2013).
   9
     Our analysis focuses on the provision of multichannel programming, and does not explicitly consider the bundling
or sale of Internet or phone services by cable or satellite distributors. In 2007, according to the U.S. Census Bureau
Service Annual Survey, cable and other program distributors received 60% of their revenues from multichannel
programming distribution services, 16% of revenues from Internet access services, and 6% from telephony services;
other revenue sources included air time and installation and rental of equipment. During our sample period, Internet
access (telephony) services grew from 2% (1%) of cable distributor revenues in 2000 to 17% (8%) by 2010 while
programming revenues fell from 77% to 57%.
  10
     As discussed in Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012), payments between distributors and content providers are pri-
marily in the form of linear fees; fixed fee monetary transfers are rare, and if they exist, they are typically neglible
relative to the total payment.



                                                           6
fees after the national sports network ESPN. For example in 2010 Comcast SportsNet (CSN)
Philadelphia had per subscriber monthly fees that averaged $2.85 per month whereas highly-rated
national channels such as Fox News, TNT, and USA were around $1 per subscriber per month (and
ESPN over $4 per subscriber per month).
       RSNs are sometimes owned by entities that also own downstream cable or satellite distributors.
Figure 1 shows RSNs’ ownership affiliations with downstream distributors over a 13-year period
for the RSNs in our data that were active in 2007. Many RSNs are owned, to some degree, by a
downstream distributor. For example, in 2007, downstream distributors had ownership interests
in 16 of these RSNs. The cable MVPDs that owned RSNs are Comcast, Cablevision, Cox, and
Time Warner. DirecTV, the largest satellite operator (and second-largest U.S. MVPD), indirectly
had stakes in numerous RSNs through its partial owners News Corporation and Liberty Media
Corporation.11 Ownership affiliations also vary over time, as RSNs may be (partially) acquired,
divested, or sold to other distributors.

2.3      Regulatory Policy
There are several key features of the regulatory environment for RSNs, and vertically integrated
content more generally, that are pertinent for our study. During our sample period, vertically
integrated firms were subject to the “Program Access Rules” (PARs), which required that vertically
integrated content be made available to rival distributors at non-discriminatory prices (subject to
final-offer arbitration if necessary). The PARs only applied to content that was transmitted to
MVPDs via satellite. This covered all national cable channels (which need satellite transmission
to cost-effectively reach cable systems around the country) and most RSNs. However, a handful of
RSNs transmitted their signal terrestrially (usually via microwave), thereby avoiding the jurisdiction
of the PARs. This was called the “terrestrial loophole” in the Program Access regulation. In
2007, only two long-standing cable-integrated RSNs were able to leverage the terrestrial loophole:
Comcast SportsNet in Philadelphia and SD4 in San Diego (owned by Cox Cable); in both cases, the
channel was not provided to satellite distributors.12 As a result, Major League Baseball (MLB),
National Basketball Association (NBA), and National Hockey League (NHL) games in Philadelphia
were only available on cable and not on DirecTV or Dish Network. Similarly in San Diego, MLB
games were available only through cable. This feature of regulatory history will be an important
source of identifying variation in our econometric estimation.
       The PARs were introduced in 1992 and required renewal by the FCC every five years. They
were allowed to lapse in 2012 and replaced by rules giving the Commission the right to review any
programming agreement for anti-competitive effects on a case-by-case basis under the “unfair acts”
  11
     News Corporation and Liberty Media both had a partial ownership stake in DirecTV starting in 2003; at the
beginning of 2008, News Corporation completed an asset swap with Liberty in which News traded its stake in
DirectTV for Liberty’s stake in News.
  12
     Time Warner Cable also employed the terrestrial loophole from 2006 to 2008 for the (then relatively new)
Charlotte Bobcats NBA franchise by placing some their games on News 14, a terrestrially delivered regional news
channel.



                                                      7
                                                                    Figure 1: RSN Ownership




8
    Notes: Reported are the vertical ownership stakes held by major distributors of cable and satellite television service for the Regional Sports Networks (RSNs)
    in our data that were active in 2007. Ownership data were collected by hand from company stock filings and industry sources. The ownership share for each
    distributor is reported and individual owners (or combinations of owners) are shaded according to the channel-specific legend located in the first line of each
    potential owner. Black bars correspond to a year in which the given RSN is not active (i.e., has not yet entered or has exited the market). Hyphens correspond
    to years of active operation for an RSN without a vertical ownership affiliation.
rules the Commission established in 2010 (FCC, 2012). The new case-by-case rules explicitly include
a (rebuttable) presumption that exclusive deals between RSNs and their affiliated distributors are
unfair. During our sample period (2000-2010), most integrated RSNs outside of loophole markets
had agreements to be carried by all MVPDs. However, even though PARs were in effect, there
were a few instances in which a cable-owned RSN was not carried by satellite distributors: e.g., in
2007, Comcast Sports Northwest, Comcast/Charter Sports Southeast, and Cox Sports Television
were not broadcast on satellite distributors.

2.4      Data
We collect a wide variety of data to analyze the effects of vertical integration. We have three
categories of data: (1) downstream prices, quantities, and characteristics of cable and satellite
bundles, (2) channel viewership data, and (3) channel affiliate fees and advertising revenues. We
briefly describe each in turn.

2.4.1      Downstream Prices, Quantities, and Characteristics

We combine data from multiple sources to construct downstream prices, quantities, and charac-
teristics. Our foundational dataset is the Nielsen FOCUS database. For each cable system, it
provides the set of channels offered (i.e., the channel “lineup”), the number of homes passed, the
total number of subscribers (to any bundle of channels), the owner of the system, and the zip codes
served. We use the years 2000 to 2010. We restrict our analysis to system-years in which the
system faced no direct competition from another cable distributor.13 We construct market shares
by combining the number of subscribers reported by FOCUS (divided by the number of households
in a market, obtained from 2000 and 2010 Census zip code data) with individual-level survey data
from household survey firms Mediamark Research & Intelligence (MRI) and Simmons, using MRI
data for 2000 to 2007, and Simmons for 2008 to 2010. Specifically, if a system-year had at least
40 survey respondents, we use the average of the market share from the FOCUS data and the
cable market share among the survey respondents; otherwise we use only the FOCUS data. We
eliminate any system-year for which we had less than 40 individual-level survey respondents in the
MRI/Simmons data and the FOCUS subscriber data were not updated from the previous year. We
use the remaining system-years to construct our markets.
       For our analysis, we define a market for each year to be a set of zip codes served by a single
cable system and, by construction, both satellite distributors. For cable systems, we aggregate over
bundles within a system, focusing on total system subscribers. Our demand model is therefore a
distributor choice model, rather than a bundle choice model.14 We construct satellite shares within
  13
     In our analysis, we focus only on markets in which there is a single cable and no other wireline (cable or telephone)
distributor. We do so because when a system faces competition from another wireline distributor, we do not know
the number of subscribers in the areas where the system faced competition relative to the areas where it did not. A
second wireline distributor is present in 6% of all system-year observations. Our maintained assumption is that the
omission of these markets does not affect the validity of our identifying assumptions or interpretation of results.
  14
     The FOCUS data only report total subsscribers to the system, and our subscriber data are not rich enough to



                                                            9
each of our markets for DirecTV and Dish Network from the MRI/Simmons survey data.15 We
use historical channel offerings and prices for DirecTV and Dish Network collected via the Internet
Archive (archive.org). Satellite bundles are assumed to vary across markets only in the set of RSNs
carried. We assume that an RSN is carried by a satellite distributor in a given market if we observe
that the satellite distributor carries that channel in any market, and the RSN is “relevant” in that
market. We define an RSN to be relevant in a Nielson Designated Market Area (DMA)—and,
hence, in all markets within that DMA—if, across all cable systems within that DMA at least 30
percent of the teams carried by the RSN are not “blacked out.”16 During our sample period, the
average household subscribing to a cable distributor received 1.8 RSNs, and 80% of our markets
have one or two relevant RSNs that are available.
    We combine multiple sources of information on cable television prices. Systems regularly post
prices on their websites and these websites are often saved in the Internet Archive. Following
industry practice, we refer to the set of channels offered at a given (incremental) price as a tier of
service and the combination of tiers chosen by households as the “bundle” that they buy.17 We
use the price of the expanded basic bundle, the most popular bundle chosen by households and the
bundle which typically contains all of the channels in our analysis. In addition to price information
on systems’ websites, we utilize newspaper reports of price changes which provide price information
at the local cable system level. Some newspapers report this information every time cable prices
change (typically yearly), providing valuable information about the history of price changes for a
single (often large) system or geographic family of systems owned by the same distributor. Finally,
cable systems typically have “rate cards” describing their current tiers, channels, and prices which
they use for marketing or to inform customers of changes in these offerings; they were used when
able to be found online. We searched the Internet for all such information about cable prices and
linked by hand the information obtained to FOCUS systems based on the distributor, principal
geographic region served, and other regions served as reported in the newspaper or listed on the
rate card. For system-years where we do not find a price from websites, rate sheets, or newspapers,
we link to the TNS Bill Harvesting database. The TNS data are individual-level bills for cable
service which report the company providing the service, the household’s expenditure, and their zip
code. For a given system-year, we use the mean expenditure for subscribers to that system if the
data contain at least 5 bills.18 These data also provide the level of any tax on cable and satellite
estimate bundle-specific quantities.
   15
      We use a weighted average of state- and market-level satellite market shares, both calculated from the individual-
level MRI/Simmons data. If we have between 1-19 market-level observations, we weight the market-level share by
0.75 (and the state-level share by 0.25). If we have 20 or more market-level observations, we weight market-level
shares by 0.90. We dropped any constructed market whose total market share exceeded one or which, in the survey
data, had a zero market share for one of the satellite distributors (which happens naturally due to sampling error).
   16
      DMAs are mutually exclusive and exhaustive definitions of television markets created by Nielsen and used for
the purchase of advertising time. Black-out rules are restrictions imposed by sports leagues that prevent broadcasts
of a team’s games in certain local markets. We use black-out information at the sport-team-zip-code level collected
from MLB, NBA, and NHL websites in 2014 to determine whether a team is blacked-out in a given market.
   17
      For example, the expanded basic bundle consists of the limited basic tier and the expanded basic tier.
   18
      We only use bills which clearly delineate video programming costs (i.e., that separate it out from other bundled
services such as internet and phone), and use the average of a system’s revenue (excluding pay-per-view or one-time



                                                          10
television services; we use state satellite taxes, which vary over time, as an instrumental variable
for price in our demand estimation.
    Table A.1 reports the average price, market share, and number of cable, RSN, and total channels
offered across markets and years in our estimation dataset. We use 11 years of data, comprising
almost 7,000 market-years, with an average coverage of 39.7 million (over 35% of) U.S. households
per year.19 Average prices are quite similar across distributors, whether on an unweighted basis
or weighted by the number of households in the market. The satellite distributors generally offer
more channels on their Expanded Basic service than the local cable system, but a similar number
of RSNs.
    Finally, we derive MVPD margins for Comcast, DirecTV, and Dish from their 2007 10K reports;
we use these as moments in our structural estimation.20

2.4.2    Viewership

We estimate demand using both bundle purchase and viewing data. We have two types of viewing
data. One type provides information at the individual household level, and the other reports
aggregate viewing decisions at the level of the DMA.
    Individual household viewing data comes from the MRI and Simmons datasets described in the
previous subsection. Our MRI data report the number of hours watched for each of the sampled
households of 96 national channels from 2000 to 2007, while our Simmons data report the same
information for 99 national channels between 2008 and 2010. Our aggregate ratings data come
from Nielsen, which provides the percentage of households in a DMA watching a given program
on a given channel at a given time. Reported is the average rating for each of between 63 and 100
channels, of which 18 to 29 are RSNs, depending on the year, in each of the 44 to 56 largest DMAs
between 2000 and 2010.
    Tables A.2 and A.3 report summary statistics for our viewing data. Table A.2 reports, for each
of our sources of viewing data, the mean rating for each of the 38 (non-RSN) national channels
included in our econometric analysis.21 For example, the average rating for the ABC Family
Channel in the Nielsen data across the 747 DMA-years for which the information was recorded is
0.418 percentage points. This suggests that a household selected at random in one of these years
charges) to construct prices.
  19
     While we observe the complete population of channel lineups, incomplete reporting of subscriber information
in the FOCUS dataset and the inability to collect cable prices in some markets prevents us from constructing the
information we need in every U.S. cable market.
  20
     We compute Comcast margins using video, advertising, and franchise fee revenues; programming expenses; and
sales, general, and administrative (SG&A) expenses multiplied by both the video revenue share of total revenues
(to proportionately allocate expenses across Comcast’s other businesses) and the share of SG&A expenses that are
subscriber acquisition and retention related (computed from DirecTV’s reports). We compute DirecTV margins
using total revenues; and programming, subscriber acquisition, upgrade, and retention expenses. We compute Dish
margins using total revenues; subscriber acquisition costs; and the share of subscriber related expenses multiplied
by the share of non-SG&A costs (programming and service expenses) that are programming related (computed from
DirecTV’s reports). The computed values are {.539, .396, .413}.
  21
     The 38 national channels represent the top 36 channels by viewership which have ratings data for each year, plus
two smaller channels with sports related content (ESPN Classic and Golf Channel).



                                                         11
and DMAs would be watching the ABC Family Channel with probability 0.418 percent. While
small, this is above average for cable networks. Similarly, Table A.3 reports the average ratings for
RSNs; for example, CSN Bay Area’s average viewership is 0.41 percent. For RSN viewership, we
have additional information—also reported in Table A.3—about the average RSN rating by type
of distributor (i.e., cable or each satellite operator).
    Our household-level data provide further details about average viewing of national channels
which are summarized in the remaining columns of Table A.2. The last column reports the share of
households on average across DMAs and years that report any viewing of that channel. As noted
in Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012), this provides valuable information about whether a household
has any interest in a channel that we will use to inform the estimated distribution of preferences
for channels across households.

2.4.3    Average Affiliate Fees and Advertising Revenues

As described earlier, affiliate fees are the monthly per subscriber charges paid by distributors
to content providers for the ability to distribute the channel. SNL Kagan maintains a database
with aggregate information about individual cable television networks, both nationally-distributed
networks like CNN and ESPN as well as RSNs like the family of Comcast and Fox networks.
For many networks, we use information about the average affiliate fee paid by cable and satellite
MVPDs to each such network. Table A.2 reports average affiliate fees for each of the 38 national
cable channels that we include in our analysis and Table A.3 reports the same information for each
of the RSNs in our analysis. The average affiliate fee in our data for the national channels is $0.30
per subscriber per month, while it is $1.64 for our RSNs.
    Per subscriber advertising rates are determined for each channel by dividing total advertising
revenues by total subscribers (both provided by SNL Kagan).


3     Model
In this section, we present an industry model that predicts: (i) household viewership of channels;
(ii) household demand for multichannel television services; (iii) prices and programming bundles
that are offered by distributors; and (iv) negotiated distributor-channel specific affiliate fees. One
key output from the specification and estimation of our model is the impact on viewership and
demand of adding or removing channels from a bundle. This in turn informs the degree to which
firms internalize the profits of integrated units when making strategic decisions, and the incentives
of an integrated RSN to provide or withhold access to its content from rival distributors.

3.1     Overview
We index consumer households by i, markets by m, and time periods by t. There are a set of
“downstream” multichannel video programming distributors (MVPDs) Ft and “upstream” channels
Ct active in each period t. The set of MVPDs active in a given market-period is denoted Fmt . We

                                                    12
will assume that each such MVPD f ∈ Fmt offers a single bundle of channels Bf mt ⊆ Ct in market
m and period t, where a household subscribing to this bundle pays a price pf mt and has access to
all channels c ∈ Bf mt .22 Since we assume that distributors offer only one bundle, f denotes both
the distributor and the bundle it offers for a given market-period.
    We assume that in each period t (a year in our empirical work), decisions are made according
to the following timing: in stage 1 channels and distributors bargain bilaterally to decide affiliate
fees, and distributors set prices and make carriage decisions for each market in which they oper-
ate; in stage 2 households choose which MVPD, if any, to subscribe to in their market; and in
stage 3 households view television channels.23 We now provide details of each stage and further
assumptions, proceeding in reverse order of timing.

3.2    Stage 3: Household Viewing
We assume that households solve a time allocation problem to determine viewership. In particular,
household i in market m and period t subscribing to MVPD f ∈ Fmt allocates its time wif t ≡
{wif ct }c∈Bf mt ∪{0} , where wif ct is the time spent watching channel c (or devoted to non-television
activities if c = 0), to solve:


                                                          X           γict
                             max vif t (wif t ) =                           (wif ct )1−νc                        (1)
                              wif t                                  1 − νc
                                                      c∈Bf mt ∪{0}
                                           s.t.   :   wif ct ≥ 0 ∀ c ,
                                                          X
                                                                  wif ct ≤ T .
                                                      c∈Bf mt ∪{0}


Parameters γict and νc ∈ [0, 1) govern consumer tastes for each channel c, where γict sets the level
of marginal utility of household i from the first instant of watching the channel, and νc controls
how fast this marginal utility decays with additional viewing. The parameter T represents the
total time available to the household. We restrict νc to be equal for all non-sport channels and
the outside-option, and equal for all sports channels (which include RSNs); i.e., νc = ν S if c is a
sports channel, and νc = ν N S otherwise.24 We parameterize γict as a function of channel-specific
  22
     In the previous section, we explained why the data only permit us to look at demand for the most popular
(expanded basic) bundle offered by each distributor in each market. We do not model distributor price discrimination
at the market level (e.g., by offering multiple channel bundles or à la carte add-ons); see Crawford and Yurukoglu
(2012) for further discussion. As modeled here, vertical integration does not affect how distributors are allowed
to price, nor does it affect the ability of channels to price discriminate among distributors (who are charged a
distributor-specific affiliate fee and cannot resell access to the channel; see also footnote 35).
  23
     Stages 2 and 3 of our model describe a discrete-continuous choice model of consumer behavior over distributors
and viewership (cf. Dubin and McFadden, 1984; Hanemann, 1984).
  24
     Allowing for this parameter to differ between sports and non-sports channels is motivated by the observation
that sports channels receive higher affiliate fees than national channels for the same viewership ratings; we discuss
this further in Section 4.1.2. Our viewership model is equivalent to the Cobb-Douglas model used in Crawford and
Yurukoglu (2012) if νc → 1 for all c.




                                                         13
parameters ρc ≡ {ρ0c , ρ1c } as follows:
                       
                       γ̃
                           ict    with probability ρ0c , where γ̃ict ∼ Exponential(ρ1c )
              γict   =                                                                             ∀ c, t .
                       0         with probability 1 − ρ0c

For RSNs, we scale γ̃ict by exp(γ b bict + γ d dic ), where bict ∈ [0, 1] represents the fraction of teams
carried on RSN c that are “blacked-out” (i.e., unable to have games televised in household i’s
market), and dic is the average distance from household i to the stadiums of the teams shown on
RSN c (measured in thousands of miles).25 These terms allow for households to value an RSN
differentially if the household cannot watch some of the carried sport teams, or if the household
lives further away from the carried teams’ stadiums.

3.3    Stage 2: Household Distributor Choice
Each period, household i considers characteristics of the bundle offered by each MVPD f ∈ Fmt —
including the utility obtained from watching channels in the bundle and its price—when determining
which distributor, if any, to subscribe to. We specify household i’s utility conditional on subscribing
to f as:
                                              ∗
                                 uif t = β v vif      x        sat
                                                 t + β xf t + βif + αpf t + ξf t + εif t ,                           (2)
       ∗ , referred to as a consumer’s viewership utility for the bundle offered by f , is the optimized
where vif t
value from the time allocation problem in (1), xf t are firm-state and year dummy variables, pf t is
the per month price (including any taxes), and ξf t is a scalar unobservable demand shock for the
                                                                               sat , that is drawn
bundle. Each consumer has a random preference for each satellite distributor, βif
from an independent exponential distribution with parameter ρsat                 sat
                                                             f ; we assume that βif = 0 if f is
a cable distributor.26 We assume that the utility of the outside option of no bundle is normalized
to ui0t = εi0t , that εit ≡ {if t }∀f is distributed Type I extreme value, and that each household
chooses the bundle with the highest value of uif t .27
    The probability that household i chooses distributor f in market m is obtained by integrating
over εit for each household:
                                                ∗ + β x x + β sat + αp + ξ )
                                       exp(β v vif t      ft   if      ft   ft
                        sif mt =                      ∗ + β x x + β sat + αp + ξ ) .                                 (3)
                                   1 + g∈Fmt exp(β v vigt
                                      P
                                                                gt  ig       gt gt
  25
     RSNs may be carried by systems outside of a team’s local area for at least two reasons. First, an RSN may
broadcast games from different sport leagues with different black-out restrictions. For example, CSN Chicago is carried
on systems in Indianapolis even though Chicago Bulls games that the RSN broadcasts are blacked-out (Indianapolis is
Pacer’s territory), as the RSN also broadcasts Chicago Cubs games (which are considered in-market for Indianapolis).
The second reason is that RSNs also broadcast programming not subject to black-out restrictions, which include other
sports (e.g., racing, boxing, poker) in addition to sports news and specialized programming. We focus only on black-
out restrictions for MLB, NBA, and NHL teams. We ignore the NFL in our analysis since its games have only been
aired by national channels since the 1960s (CBS, NBC, Fox, and ESPN currently own its television rights).
  26
     As we discuss in the next section, allowing for heterogeneity in preferences for satellite bundles assists our model
in matching observed distributor price-cost margins.
  27
     Our normalization allows for variation in the quality of the outside option (which includes local antenna reception
for television signals) across markets and time due to our inclusion of firm-state and year dummy variables.


                                                            14
                                                                                                      R
The total market share for distributor f (in market m at time t) is then sf mt ≡                          sif mt dHmt (i),
where Hmt (i) is the joint distribution of household random coefficients (γ, β) in the market, and
the demand for distributor f is Df mt ≡ Nmt sf mt , where Nmt is the number of television households
in the market.

3.4      Stage 1: Distributor Pricing, Carriage, and Affiliate Fee Bargaining
In Stage 1, all MVPDs and channels bargain over affiliate fees τt ≡ {τf ct }∀f,c , where τf ct represents
the period t fee that distributor f pays the owner of channel c for each of f ’s household subscribers.
Simultaneously, each distributor chooses the prices and channel composition of its bundle in every
market in which it operates.28 That is, we assume that bargaining occurs simultaneously with the
determination of distributor pricing and carriage decisions; we provide further discussion of this
assumption in Section 3.4.3.
       We assume that affiliate fees, bundle prices, and bundle compositions are optimal with respect to
one another in equilibrium. We now discuss these optimality conditions in more detail, considering
first distributors’ pricing and carriage decisions (given the affiliate fee bargaining outcome), and
then affiliate fee bargaining (given distributor pricing and carriage).

3.4.1      Stage 1a. Distributor Pricing and Carriage

Each period, every MVPD f ∈ Ft chooses prices and the channels offered in each of its bundles
{pf mt , Bf mt }∀m:f ∈Fmt to maximize its profits given negotiated affiliate fees τt . Profits for f across
all markets are:
                                                               X
                      ΠM
                       f t ({Bmt }m , {pmt }m , τt ; µ) =              ΠM
                                                                        f mt (Bmt , pmt , τt ; µ) ,
                                                            m:f ∈Fmt


where:
                                                       X                                                   
                                       pre-tax
                                                                               X
 ΠM
  f mt (Bmt , pmt , τt ; µ) = Df mt × pf mt −mcf mt +µ×                              OfMct ×Dgmt ×(τgct +act ) , (4)
                                                                    g∈Fmt c∈Bgmt


(and, as in the rest of this section, Fmt also includes f ). In expression (4), we denote by Bmt ≡
{Bf mt }f ∈Fmt and pmt ≡ {pf mt }f ∈Fmt the set of channels and associated prices offered in market
m, and by act the expected per-subscriber advertising revenue obtained by channel c from bundles
that carry c. Firm revenues are derived from pre-tax prices, ppre-tax
                                                              f mt    ≡ pf mt /(1 + taxf mt ), which
are a function of market-specific cable or satellite tax rates that are known and assumed to be
determined exogenously. The term OfMct is a function of MVPD f ’s ownership share of channel c
at time t; we refer to f and c as being integrated if OfMct > 0, with full integration equivalent to
  28
     A given cable distributor f often operates in many markets, and is choosing its price and set of channels to
offer in each of these markets. Satellite distributors choose a single national price and channel bundle, with the only
potential variation across DMAs being the set of RSNs that are carried.




                                                          15
OfMct = 1.29 The parameter µ, which we will estimate, captures the extent to which a downstream
MVPD f internalizes upstream affiliate fees and advertising revenues from its integrated channels.
       The first component of (4), an MVPD’s profit function in a given market m, is standard: each
bundle has a price and a marginal cost (mcf mt ) that determine its margin, and this is multipled
by its demand. We assume that each MVPD f ’s marginal cost in market m can be decomposed
into the sum of the per subscriber fees that f must pay to the various channels in its market-
bundle, and bundle-specific non-channel-related marginal cost, denoted by κf mt : i.e., mcf mt ≡
                        30 The second component of the profit function is non-standard, and represents
P
  c∈Bf mt τf ct +κf mt .
the degree to which a vertically integrated downstream unit values the profits that accrue to
its upstream (i.e., channel) units. These terms include per subscriber fees (τgct ) and advertising
revenues (act ) that accrue to integrated upstream channels from MVPD f ’s own viewers as well
as from viewers of other distributors g 6= f , and are multiplied by the ownership share variables
OfMct and parameter µ.31 In the absence of any intra-firm frictions, µ would equal one, implying
that the downstream unit of an integrated firm perfectly internalizes its (fully) integrated upstream
units’ profits, and its strategic decisions maximize total firm profit. The parameter µ could also
be less than one, potentially representing divisionalization that could arise from ignorance, poor
management, optimal compensation under informational frictions, or any other conflict between
managers of different divisions within the same firm. By estimating µ we seek to uncover the extent
to which such internalization actually occurs in our setting.

Cable Pricing and Carriage.             We will leverage necessary conditions on the optimality of MVPD
pricing and carriage decisions in our estimation. Differentiating (4) with respect to pf mt (and
dividing by market size) yields the following pricing first-order condition:

 ∂ΠM
   f mt           sf mt                       ∂s
                                                  f mt
                                                            X                          ∂sgmt              
                           + ppre-tax
                                                                          X
           =                  f mt    −mcf mt          +µ×                      OfMct          (τgct +act ) = 0 . (5)
  ∂pf mt       1 + taxf mt                      ∂pf mt                                  ∂pf mt
                                                                 g∈Fmt c∈Bgmt


With regard to carriage, a cable distributor’s optimal decision for an RSN is indeterminate when
no deal is reached between the distributor and that RSN: i.e., whether or not the distributor would
carry the RSN on a subset of its systems in the event the RSN were available is irrelevant when
the RSN is not available to the distributor at all. In our estimation, we will therefore make use
of bundle optimality conditions for cable operators only for channels with which they have an
agreement. Thus, we assume that the set of channels that are offered by each cable MVPD f in
  29
     In Appendix C.1, we detail the construction of this and our other ownership variables (introduced later). For
our analysis, we restrict OfMct = 0 if c is not an RSN.
  30
     Non-channel related costs include technical service, labor, gasoline, and equipment costs that are incurred on a
per subscriber basis.
  31
     We omit portions of integrated channels’ profits that are not affected by f ’s pricing and carriage decisions, as
they do not affect the analysis. We also assume that channel c’s per subscriber advertising revenues in market m do
not vary across MVPDs, and that channel c’s marginal costs per subscriber are zero.




                                                         16
each market m satisfies:

                              Bf mt = arg max ΠM
                                               f mt ({Bf , B−f,mt }, pmt , τt ; µ) ,                         (6)
                                           Bf ⊆Af t


where Af t ⊆ Ct is the set of channels available to MVPD f : i.e., the set of channels for which f
has reached an agreement.

Satellite Pricing and Carriage.               If instead distributor f is a satellite MVPD (DirecTV or Dish),
we assume that the distributor sets a single national price and bundle. This national satellite price
satisfies a similar optimality condition to (5) above. We assume that the bundle offered by a satellite
MVPD in any given market may differ from the national bundle only in the set of RSN channels
that are offered. In addition, we assume that satellite distributors adopt the strategy of carrying
any channel for which they have negotiated a deal (intuitively, since any deal that is reached should
make carriage profitable).32

3.4.2    Stage 1b: Bargaining over affiliate fees

Before describing how affiliate fees are determined, we specify the profits that each channel c
contemplates when bargaining with MVPD f . We assume that if f and c are integrated (i.e.,
OfMct > 0), c’s profits in market m are:
                                    X                         
 ΠC
  cmt (Bmt , pmt , τt ;µ) =                   Dgmt × τgct + act . . .                                        (7)
                              g∈Fmt :c∈Bgmt
                                                                                                            
                                                 × (ppre-tax
                              X                                               X
                                             C                                           CC
                       +µ            Dgmt × Ogct     gmt     − mcgmt ) +                Ocdt × (τgdt + agdt ) .
                            g∈Fmt                                           d∈Bgmt \c


However, if f and c are not integrated, c’s profits in m are:
                                      X                           
ΠC
 cmt (Bmt , pmt , τt ;µ, λR ) =                   Dgmt × τgct + act . . .                                    (8)
                                  g∈Fmt :c∈Bgmt
                                                                                                                
                                                    × (ppre-tax
                           X                                                       X
                                                C                                            CC
                     +µ            Dgmt × λR × Ogct     gmt     − mcgmt ) +                 Ocdt × (τgdt + agdt ) .
                          g∈Fmt                                                 d∈Bgmt \c


In both (7) and (8), the first lines represent affiliate fees and advertising revenues that channel
c obtains from each bundle on which the channel is available in market m, and the second lines
                                                                                          C ,
incorporate channel c’s potential profits from its integrated downstream MVPDs (based on Ogct
a function of the ownership share of c held by MVPD g), as well as profits from other integrated
                                          CC , which is a function of the common ownership
channels d of channel c (which depend on Ocdt
shares of channels c and d; see Appendix C.1 for further details).33 These integrated profits are in
  32
    For RSNs, we make this assumption only in the RSN’s relevant markets.
  33
    In 2007, 4% of markets in our sample have two RSNs that are relevant and share a common owner; none have
three or more relevant RSNs that share a common owner.



                                                          17
                                 d         cO                                 d        c^

                                                                                               
                                      f                                                g f
                  ΠC
                   cmt   = πcmt + µ × (πf mt + πdmt )           ΠC
                                                                 cmt = πcmt + µ × ((λR × π gmt ) + πdmt )
                          (a) Internal Bargaining.                    (b) Bargaining with Rival MVPD.


                         Figure 2: Examples of ΠC
                                                cmt when c bargains with MVPD f .



each case multiplied by µ, the parameter capturing the extent of within-firm internalization across
divisions.
       The one difference between (7) and (8) is that in the latter expression, which is relevant when an
integrated RSN c bargains with a non-integrated distributor f , any effects of the deal on downstream
distributors integrated with c are multiplied by the parameter λR ≥ 0. This parameter—our “rival
foreclosure” parameter—captures the extent to which channel c considers the benefits of foreclosure
(the denial of access to channel c) to its downstream division g in its decision of whether to supply
f . This benefit arises because non-supply lowers the quality of f ’s bundle, shifting demand to c’s
downstream division g. By including and estimating this parameter—rather than simply setting
it equal to the theoretical value of 1—we aim to estimate the extent to which foreclosure concerns
actually motivate integrated RSNs’ supply decisions to non-integrated downstream rivals.
       In Figure 2, we provide an illustration of how channel c’s perceived profits when bargaining
with MVPD f may change depending on whether or not it is integrated with f . In Figure 2a,
the dashed square represents the fact that channel c is fully integrated with MVPD f (so that
OfMct = OfCct = 1) and another channel d; in this case, when bargaining with its integrated distributor
f , channel c will consider its own profits (denoted by πcmt ), consisting of affiliate fees and advertising
revenues, as well as profits of f and its integrated channel d (denoted by πf and πd ), weighted
by µ: i.e., ΠC
             cmt = πcmt + µ × (πf mt + πdmt ). We assume that πf mt includes f ’s subscription
revenues net of its costs, whereas profits πdmt include d’s affiliate fees and advertising revenues.
In Figure 2b, channel c is instead integrated with another MVPD g (and still channel d); in this
case, channel c will consider its own profits πcmt when bargaining with f (now a rival MVPD), as
well as those of its integrated units πgmt and πdmt , weighted by µ × λR and µ, respectively: i.e.,
ΠC
 cmt = πcmt + µ × ((λR × πgmt ) + πdmt ).
       The parameter λR (multiplied by µ) thus captures the internalization of an integrated down-
stream MVPD’s profits when an integrated channel bargains with another non-integrated distrib-
utor. In the case considered in Figure 2b, a higher value of λR increases channel c’s desire to
raise downstream profits of its fully integrated distributor g, and lowers c’s gains from trade when
bargaining with the non-integrated rival MVPD f . This may lead to an increased affiliate fee (τf ct )
for the rival distributor f . If the overall gains from trade are eliminated instead, it may lead to
non-supply of channel c to f altogether.34
  34
       When it does not lead to non-supply, a positive value of our rival foreclosure parameter λR will lead to an increased


                                                             18
    Finally, when c is only partially integrated with a distributor, the internalization parameter µ
is multiplied by our ownership share variable in firms’ perceived profits: e.g., in the case of external
bargaining with distributor f when c is partially integrated with distributor g, c’s perceived profits
are ΠC                 C
     cmt = πcmt + µ × Ogct × ((λR × πgmt ) + πdmt ).


Bargaining.        We assume that, given channel c is carried on some of MVPD f ’s systems, the
affiliate fee τf ct between distributor f and channel c maximizes their respective bilateral Nash
products given the expected negotiated affiliate fees of all other pairs and the expected prices and
bundles for all distributors. In other words, affiliate fees τt satisfy:
                                       "                                                                #ζf ct
                                               X
τf ct (τ−f c,t , Bt , pt ) = arg max                 [∆f c ΠM
                                                            f mt (Bmt , pmt , {τf ct , τ−f c,t }; µ)]                               (9)
                               τf ct
                                           m∈Mf ct
                                           |                           {z                          }
                                                                GF TfMct (τf ct ,·)
                                       "                                                                       #1−ζf ct
                                               X
                                   ×                 [∆f c ΠC
                                                            cmt (Bmt , pmt , {τf ct , τ−f c,t }; µ, λR )]                 ∀f, c ∈ Af t ,
                                           m∈Mf ct
                                           |                                {z                             }
                                                                   GF TfCct (τf ct ,·)


where Mf ct ≡ {m : c ∈ Bf mt } denotes the set of markets in which c is carried on f ’s bundle,
ζf ct ∈ [0, 1] represents a firm-channel-time specific Nash bargaining parameter, and:
                                                                                       
                          [∆f c ΠM
                                 f mt (Bmt , ·)]
                                                   M                 M
                                                ≡ Πf mt (Bmt , ·) − Πf mt (Bmt \ f c, ·) ,
                                                                                      
                                 C                 C                 C
                          [∆f c Πcmt (Bmt , ·)] ≡ Πcmt (Bmt , ·) − Πcmt (Bmt \ f c, ·) ,


where we denote by Bmt \ f c the set of all bundles in Bmt with channel c removed from bundle f .
These last two terms represent the difference in either MVPD or channel profits in market m if f
no longer carries channel c. We will refer to GF TfMct (τf ct , ·) and GF TfCct (τf ct , ·), which are the sums
of these terms across all markets, as the gains from trade for MVPD f and channel c coming to
an agreement with affiliate fee τf ct . We assume that each MVPD and channel negotiate a single
affiliate fee that applies to all markets.35
input fee for non-integrated downstream rivals by reducing c’s gains from trade. This “raising rivals’ costs” effect
differs from that in Salop and Scheffman (1983) and Krattenmaker and Salop (1986): in those papers, the supplier
has all the bargaining power and is motivated by the effect that raising its input price has on downstream prices to
consumers. With our simultaneous timing, channel c instead considers consumer prices as fixed when it bargains.
Nonetheless, in equilibrium an increase in c’s input fee can lead the non-integrated downstream distributor to raise its
bundle price to consumers, just as the equilibrium downstream price increases in the double-marginalization example
of Section 3.4.3 when the distributor’s effective affiliate fee increases there. (Although in our main counterfactual
specifications we assume that national satellite prices are held fixed, we also consider as an extension cases in which
satellite bundle prices can adjust on a local level.)
  35
     We rule out the possibility that RSNs are able to negotiate market-specific affiliate fees for each distributor
(thereby engaging in a form of price discrimination across markets). Such richer pricing could reduce the degree of
inefficient carriage decisions present in these markets, and thereby alter the welfare effects of vertical integration. To



                                                                  19
    In Appendix C.1, we show that when f and c share at most one common owner (which is the
case for all MVPD-channel pairs considered in our analysis), OfMct = OfCct ≡ Of ct . When this holds,
we can write the first-order condition of (9) for each channel c bargaining with MVPD f as:

                  (1 − ζf ct ) × GF TfMct (τf ct , ·) = ζf ct × GF TfCct (τf ct , ·)         ∀f, c ∈ Af t ,       (10)

which states that the equilibrium negotiated input fee τf ct between channel c and distributor f
equalizes their (weighted) gains-from-trade.36
     Alternatively, letting µf ct ≡ µ × Of ct , observe that GF TfMct (τf ct , ·) = GF TfMct (0, ·) − (1 −
µf ct ) m∈Mf ct Df mt τf ct and GF TfCct (τf ct , ·) = GF TfCct (0, ·)+ (1− µf ct ) × m∈Mf ct Df mt τf ct , where
       P                                                                             P

we omit the arguments of Df mt for convenience. Thus, we can rewrite (10) as:
                                    X
          [(1 − µf ct )τf ct ] ×             Df mt = (1 − ζf ct ) × GF TfMct (0, ·) − ζf ct × GF TfCct (0, ·) ,   (11)
                                   m∈Mf ct


which relates the “effective” total payments made by distributor f to channel c, given by the left
hand side of (11), to a weighted sum of the gains from trade due to agreement at τf ct = 0, given
by the right hand side. The effective total payments nets out the µf ct fraction of f ’s affiliate fee
payments to an integrated unit c that are not considered by f when making pricing, carriage, or
bargaining decisions (see (4)). Intuitively, the more that f gains from the relationship, the higher
the total (effective) payment that is made; the more that c gains from the relationship, the lower
the total payment. If f and c’s Nash bargaining parameters were equal, then ζf ct = 1/2 and the
total gain from trade would be split in half.
    For estimation and our counterfactual simulations, we assume Nash bargaining parameters
ζf ct = ζ I or ζf ct = ζ E depending on whether c and f are integrated (Of ct > 0) and bargain
internally (I), or are non-integrated (Of ct = 0) and bargain externally (E).

Bargaining Example.                Consider the case in which MVPD f and channel c are both non-
integrated entities that bargain with one another in period t. The negotiated affiliate fee τf ct
our knowledge, however, such contracts are not widely employed in this industry.
  36
     When f and c are bargaining with one another and µf ct ≡ µ × Of ct 6= 1:

                               ∂GF TfMct (·)   X ∂ΠMf mt
                                                                          X
                                             =           = −(1 − µf ct )                 Df mt ,
                                 ∂τf ct        m
                                                  ∂τf ct                 m∈M      f ct

                               ∂GF TfCct (·)   X ∂ΠC
                                                   cmt
                                                                        X
                                             =          = (1 − µf ct )                Df mt ;
                                 ∂τf ct        m
                                                 ∂τf ct                m∈M     f ct


thus ∂GF TfMct /∂τf ct = −∂GF TfCct /∂τf ct and (10) follows. The bargaining solution given by (9) is not defined if
µf ct = 1; in this case, f and c perfectly internalize each other’s profits when bargaining with one another, and the
negotiated τf ct is indeterminate.




                                                             20
that satisfies the Nash bargaining solution given by (11) solves:
                                                                                                   
                                                               [∆f c Df mt ](ppre-tax
           X                                         X
                   Df mt τf ct = (1 − ζf ct )                                 f mt    − mcf mt\f c )                            (12)
         m∈Mf ct                                m∈Mf ct
                                                |                           {z                          }
                                                                       GF TfMct (0,·)
                                                     X                            X                                   
                                    − (ζf ct )                 Df mt act +                   [∆f c Dgmt ] τgct + act        ,
                                                 m∈Mf ct                     g6=f :c∈Bgmt
                                                 |                                      {z                              }
                                                                                 GF TfCct (0,·)


where [∆f c Dgmt ] ≡ Dgmt (Bmt , ·)−Dgmt (Bmt \f c, ·) denotes the change in firm g’s demand in market
                                                                                 P
m and time t if channel c was removed from firm f ’s bundle, and mcf mt\f c ≡ d∈Bf mt \c τf dt +κf mt .
As before, the left hand side of (12) represents the total payment made by distributor f to channel
c. It is increasing in the additional profits (not including payments to c) that f receives from the
additional subscribers induced by the carriage of channel c (given by the first line of the right
hand side), decreasing in c’s advertising revenues due to f ’s subscribers (represented by the terms
Df mt act ), and increasing in c’s loss in profits from other distributors as a result of being carried
                                                                                        
on f (as [∆f c Dgmt ] < 0 for g 6= f ). This last term, given by [∆f c Dgmt ] τgct + act summed across
other distributors g, can be interpreted as an opportunity cost borne by channel c from supplying
distributor f , and relates the equilibrium affiliate fees that channel c receives from all distributors
to each other (Chen, 2001).

3.4.3    Remarks on Timing and Bargaining

Our bargaining solution assumes that each pair of distributors and channels agree upon a set
of affiliate fees that maximize the Nash product of their gains from trade. It is motivated by
the model put forth in Horn and Wolinsky (1988), and used by Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012)
to model negotiations between MVPDs and channels. Other empirical papers that employ this
concept, occasionally referred to as the “Nash-in-Nash” bargaining solution, include Draganska
et al. (2010), Grennan (2013), Gowrisankaran et al. (2015), and Ho and Lee (2017). Collard-Wexler
et al. (2015) provide a non-cooperative foundation for this particular bargaining solution based on
a model of alternating offer bargaining in settings where agents negotiate fixed fee transfers and
can engage in multilateral deviations.37
    Our model also assumes that bargaining over affiliate fees happens simultaneously with dis-
tributors making carriage and pricing decisions. This assumption simplifies the estimation and
computation of our model. For example, we leverage the simultaneity of bargaining and pricing in
deriving (10), as there is no anticipated change in pf mt if τf ct changes. Formally, one can think
of separate divisions of the distributor engaging in different functions or actions: e.g., a central
   37
      Our model differs from Collard-Wexler et al. in that agents negotiate over linear fees, τ . However, as (11) makes
clear, the total equilibrium payment that is made between a channel and a distributor in our setting (given deals
with other distributors) is equivalent to that when their bargaining is over a fixed fee.




                                                                 21
division bargains over affiliate fees, while local offices determine both pricing and carriage.38 An
alternative timing assumption would be to assume that affiliate fees are first negotiated, and then
distributor prices and bundles are chosen. This would adjust firms’ perceptions of off-equilibrium
path actions: e.g., when bargaining, firms would anticipate different bundle prices to be set imme-
diately if off-equilibrium path affiliate fees or disagreement were realized. However, there may be
reasons to believe that such a rapid response is unrealistic. Absent a fully specified dynamic model
of firm bargaining and pricing, which is outside the scope of the current analysis, we believe the
approach taken here to be a reasonable approximation.
       Nonetheless, in equilibrium, all supply decisions must satisfy the conditions put forth in (5), (6)
and (10): i.e., bundle prices and carriage are optimal with respect to equilibrium affiliate fees, and
affiliate fees are negotiated while conditioning on equilibrium bundle prices and carriage. Hence,
as the following example illustrates, when MVPD f integrates with channel c, lower negotiated
affiliate fees τf ct can still lead to a lower downstream price pf mt .

Example: Integration, Internalization, and Double Marginalization.                                 To illustrate both
how our model leads to double marginalization and the effect of changes in our internalization
parameter µ, consider a simple setting with a single channel c fully owned by a single MVPD f .
Downstream demand is D(p), while per subscriber costs are mcf for the MVPD (channel c incurs
no marginal costs). Given affiliate fee τ , MVPD f sets bundle price p = φ(mcf + (1 − µ)τ ), where
φ0 (·) > 0. On the other hand, given a bundle price p, the gains from trade (at an affiliate fee of
zero) for channel c and MVPD f are

                      GF TcC (0, ·) = 0 + µ × (p − mcf )D(p) = µ × (p − mcf )D(p)
                     GF TfM (0, ·) = (p − mcf )D(p) + µ × 0 = (p − mcf )D(p)

Hence, from (11), the negotiated affiliate fee is

                     (1 − µ)τ × D(p) = (1 − ζ)(p − mcf )D(p) − ζµ × (p − mcf )D(p)

so (1 − µ)τ = [(1 − ζ) − ζµ](p − mcf ). Thus, for a given p, an increase in µ lowers the effective
affiliate fee (1 − µ)τ considered by f when setting prices. The equilibrium price satisfies the fixed
point condition that p = φ(mcf + [(1 − ζ) − ζµ](p − mcf )). Provided that the stability condition
φ0 (·) < 1 is satisfied, an increase in µ also lowers the equilibrium price p.
  38
     Similar timing assumptions have been used in Nocke and White (2007), Draganska et al. (2010), and Ho and Lee
(2017), and is also implicit in the analysis described in Rogerson (2014). In Appendix B, we also discuss how our
external bargaining outcomes, given anticipated pricing and carriage decisions, can arise as the result of an alternating
offer bargaining game of the form studied by Collard-Wexler et al. (2015).




                                                           22
4     Estimation and Identification
In this section, we discuss the estimation of our model’s parameters and how they are identified
(given our modeling assumptions) from patterns in the data. We estimate all of our parameters
jointly in a single step; however, for exposition, we discuss our estimation procedure in two steps:

    1. We estimate θ ≡ {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 }, where:

        (a) θ1 ≡ {ρ, ν, γ d , γ b }, where ρ ≡ {ρ0c , ρ1c }∀c and ν ≡ {ν S , ν N S }, determines household
             viewership decisions by governing the distribution of γict , how fast marginal utilities from
             viewership decay, and the viewership utility reductions due to black-outs and distance
             to teams’ stadiums;
        (b) θ2 ≡ {β v , β x , ρsat , α}, where ρsat ≡ {ρsat         sat
                                                        DirecT V , ρDish }, determines household distributor
             choice;
        (c) θ3 ≡ {µ, ζ I , ζ E , σω2 } are parameters that affect firm incentives when pricing, bargaining,
             and determining carriage of channels. Recall that the parameter µ governs the extent
             to which integrated channels and distributors internalize profits across upstream and
             downstream units. Finally, σω2 is the variance of an error term that influences MVPDs’
             carriage decisions in a manner that we discuss below.

    2. We estimate (a lower bound for) our rival foreclosure parameter, λR .

    To capture the impact of program access rules, we will assume that λR = 0 in non-loophole
markets and estimate our first step parameters using only these markets. That is, we assume that
the program access rules effectively require integrated firms to ignore any foreclosure incentives in
dealing with non-integrated rivals.39 We then estimate λR using only the markets in our data in
which RSNs took advantage of the terrestrial loophole (i.e., Philadelphia and San Diego).
    Our estimation procedure conditions on the ownership structures of firms that are observed
in the data. We maintain the assumption that the integration status of a channel or distributor
does not directly affect viewership utility or distributor demand, and is not correlated with either
measurement error (e.g., in affiliate fees or markups) or market-level profit disturbances considered
by firms when bargaining or making pricing or carriage decisions.40
  39
     We take this approach as a simple reduced-form way to capture the effects of program access rules. In practice,
in markets subject to program access rules an integrated channel could attempt to deny access to a rival distributor
at the risk of triggering a binding arbitration process in which the negotiated affiliate fees with other distributors
might be used to determine the arbitrated price. Explicitly modeling this process is beyond the scope of the current
analysis, and we leverage the assumption that λR = 0 when PARs are enforced for tractability.
  40
     This does not rule out the possibility that integrated channels may differ in quality from non-integrated channels
(e.g., have different values of ρc ), as we estimate time varying channel taste parameters.




                                                          23
4.1     Estimation of Parameters θ1 , θ2 , θ3
4.1.1     Moments used in Estimation

We estimate the model parameters via GMM, using the following moments derived from the model
described in the previous section.

Household Viewership.            For every RSN and 38 national channels in each year, we use the
difference between the following viewership moments observed in the data and predicted by the
model:41

   1. Summing across markets, the mean viewership for each channel-year;

   2. Summing across markets, the number of households with zero viewership for each channel-
        year.42

Household Distributor Choice.               For every year and market, we assume that the unobserv-
able characteristic for each distributor’s bundle is orthogonal to a vector of instruments: i.e.,
E[ξf mt (θ)Zmt ] = 0, where the expectation is taken across all markets, firms, and years. For Zmt ,
we include: bundle observable characteristics xf mt ; the maximum fraction of teams carried by the
relevant RSNs in the market that are not blacked-out (to instrument for bundle utility vf∗mt ); and
the satellite tax within the market, interacted with an indicator for whether the bundle is offered
by a cable or satellite distributor (to instrument for bundle prices pf mt ).43 We recover ξf mt (θ)
using the standard Berry et al. (1995) inversion.

Distributor Bargaining, Pricing, and Carriage.                   First, for any θ, the vector of affiliate fees
{τf ct } and bundle-specific marginal costs {mcf mt } can be directly computed using the optimal
pricing and bargaining conditions given by (5) and (10) (see Appendix C.2 for further details). We
use these predicted values of {mcf mt (θ)} and {τf ct (θ)} in constructing the next set of moments
which we form using only 2007 data and values:

   1. Average affiliate fees: For each RSN active in 2007 and four national channels (ABC
        Family, ESPN, TNT, and USA), we minimize the difference between the model’s predicted
                                                                                                 o (where
        average affiliate fees across MVPDs and observed average affiliate fees: Ef [τf ct (θ)]−τct
        variables with an o superscript denote values of those objects that are observed in the data).
  41
     To avoid re-solving the viewership problem for every household for every evaluation of a candidate parameter
vector, we follow the importance sampling approach of Ackerberg (2009). See Appendix C.3 for further details.
  42
     The MRI/Simmons data provides an estimate of the probability that a channel is never watched for national
channels. We regress this probability on viewership, and use the estimated relationship to predict the probability
that an RSN is never watched.
  43
     The satellite tax changes that we use, by state year and percentage increase, are: CT 2003, 5%; FL 2002, 10%;
KY 2006, 5%; MA 2009, 5%; NC 2003, 7%; OH 2003, 6%; and UT 2003, 5%. We discuss these instruments further
in Section 5.2 and in footnote 55.




                                                       24
       We weight estimated affiliate fees by national MVPD market shares conditional on observed
       carriage of the channel to approximate expectations across MVPDs.
       Deviations in these and the next set of moments for implied markups reflect both measurement
       error in the data and sampling error, as our predictions are computed using a subset of U.S.
       markets.

   2. Implied markups: For each distributor f ∈ {Comcast, DirecT V, Dish}, we minimize the
       difference between the model’s predicted MVPD price-cost margin and those observed in the
       data: Em [(pof mt − mcf mt (θ))/pof mt ] − markupof t .

   3. RSN Carriage: Equation (6) implies that every cable distributor f chooses the optimal set
       of channels (from among those with which it has agreements) to include in each market m’s
       bundle. We assume that distributor f ’s true per household profits (not per subscriber) in
       market m are given by π̃fMmt (·), where:

                                    π̃fMmt (Bmt , ·) ≡ [πfMmt (Bmt , ·) − ωf mt (Bf mt )] ,                      (13)

       and πfMmt (Bmt , ·) represents our (the econometrician’s) estimate of a firm’s per household
       profits. The term ωf mt (Bf mt ) represents a mean-zero i.i.d. bundle-distributor-market-time
       specific disturbance; we assume that ωf mt (·) ∼ N (0, σω2 ).44
       If channel c has negotiated an agreement with some firm f : (i.e., f carries c on its bundles in
       some non-empty set of markets), then firm f ’s optimal carriage decision given by (6) implies
       that:
                                                                              
                    [∆f c πfMmt (Bmt ∪ f c, ·)] − [∆f c ωf mt (Bf mt ∪ f c, ·)] ≥ 0           ∀m : c ∈ Bf mt ,   (14)
                                                                              
                    [∆f c πfMmt (Bmt ∪ f c, ·)] − [∆f c ωf mt (Bf mt ∪ f c, ·)] ≤ 0           ∀m : c ∈
                                                                                                     / Bf mt ,

       where [∆f c πfMmt (Bmt , ·)] ≡ πfMmt (Bmt , ·) − πfMmt (Bmt \ f c, ·), [∆f c ωf mt (Bf mt )] ≡ ωf mt (Bf mt ) −
       ωf mt (Bf mt \ f c), and Bmt ∪ f c denotes the set of all bundles Bmt where c is added to bundle
       f .45 That is, these inequalities imply that in any market in which c is carried by f , f obtains
       higher profits from carrying than by dropping c (holding fixed prices and carriage decisions
       of other firms); similarly, in any market where c is not carried, f obtains higher profits from
       not carrying than by carrying c.
       Given our assumptions on the distribution of ωf mt (·), it follows that:

                                Pr(c ∈ Bf mt ) = Φ([∆f c πfMmt (Bmt ∪ f c, ·)]/(2σω )) ,                         (15)
  44
     We interpret ωf mt (·) as the difference between our estimated profits and those used by a local system operator
when determining carriage decisions; we assume that these disturbances are not accounted for by a distributor when
pricing or bargaining with channels.
  45
     In cases where c ∈ Bf mt , this definition implies that Bmt ∪ f c = Bmt .




                                                          25
 Table 1: Regression of RSN Carriage on Integration Status, Distance, and Blackout Percentage

                                                        (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)
              VI Ownership Share                     0.404***        0.435***      0.293***     0.171**
                                                     (0.0674)        (0.0837)       (0.110)    (0.0852)
              % Teams not Blacked Out                0.412***        0.399***      0.429***    0.477***
                                                     (0.0494)        (0.0586)       (0.109)     (0.107)
              Avg Distance to RSN’s Stadiums        -0.559***       -0.630***     -0.838***   -0.795***
              (103 mi)                                (0.100)         (0.117)       (0.238)     (0.284)

              Years                                  2000-10          2007         2007         2007
              Systems                              All Systems    All Systems     Has P Q      Has P Q
              Has Deal                                  No             No           No           Yes
              Observations                           154,121         12,246        1,132        1,052
              R-squared                               0.615           0.616        0.670        0.639

Notes: Linear probability regression where the dependent variable is whether a cable system carries an RSN in a
relevant market in 2007. Specifications differ by sample used, where “Has P Q” restricts attention to systems for which
price and quantity data is available, and “Has Deal” restricts attention to system-RSN pairs where the MVPD has a
deal with the RSN (i.e., carries the RSN on at least one other system). All specifications use DMA, RSN and (when
appropriate) year fixed effects. Inclusion of system demographic controls (race, population density, average income,
household ownership) did not appreciably change point estimates. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standards errors
are reported in parenthesis, and are clustered by DMA.


      where Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.

      We construct several moments based on the model’s predicted carriage probabilities. First,
      we construct moments based on indirect inference (cf. Gouriéroux and Monfort (1996)) that
      match the predicted to observed relationship between carriage of a relevant RSN by a system
      and (i) the ownership share of the RSN by the system’s MVPD, (ii) the distance of the
      system to the RSN’s teams’ stadiums, and (iii) the fraction of teams on the RSN that are not
      blacked-out. Table 1 presents the results of a linear probability regression predicting whether
      a cable system carries a relevant RSN in our data. We find that carriage of an RSN by a cable
      system is increasing with the share of the RSN owned by the system’s MVPD, and decreasing
      in the distance between the system and the RSN’s teams’ stadiums and in the fraction of
      teams that are blacked-out. We perform the same regression using the predicted carriage
      probabilities from our model, and match the estimated coefficients for vertical integration,
      distance, and the fraction of teams not blacked-out from this regression to the coefficients in
      specification (4) in Table 1.46
      Second, we calculate the probability that an RSN is carried by a cable distributor in a relevant
      market, and match the probability that is observed in the data to that predicted by our model
      via (15).47 Third, we set ∂Lcarriage /∂σω = 0, where Lcarriage is the predicted log-likelihood
   46
      We focus on the “Has Deal” specification as our model does not predict the probability of carriage for a system
if the MVPD and channel do not have a deal.
   47
      E.g., if there are only two RSNs A and B, and A is carried on cable in 30/40 of A’s relevant markets, and B is
carried on cable in 25/60 of B’s relevant markets, the probability than an RSN is carried by a cable distributor in a
relevant market is 0.55.




                                                          26
        of the observed market-level RSN carriage decisions by cable MVPDs, given by:
                        X       X                                                                                
          Lcarriage =                          1{c∈Bf mt } × log Pr(c ∈ Bf mt ) + 1{c∈B
                                                                                     / f mt } × log Pr(c ∈
                                                                                                         / Bf mt ) ,
                        c∈CtR f m:c∈Af t


        where CtR denotes the set of RSNs, and Af t are the set of channels available to MVPD f .

4.1.2     Identification of Parameters θ1 , θ2 and θ3

We now provide a discussion of how these moments and variation in the data help identify the
parameters of our model (given our assumptions and functional forms that are employed).

Viewership and Distributor Choice Parameters (θ1 , θ2 ).                          The main parameters governing
the distribution of channel taste parameters γict (i.e., ρ) are primarily identified from viewing
behavior: channels that are watched at all by a larger fraction of households have higher values of
ρ0c (the probability that γict > 0), and those that conditional upon being watched are watched more
often have higher values of ρ1c (the mean of the distribution). However, since we do not possess
ratings for RSNs at the market level, we identify the black-out and distance parameters (γ b and
γ d ) from the RSN Carriage moments; we defer discussion of these parameters until the end of this
subsection when discussing identification of µ.
   Parameters governing household bundle choice (β x and β v ) are identified from variation in
bundle market shares as observed bundle characteristics (including its viewership utility) changes;
Table A.1 summarizes the substantial variation in prices and channel carriage across markets.
Viewership utility varies as a function of the set of channels that are carried and, if an RSN is
carried, whether the market is further from teams’ stadiums or if teams carried are blacked-out.
Since firms may respond to local demand shocks when determining carriage, we instrument for
viewership utility using the fraction of blacked-out teams on RSNs in each relevant market. The
satellite tax is an instrument for price, and is used to identify the price sensitivity coefficient α.
Information contained in cable and satellite pricing margins helps identify the heterogeneity in
preferences for satellite. In particular, the relationship between satellite and cable market shares
has strict implications for predicted price elasticities (and hence implied markups) under a standard
logit demand system without preference heterogeneity; inclusion of a random preference for satellite
(parameterized by ρsat ) assists with rationalizing observed markups for a given satellite market
share.
   In addition to observing how bundle market shares vary based on channel composition (which
has limited variation for some channels across markets), matching observed average affiliate fees
                              o } to those predicted by the model {τ
negotiated for each channel {τct                                    f ct (θ)} is crucial for identifying
the values that consumers place on channels. First, our model relates τf ct (θ) to the gains from
trade created when channel c contracts with firm f : i.e., differences in f and c’s profits (primarily
realized from subscription and advertising revenues) when f drops c. Thus, our model attempts to
                                                           o by predicting that this channel creates
rationalize a channel with higher observed affiliate fees τct

                                                              27
                                     ∗ in a household’s distributor utility equation given by (2),
greater demand through the term β v vif t
which in turn is also a function of parameters governing the distribution of γict , and how γict is
scaled to enter into utility by a “decay parameter” (either νcS for sports channels or νcN S for non-
sports channels)—i.e., a channel with a higher γict and lower decay parameter than another will
contribute more to a viewer’s utility from the same amount of time the channel is watched.48
       Our choice to allow different values of decay parameters for sports and non-sports channels is
motivated by the data, illustrated in Figure 3. Sports channels have consistently higher negotiated
affiliate fees than non-sports channels with similar viewership patterns (ratings), often receiving
payments an order of a magnitude higher. Our model rationalizes this fact by assigning a higher
decay rate to sports channels than to non-sports channels. This implies that, for a given amount
of time spent watching, consumers derive higher utility from sports than non-sports channels, and
sports channels obtain higher affiliate fees due to the greater gains from trade. Furthermore, levels
of decay parameters are identified by the change in viewership of channels as the availability of
other channels varies, and by the variation in ratings and fees within sports or non-sports channels:
e.g., a higher value of ν S reduces the amount by which greater viewership for a sports channel
translates into higher generated utility and, hence, higher affiliate fees.
       To anchor the discussion in the past two paragraphs in an example, consider a single market and
bundle with two non-integrated channels c and d, and a single household i; ignore the time index
t. Assume that the household watches d more than c. This could be induced by many potential
combinations of (γic , νc , γid , νd ). For example, γid could be higher than γic and νc = νd . If this
were true, however, then d should obtain higher negotiated affiliate fees as it would be predicted
to generate a higher surplus for a viewer, and hence there would be greater gains from trade from
carriage of d than c. However, if affiliate fees are observed to be the same for the two channels
despite the difference in viewership, then the model would predict that the rate of “decay” (νc )
and initial utility (γc ) for channel c were in fact higher than for channel d, thereby allowing c
to generate the same utility for consumers—and hence the same negotiated affiliate fees—for the
shorter amount of time watched.

Bargaining, Pricing, and Carriage Parameters (θ3 ).                     Although the internalization parame-
ter µ enters into the computation of several moments (including any moment based off of recovered
values of τf ct (θ) and mcf mt (θ)), we expect it is identified primarily off of the RSN Carriage mo-
ments. As µ increases, distributors have a greater incentive to carry a channel for a fixed value of
τf ct (·), (positive) level of integration (Of ct > 0), and the contribution of the channel to downstream
profits. Hence, this parameter will help to rationalize higher carriage rates between integrated dis-
tributors and channels observed in the data and captured in the regression coefficients reported in
Table 1. Black-out and distance parameters, γ b , γ d , are identified in a similar fashion.
       An example of the variation in the data that we leverage is illustrated in Figure 4, which presents
  48
    For computational reasons, during estimation we restrict ν S to lie on a coarse grid while allowing all other
parameters to vary freely; see Appendix C.3 for further details and robustness tests. See also the discussion in the
appendix of Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) which examines a variant of this model using Monte Carlo simulation.


                                                        28
                                            Monthly Input Fees vs Ratings
                                                 Sports and Non-Sports




                             4
                             3
                        Input Fees
                             2
                             1
                             0




                                     0   .005       .01             .015      .02   .025
                                                          Ratings

                                                  Non-Sports         Sports



                   Figure 3: Negotiated monthly affiliate fees and viewership ratings.


the integrated and non-integrated carriage of a Comcast integrated RSN in three different regions
of the U.S. In these three settings, cable systems in markets close to the RSN’s teams’ stadiums
almost always carry the RSN; systems far away most often do not. However, in markets located
a moderate distance away from these stadiums, these RSNs are much more likely to be carried
on systems owned by Comcast than on non-integrated systems. For example, in Figure 4a, all
Comcast systems in northern Vermont carry CSN New England (denoted by black dots) whereas
most non-Comcast systems (denoted by grey dots for systems that carry the RSN, and grey X’s
for those that do not) do not carry CSN New England; and in Figures 4b and 4c, non-carriage by
non-Comcast systems occurs much closer to the RSN’s teams’ stadiums than for Comcast systems
(as there is a higher ratio of grey X’s to grey dots near Washington DC and Chicago than of black
X’s, denoting non-carriage by Comcast systems, to black dots). These maps also indicate that
non-carriage is much more likely in areas where the teams on the RSN are blacked-out (as in New
York for CSN New England, Pennsylvania for CSN Mid-Atlantic, and Michigan for CSN Chicago).
    Next, different values for the Nash bargaining parameters {ζ I , ζ E } affect the model’s ability to
match the relationship between factors influencing MVPD and channel “gains from trade” with
negotiated input fees. For example, consider a non-integrated MVPD f and RSN c. If ζ E = 0
(so that the Nash bargaining parameter for distributors is equal to 0 when bargaining with a non-
integrated channel), the bargaining first-order conditions given by (11) imply that input fees τf ct
would be determined solely by MVPD f ’s gains from trade from carrying channel c (GF TfMct ), and
not by channel c’s gains from trade (GF TfCct ). This implies that channel c’s advertising revenues act ,
which enter only into GF TfCct , would not affect negotiated input fees if ζ E = 0. Thus, controlling
for viewership, the extent to which observed channel affiliate fees vary with advertising revenues
identifies ζ E .
    Finally, we identify the variance of carriage disturbances σω2 from our carriage moments. Recall



                                                          29
      (a) Carriage of CSN New England                        (b) Carriage of CSN Mid-Atlantic




                                        (c) Carriage of CSN Chicago

Figure 4: Carriage by Comcast and non-integrated cable MVPDs of three Comcast-integrated
RSNs across cable systems in 2007. Dots represent carriage by a system, X’s represent no carriage.
Black markers represent Comcast systems, grey markers represent non-Comcast cable systems.


that these carriage moments include matching the overall probability that an RSN is carried by a
cable distributor in a relevant market, and setting the derivative of the log-likelihood of observing
the carriage decisions in the data with respect to σω to zero. As this variance increases while
holding all other parameters fixed, the predicted carriage probability for any channel approaches
1/2 as carriage decisions become based purely on noise. Thus, lower values of σω2 indicate that our
model’s predicted changes in distributor’s profits from carrying a channel can be used to predict


                                                    30
observed carriage decisions. Note also that while σω2 can be estimated using information on carriage
rates for non-integrated firms only, the identification argument for our internalization parameter µ
relies on carriage rates for both non-integrated and integrated firms.

4.2     Estimation of Rival Foreclosure Parameter λR
To recover lower bounds for our rival foreclosure parameter λR , we will use information provided
by markets in which distributors are able to exclude competitors from carrying an integrated RSN
channel—i.e., terrestrial loophole markets. The markets we focus on are Philadelphia and San
Diego, the channels in question CSN Philadelphia (owned by Comcast) and 4SD (owned by Cox),
and the competitors excluded from carriage are satellite distributors DirecTV and Dish.
    Observe that because these two markets both had total exclusion of satellite distributors, we
will only be able to estimate a lower bound on λR , which we will denote by λR . Intuitively, this
lower bound will be the lowest level of λR at which there are no mutual gains from trade between
the RSN and either satellite distributor (i.e., at which the gains from exclusion exceed the gains
from carriage). In general, however, whether there are gains from trade between an RSN and
a satellite distributor depends on the satellite firm’s beliefs about whether, if it is supplied, the
other satellite firm will also be supplied. In Appendix B we show that a necessary condition for
non-supply, regardless of the satellite firm’s beliefs, is that the joint profit of the RSN c and the
two satellite firms g and g 0 is reduced when both satellite firms have access to the RSN, which can
be stated as:

         "
   X
                                          0                                                        0
             [∆gc,g0 c ΠM      o                 o                            M         o                 o
                        gmt ({Bmt ∪ {gc, g c}}, pmt , τ̃ ; µ̂)] + [∆gc,g 0 c Πg 0 mt ({Bmt ∪ {gc, g c}}, pmt , τ̃ ; µ̂)] . . .
 m∈Mc
                                                                               #
                                                  0
                   + [∆gc,g0 c ΠC      o                 o
                                cmt ({Bmt ∪ {gc, g c}}, pmt , τ̃ ; µ̂, λR )] ≤ 0 ,                                        (16)


where the left-hand side of the inequality, which we refer to as the “three-party surplus,” represents
g, g 0 , and c’s joint gains from trade from both g and g 0 being supplied with channel c and carrying
the channel in all of g’s relevant markets, and τ̃ equals the predicted values of affiliate fees τ̂ (·)
except that τ̃gct = τ̃g0 ct = 0.49
    We can therefore estimate a lower bound for λR that holds for any beliefs held by a satellite
firm about whether the RSN will also be supplied to the rival satellite firm by finding the lowest
value λR that makes (16) hold for both of the loophole-market cable-integrated RSNs that do not
contract with the satellite distributors (CSN Philadelphia and 4SD).50 We estimate a separate lower
  49
     Specifically, we show that in an alternating offer bargaining game of the form studied by Collard-Wexler et al.
(2015), if the three-party-surplus is positive, then RSN c has a deviating pair of offers {τ̃gc , τ̃g0 c } to both satellite
distributors that both will accept regardless of their beliefs over whether, if they are supplied, their rival will also be
supplied, and will increase c’s profits. See Appendix B for a formal derivation and discussion of the idea behind this
result.
  50
     An alternative would be to assume that when approached by the RSN to negotiate supply, a satellite firm holds


                                                               31
bound for each market (i.e., λPRhil and λSD
                                         R ).


Incentives for Exclusion. It is instructive at this point to discuss the competing forces that
would induce a cable provider to withhold its integrated RSN from a satellite provider. This is
equivalent to understanding why the gains created when satellite distributors are supplied with the
RSN may be offset by the losses incurred by the integrated cable provider.
    The primary gains created when a satellite distributor g is supplied with the RSN are through
potential market expansion effects from carriage: i.e., if consumers who previously did not subscribe
to an MVPD now would if satellite were to carry the RSN. Each household that substitutes from
the outside good to g would generate additional industry profit equal to the level of g’s margins
plus any additional advertising revenues generated by those households watching the RSN.
    The primary losses generated by supplying g with the RSN would be incurred by the RSN’s
integrated cable distributor if households substituted away from the integrated cable provider to
g. Although these consumers would generate profit for g, insofar as cable margins are higher than
those of satellite providers (by 10+ percentage points in our data), any household that switched
from cable to satellite as a result of supplying satellite with the RSN would reduce industry profit
by this difference in margins.
    Consequently, factors that make exclusion of satellite by an integrated cable owner (for λR > 0)
more likely include: (i) a smaller share of consumers that are not subscribers to any MVPD and
lower advertising rates (thereby reducing the potential gains generated by market expansion); (ii)
a larger cable “footprint” (market share) in the RSN’s relevant market area; (iii) closer substi-
tutability between satellite and cable distribution; and (iv) a larger differential between cable and
satellite margins (all of which would exacerbate the losses from business stealing by satellite from
cable). For all such factors, lower values of λR (closer to 0) cause any losses incurred by the RSN’s
integrated owner to be internalized less by the RSN when bargaining with g, reducing the likelihood
of exclusion occurring.


5     Results and Parameter Estimates
Estimates of selected key parameters of our model are reported in Table 2. We discuss our estimates
primarily through how they influence predicted moments relating to consumer viewership and
subscription patterns, firm pricing and carriage decisions, and negotiated agreements.


5.1    Viewership Parameters
The willingness-to-pay (WTP) for each channel can be derived by computing the contribution of
                                                       ∗ in (2)), multiplying it by our estimates
a given channel to bundle utility for each household (vijt
of parameters β v /α to convert it into dollars, and averaging across households (as households have
the belief that the rival satellite firm will not be supplied. The approach we employ instead provides a lower bound
for λR that holds for any beliefs.



                                                        32
                                    Table 2: Estimates of Key Parameters

                             Parameter         Description                                         Estimate     SE
  Viewership                 νNS               Viewership Decay, Non-sports                             0.59   0.00
  Parameters                 νS                Viewership Decay, Sports                                 0.95      -
  θ1                         γb                Fraction of Teams Blacked-out                           -0.58   0.31
                             γ d (103 mi)      Distance                                                -0.93   0.27
  Bundle Choice              α                 Bundle Price                                            -1.00   0.44
  Parameters                 βv                Bundle Viewership Utility                                0.14   0.07
  θ2                         ρsat          2
                              DirecT V (10 )   DirecTV Exponential Parameter                            0.42   0.23
                             ρsat
                              Dish (10 2
                                         )     Dish Exponential Parameter                               0.49   0.27
  Pricing, Bargaining,       σω2               Variance of Carriage Shocks                              0.00   0.00
  Carriage and               ζE                Bargaining, External                                     0.28   0.03
  Foreclosure Parameters     ζI                Bargaining, Internal                                     0.37   0.06
  θ3 , λR                    µ                 Internalization                                          0.79   0.09
                             µ × λPR
                                     hil
                                               Internalization & Rival Foreclosure, Philadelphia        1.11   0.14
                                   SD
                             µ × λR            Internalization & Rival Foreclosure, San Diego           0.94   0.11

Notes: Selected key parameters from the first and second step estimation of the full model, where parameter ν S is
estimated separately via a grid search (see Appendix C.3). Additional viewership parameters contained in θ1 are
reported in Appendix Table A.4; state-firm and year fixed effects in θ2 are not reported. Asymptotic GMM standard
errors are computed using numerical derivatives and 1500 bootstrap draws of markets and simulated households to
estimate the variance-covariance matrix of the moments.


different tastes (γict ) for each channel, which are distributed according to parameters ρ).51 We
report estimated values of these parameters and WTPs in 2007 for all channels in Appendix Ta-
ble A.4. We also depict the distribution of household WTPs for nine national channels, conditional
on being positive, in Figure 5a, with the fraction of households with positive valuations listed for
each channel. Although most national channels have average WTP values below $1 per month (and
other than sports channel ESPN, none exceed $2), the pattern is very different for RSNs: none are
predicted to have average WTP values less than $1 per month, and over 70% are greater than $2.
    Our estimates of the RSN distance-decay parameter γ d and blackout parameter γ b are negative,
and imply that consumers derive less utility from watching an RSN both (i) the further they are
from the teams carried on the RSN, and (ii) the greater the fraction of teams that are blacked out.
We predict that increasing the average distance of a household from an RSN’s teams’ stadiums from
0 to 100 miles reduces that household’s value of the channel by approximately 9%.52 Figure 5b
illustrates this pattern, and plots the predicted average WTP in 2007 for four different RSNs as
the distance from a household to an RSN’s teams’ stadiums increases.53 Similarly, we predict that
subjecting half of the teams that an RSN normally broadcasts to blackout restrictions reduces
consumers’ valuation of the channel by 25%.
    Finally, we estimate ν N S to be different than ν S . The lower estimated value of ν N S implies
  51
     We compute the average WTP for channels relative to a synthetic bundle that includes every national channel
carried by at least 60% of systems in 2007, and by using 20,000 simulated households. When computing the WTP
for an RSN c, we add the RSN to the synthetic bundle and use the average values of bict and dic across all markets
that carry the RSN.
  52
     As distance is measured in thousands of miles, being further away by 100 miles scales utility by exp(γ̂ d × 0.1).
  53
     Each point in Figure 5b corresponds to a market in which the RSN is carried in 2007, and the WTP for each
market is computed by averaging over 160 simulated households per market using that market’s value of bict and dic .



                                                         33
                                                                                                   AMC                                                                       CNN                                                       Discovery Channel




                                                Fraction of Consumers




                                                                                                                                    Fraction of Consumers




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fraction of Consumers
                                                                        0.4                        Frac Positive: 0.313                                     0.4              Frac Positive: 0.583                                          0.4             Frac Positive: 0.597
                                                                        0.3                                                                                 0.3                                                                            0.3
                                                                        0.2                                                                                 0.2                                                                            0.2
                                                                        0.1                                                                                 0.1                                                                            0.1
                                                                        0                                                                                   0                                                                              0
                                                                              0                   10               20         30                                  0         10        20                      30                                 0        10        20        30
                                                                                    Monthly WTP in Dollars                                                            Monthly WTP in Dollars                                                         Monthly WTP in Dollars

                                                                                                  ESPN                                                            Food Network                                                             Fox News Channel
                                                Fraction of Consumers




                                                                                                                                    Fraction of Consumers




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fraction of Consumers
                                                                        0.4                        Frac Positive: 0.295                                     0.4              Frac Positive: 0.417                                          0.4             Frac Positive: 0.487
                                                                        0.3                                                                                 0.3                                                                            0.3
                                                                        0.2                                                                                 0.2                                                                            0.2
                                                                        0.1                                                                                 0.1                                                                            0.1
                                                                        0                                                                                   0                                                                              0
                                                                              0                   10               20         30                                  0         10        20                      30                                 0        10        20        30
                                                                                    Monthly WTP in Dollars                                                            Monthly WTP in Dollars                                                         Monthly WTP in Dollars

                                                                                                       MTV                                                                   TNT                                                                            USA
                                                Fraction of Consumers




                                                                                                                                    Fraction of Consumers




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fraction of Consumers
                                                                        0.4                        Frac Positive: 0.250                                     0.4              Frac Positive: 0.533                                          0.4             Frac Positive: 0.417
                                                                        0.3                                                                                 0.3                                                                            0.3
                                                                        0.2                                                                                 0.2                                                                            0.2
                                                                        0.1                                                                                 0.1                                                                            0.1
                                                                        0                                                                                   0                                                                              0
                                                                              0                   10               20         30                                  0         10        20                      30                                 0        10        20        30
                                                                                    Monthly WTP in Dollars                                                            Monthly WTP in Dollars                                                         Monthly WTP in Dollars




                          (a) Histograms of monthly WTP (conditional on being positive) for selected national channels.



                                  CSN Chicago                                                                  CSN Philadelphia
                 10                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Estimates: Monthly WTP vs Ratings
                 8                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sports and Non-Sports
      Mean WTP




                                                                                       Mean WTP




                 6                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                              10




                 4                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                     Estimated Mean WTP
                                                                                                                                                                                                      8




                 2                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                6




                 0                                                                                0
                      0     0.1     0.2   0.3   0.4                           0.5                      0     0.1        0.2   0.3                           0.4       0.5
                  Distance to Team Stadium (000s mi)                                               Distance to Team Stadium (000s mi)
                                                                                                                                                                                          4




                              Fox Sports Detroit                                                           SportsNet New York (SNY)
                 10                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                              2




                 8                                                                                8
      Mean WTP




                                                                                       Mean WTP




                 6                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                 4                                                                                4                                                                                                       0                                                          .005                   .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Estimated Ratings
                 2                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Non-Sports         Sports
                 0                                                                                0
                      0     0.1     0.2   0.3   0.4                           0.5                      0     0.1        0.2   0.3                           0.4       0.5
                  Distance to Team Stadium (000s mi)                                               Distance to Team Stadium (000s mi)




   (b) Mean WTP in a market versus distance to RSN’s                                                                                                                              (c) Estimated monthly WTP versus estimated rat-
   teams’ stadiums, for four RSNs.                                                                                                                                                ings for sports and non-sports channels

                                  Figure 5: Predicted willingness-to-pay (WTP) for channels (2007 values).


that consumers’ marginal utility from watching non-sports channels falls slower than for sports
channels; in turn, this implies that consumers derive higher utility from sports channels than non-
sports channels if they choose to spend the same amount of time spent watching each. Our model
thus predicts that sports channels receive higher negotiated affiliate fees for the same viewership
ratings, as depicted in Figure 5c for the year 2007.




                                                                                                                                                                             34
                                         Table 3: Elasticities and Margins

                  Elasticity of row with respect to price of column:          Cable     DirecTV       Dish
                                                               Cable           -1.69         0.30      0.19
                                                            DirecTV             2.16        -2.90      0.13
                                                                Dish            3.18         0.22     -4.15
                                                    Outside Option              5.52         0.26      0.16

                  Predicted Margins
                                              Mean Comcast Margin               0.66
                                              Mean DirecTV Margin               0.48
                                                 Mean Dish Margin               0.45

                  Logit Demand Price Coefficients
                                     OLS Logit Price Coefficient           -0.004**      (0.002)
                                       IV Logit Price Coefficient         -0.080***      (0.025)

                              Semi-Elasticity of row with respect to
                                    removal of ESPN from column:              Cable     DirecTV        Dish
                                                              Cable           -18.90        3.86       2.36
                                                           DirecTV             54.82      -19.52       1.11
                                                               Dish            51.16        1.85     -19.67
                                                    Outside Option             17.27        0.22       0.14

Notes: This table reports predicted mean price elasticities, predicted margins for Comcast and the two satellite
distributors, the estimated price coefficient from a logit demand regression without (OLS) and with (IV) the use of
price instruments (where standard errors clustered at market level), and semi-elasticities from dropping the national
channel ESPN. For logit demand estimates, **, *** represent significance at the 5% and 1% levels.


5.2       Distributor Choice Parameters
All reported coefficients in θ2 are statistically significant at the 5% level, and have the expected
sign: consumers negatively respond to price (α), and positively respond to the indirect utility they
receive from a bundle’s channels (β v ).
       At the top of Table 3 we report the average own- and cross-price elasticities that are predicted
by our model. Demand for the average cable system is more inelastic (-1.7) than for satellite (-2.9
and -4.2), which is consistent with higher cable market shares and margins that are both observed in
the data and predicted by our model.54 Estimated values of ρsat           sat
                                                            DirecT V and ρDish indicate consumers
have substantial heterogeneity in their valuation for satellite bundles (a standard deviation of ap-
proximately $40 per month); as discussed earlier, such heterogeneity assists the model in matching
observed Comcast, DirecTV, and Dish price-cost margins. The implied average predicted margins
are given in the second panel of Table 3.
       To illustrate the efficacy of instruments described in the previous section (which include satellite
  54
     Our estimates can be compared to Goolsbee and Petrin (2004), who estimate household demand for satellite, basic
cable, premium cable, and local antenna using 2001 data; they obtain an expanded basic cable own-price elasticity
of -1.5, and an overall satellite own-price elasticity of -2.5. They do not observe cross-sectional variation in prices for
satellite distributors, and rely on Slutsky symmetry to identify satellite price elasticities. Our estimated own-price
elasticity for cable is similar, and the overall satellite own-price elasticity implied by our own- and cross-price elasticity
estimates for DirecTV and Dish, computed at average market shares during our sample period (see Table A.1), is
-3.2.



                                                             35
taxes), the third panel of Table 3 reports the results from a logit demand regression.55 Instrumenting
for price yields a 22 times larger estimated price coefficient, consistent with the presence of a positive
correlation between prices and unobservable bundle characteristics.
    The bottom panel of Table 3 reports the semi-elasticity for MVPDs and the outside option given
the removal of ESPN from each type of distributor (cable or either of the two satellite providers).
For example, the removal of ESPN from DirecTV’s bundles implies that its own market share
would fall by 19.5%, while those for cable and Dish would increase by 3.9% and 1.8% respectively.
This implies that for every 1000 households that would leave DirecTV if it lost access to ESPN,
920 would substitute to cable, 67 would substitute to Dish, and 13 would go to the outside option.
These types of diversion figures, and in particular those to cable, play a central role in the incentives
of an integrated cable provider to deny access to a rival satellite distributor.

5.3     Pricing, Bargaining, Carriage and Foreclosure Parameters
We now discuss the parameters contained in θ3 which govern a firm’s pricing, bargaining and
carriage decisions, as well as our rival foreclosure parameter λR .
    First, we estimate that the variance of firms’ bundle-market-time specific profit shocks (σ̂ω2 ) is
neither economically nor statistically significant. We estimate that channels capture more than
half of the gains from trade when bargaining, although less with integrated distributors (ζ̂ I = 0.38)
than non-integrated distributors (ζ̂ E = 0.28).
    Our estimated value of µ indicates that firms internalize a substantial fraction, but not all, of
the profits of other integrated units when making decisions. Only $0.79 of each dollar of profit
realized by its integrated partner is internalized when an integrated MVPD makes pricing and
carriage decisions, or when integrated MVPDs and RSNs bargain with each other. (We reject the
hypothesis of full internalization at standard confidence levels.)
    Our estimated lower bounds for µ × λPRhil and µ × λSD
                                                       R are 1.11 and 0.94; these indicate that
integrated channels’ supply decisions vis-à-vis non-integrated rival distributors are significantly
affected by foreclosure incentives, and these weights placed on the benefits of rival foreclosure for
the channel’s integrated distributors are not stastically significantly different from 1.56 Figure 6
   55
       For 20,784 firm-market-year bundles, the dependent variable is the log of the ratio of market shares for the
bundle to the outside option, and the OLS regressors are firm-state and year fixed effects, channel fixed effects for
all channels contained in the bundle, and price. The excluded instruments for price in the IV regression are the
satellite tax within the market interacted with an indicator for whether the bundle is offered by a satellite or cable
distributor, and the maximum fraction of teams not blacked out within the market across all RSNs for which the
market is relevant. The F-statistic on the excluded instruments in the first stage regression of price is 425.4; the
t-statistic for satellite taxes interacted with a satellite distributor indicator in the first stage price regression is 35; and
the R2 from the regression is 0.52. Additionally, an important input into distributor demand elasticities with respect
to carriage is the coefficient on mean viewership utility in the distributor choice utility equation in (2). The first
stage regression of vf∗mt on the same set of instruments for price results in an F-statistic on the excluded instruments
of 389.4; the t-statistic for the maximum fraction of teams not blacked out is 33; and the R2 from the regression is
0.56.
   56
      Given µ̂ = 0.79, these estimates imply that λP   R
                                                         hil
                                                             is at least 1.4 and λSD
                                                                                   R  at least 1.3, which corresponds to the
integrated channel placing more weight on its integrated distributor’s benefits from foreclosure than the channel and
distributor place on each other’s profits when pricing, making carriage decisions, and bargaining with each other.
However, we cannot reject the hypothesis that either of these values differ from 1: the 95% confidence interval for


                                                              36
                                                                   RSN's and Exclusion
                                                        0.2

                                                                             4SD San Diego - Cox
                                                                             CSN Philadelphia - Comcast
                                                       0.15




                                 Three Party Surplus
                                                        0.1



                                                       0.05



                                                          0



                                                       -0.05



                                                        -0.1
                                                               0     0.5              1                   1.5
                                                                           7 x 6R



Figure 6: Three-party surplus between the integrated cable MVPD, DirecTV, and Dish as a function
of µ × λR in Philadelphia and San Diego.


graphs the total three party surplus—given by the left-hand side of (16)—between the integrated
channel and the two satellite distributors in the two loophole markets we examine (Philadelphia
and San Diego). We see that for values of µ × λR lower than 0.94, it is not an equilibrium for
either channel to exclude both satellite distributors as there would be a profitable deviation, for
some negotiated set of affiliate fees, for the channel to be supplied. However, for values between
approximately 0.94 and 1.11, we can rationalize exclusion in San Diego but not Philadelphia. Only
for values of µ × λR ≥ 1.11 does our model rationalize exclusion in both of these loophole markets.


6        The Welfare Effects of Vertical Integration
In this section we use our model’s estimates to examine how vertical integration affects affiliate fee
negotiations (including whether supply occurs at all), distributors’ pricing and carriage decisions,
and—ultimately—firm and consumer welfare. We focus on 26 RSNs that were active in 2007, 13 of
which were (at least partially) integrated with a downstream distributor (10 with a cable MVPD,
3 with DirecTV).57 Of these integrated RSNs, two—CSN Philadelphia and 4SD—were owned by
cable distributors in “loophole” markets, and were not provided to satellite.
      For each of these RSNs we simulate market outcomes for the year 2007 that would have occurred
in the RSN’s relevant markets under the following three integration scenarios: (1) Non-integration,
(2) Integration with PARs, and (3) Integration without PARs.58 More specifically:

(i) Non-Integration: In this scenario, we assume that µ = 0 and λR = 0 so that all firms behave
 P hil                   SD
λ̂R   is [0.97, 1.93] and λ̂R is [0.82, 1.70].
  57
     We exclude from our analysis 3 cable-integrated RSNs (CSN Northwest, Comcast/Charter Sports Southeast, and
Cox Sports TV) and one independent RSN (YES) that did not supply satellite providers in markets where PARs
were in effect, as our model does not explain this exclusion.
  58
     We simulate the equilibrium under all three scenarios for each RSN, including whichever scenario occurred in the
data for the RSN.


                                                                           37
         as if they are non-integrated (i.e., no MVPD or channel internalizes the profits of any other
         unit).

(ii) Integration and PARs: In this scenario, if the RSN being examined is non-integrated in
         the data, we assign full ownership of the channel to the largest cable MVPD in that RSN’s
         relevant markets; if the RSN is integrated, we do not change its ownership structure. We then
         assume that µ is equal to our estimated value µ̂ = 0.79, but that λR = 0: i.e., we assume that
         integrated distributors and channels partially internalize each other’s profits when bargaining
         with each other over affilliate fees, and when the integrated distributor is pricing and making
         carriage decisions, but that program access rules prevent the channels from considering the
         benefits of foreclosure to its integrated distributor when bargaining with rival distributors.

(iii) Integration and no-PARs: In our final scenario, we follow the same setup as in the “In-
                                                                               P hil
         tegration and PARs” scenario, but assume that λR = λ̂R                        , the larger of our two recovered
         lower    bounds.59   The RSN therefore internalizes the profits of its downstream integrated units
         when bargaining with other downstream distributors, and thus may find it unprofitable to
         supply downstream rivals.

       For each integration scenario and each RSN, we solve for a set of bundle prices, carriage deci-
sions, and negotiated affiliate fees that satisfy the necessary equilibrium conditions given by equa-
tions (5), (6), and (11). Under non-integration and integration with PARs (scenarios (i) and (ii)),
we assume that all RSNs are supplied to all distributors.60 Under scenario (iii), where channels are
integrated but PARs are not in effect, we also solve for the RSN’s equilibrium supply decision. To
determine whether or not each rival distributor is supplied with the channel, we test which supply
outcomes (e.g., if a cable integrated RSN supplies both, neither, or either one of the two satellite
distributors) are consistent with equilibrium.61
  59                                     P hil
       The value of λR must be at least λ̂R      to rationalize the non-supply of the satellite distributors that we observe
                                                   P hil
in both Philadelphia and San Diego. If λR > λ̂R , foreclosure incentives would be larger than those considered here;
we explore the effects of larger values of λR in Section 6.3.
  60
     Aside from the two loophole RSNs, all other RSNs in our counterfactuals were provided to all distributors in
2007.
  61
     At the set of affiliate fees, prices, and carriage decisions that satisfy the necessary equilibrium conditions under
each potential supply outcome, for each cable-owned channel in scenario (iii) we test: (a) whether supplying both
satellite providers is an equilibrium by examining if there are positive bilateral gains from trade between the RSN
and each satellite provider given that the other satellite provider is supplied; (b) whether supplying only one satellite
distributor is an equilibrium by examining if there are positive gains from trade between the RSN and the supplied
satellite distributor given that the other satellite provider is not supplied, and if there are no bilateral gains from
trade between the RSN and the non-supplied satellite distributor given that the other satellite provider is supplied;
and (c) whether supplying neither satellite distributor is an equilibrium by examining if the three-party-surplus given
by the left-hand side of (16) is negative. For all RSNs but two, exactly one supply outcome was robust to these tests.
For two RSNs, exactly two supply outcomes satisfied these tests: for CSN Philadelphia, they were the non-supply of
both satellite distributors and the supply of only DirecTV; for NESN, they were the non-supply of both or supply
of both. We report results assuming that the outcome with the least supply is chosen (as this outcome maximized
the integrated firms’ profits given our parameter estimates). For each of the three RSNs owned by DirecTV, we
determine supply by verifying that the bilateral surplus generated by the RSN’s supply of each cable MVPD in the
RSN’s relevant markets as well as Dish Network is positive (where surpluses are computed at updated levels of affiliate
fees, prices, and carriage decisions).


                                                              38
   In our main counterfactual results, we assume that a change in ownership for a single RSN
does not cause national satellite prices to adjust, and we thus hold satellite prices fixed at observed
levels. In Section 6.3, we also examine counterfactuals under the alternative assumption that
satellite prices are determined at the DMA level, and may adjust across our integration scenarios.
Further computational and implementation details are provided in Appendix C.4.

6.1   Potential Effects
Before proceeding, it is instructive to highlight the effects of vertical integration that are captured
by our model and that we attempt to quantify. Our model emphasizes three main supply-side
decisions: (i) negotiations over supply and affiliate fees between channels and distributors, and
both (ii) channel carriage (conditional on supply) and (iii) bundle pricing by distributors.
   Suppose, then, that MVPD f integrates with RSN c, and that there is a rival MVPD g. The
following effects of vertical integration are admitted in our setting:

  1. Bargaining Effects and Foreclosure: When integration occurs there are effects on both
      internal and external bargaining. As discussed in Section 3.4.3, we expect the effective internal
      affiliate fee paid by the integrated distributor f to fall when integration occurs: i.e., our 0.79
      estimated value of µ indicates that the RSN and distributor f internalize (most of) each
      others’ payoffs. Of course, in equilibrium, the internal affiliate fee is also affected by any
      changes in carriage and pricing as these can change both f and c’s gains from trade.
      The effects of integration on external bargaining will depend on whether PARs are in effect
      or not. When PARs are in effect, RSN c ignores any benefits to its integrated distributor f ’s
      profits from denying access to rival distributor g, just as if c was not integrated. However, the
      negotiated affiliate fee to g may still be affected by changes in f ’s carriage and prices, which
      can affect g’s benefit from getting access to c, and by any change in the internal affiliate fee
      that c receives from f (which would alter how supply of g affects c’s profit).
      Finally, when c bargains with the rival MVPD g and PARs are not in effect, c internalizes
      the lost profit of its integrated downstream distributor f if g is supplied (since λR > 0). As
      a result, the gains-from-trade that accrue to c by supplying g are reduced from what they
      would be under either non-integration or in the presence of PARs, potentially leading to
      a higher negotiated affiliate fee τgct or—if gains-from-trade are eliminated altogether—non-
      supply. Again, however, any induced changes in carriage and pricing can also affect negotiated
      input fees.

  2. Carriage Effects: When vertical integration occurs, the fact that µ is positive makes the
      integrated f internalize the effects of its carriage of RSN c on c’s profit. As carriage is likely
      to increase c’s profit due to the increase in affiliate fees earned from f (although an offsetting
      effect is that f ’s carriage of c may lower c’s affiliate fee revenues earned from g, by reducing
      g’s market share), integration may lead f to increase carriage of RSN c. The net impact on


                                                  39
        carriage will also depend on equilibrium price adjustments and whether rival distributors are
        still supplied with the channel.

  3. Pricing Effects: As with the carriage decision, an integrated f will internalize effects of its
        pricing on RSN c’s profit. This is likely to push f toward charging a lower bundle price—i.e.,
        reducing double marginalization—as a lower price will increase f ’s market share, and hence
        the affiliate fees that c collects from f (although, as described above, there is a potentially
        offsetting effect from any reduced affiliate fees earned from g, as in Chen 2001). In addition,
        changes in carriage will have a separate effect on f ’s pricing; for example, if carriage increases,
        the resulting increased bundle quality is likely to push f to increase prices in those markets
        where c is added to its bundle relative to what its prices would have been absent the carriage
        change.


   Thus, while we expect integration to increase carriage and reduce double marginalization by
integrated distributors, and the absence of PARs to increase foreclosure of and affiliate fees paid
by rival distributors of integrated firms, confounding effects are present that may upset these
expectations. Moreover, even if the directions of these effects are as expected, their magnitudes,
and their overall impacts on consumer and aggregate welfare remain empirical questions that our
counterfactual simulations aim to address.

6.2     Results
6.2.1     Individual RSN Results

As an illustration of the kinds of effects we see for individual RSNs, Table 4 reports market shares,
channel carriage, cable prices, firm profits, and consumer and total welfare across our three differ-
ent integration scenarios for three RSNs: CSN Philadelphia, a cable-integrated RSN located in a
terrestrial loophole market; MSG, a cable-integrated RSN located in a non-loophole market; and
NESN, a non-integrated RSN. Below each RSN name is the MVPD that owns the channel (or is
assigned ownership under integration scenarios (ii) and (iii) if the RSN is non-integrated, denoted
by a * next to the assigned owner’s name), the number of households and the MVPD owner’s
“footprint” (the percentage of these households that the MVPD “passes” or plausibly could serve)
in the RSN’s relevant markets, and the estimated mean consumer willingness-to-pay (WTP) for
the RSN.
   The values shown for scenario (i), corresponding to no vertical integration (“No VI”), are
household weighted average levels across an RSN’s relevant markets; with the exception of market
shares and cable carriage, reported numbers are in dollars per household per month. For integration
scenarios (ii) and (iii), “VI PARs” and “VI No PARs” respectively, we report changes from non-
integration scenario (i) either as a percentage of non-integration levels (denoted %∆lvl ) or as a
percentage of the mean WTP for the RSN (denoted %∆W T P ). A missing value for “Aff Fees to Sat”
indicates that the RSN is predicted to be withheld from the two satellite distributors. Confidence

                                                     40
                           Table 4: Simulated Market Outcomes for Selected RSNs
                                                   (i) No VI              (ii) VI PARs                        (iii) VI No PARs

                                                                           (vs. No VI)                           (vs. No VI)

                                                       Level            %∆lvl            %∆W T P              %∆lvl            %∆W T P
      CABLE INTEGRATED RSNs
      CSN PHIL      Cable Mkt Share                      0.64               0.8%                                 1.8%
      Comcast                                     [0.62,0.65]        [0.2%,2.4%]                          [0.6%,4.0%]
      Pop 4.25M     Sat Mkt Share                        0.18              -0.5%                               -10.4%
      Footprint 90%                               [0.17,0.19]     [-3.3%,-0.2%]                      [-14.8%,-0.5%]
      WTP $4.99     Cable Carriage                       0.95               1.6%                                 0.4%
                                                  [0.62,0.97]      [0.0%,53.8%]                        [-6.2%,52.9%]
                         Cable Prices                   54.31              -0.5%                                 0.9%
                                                [53.28,55.42]       [-1.5%,0.9%]                         [-1.4%,1.8%]
      Foreclose: 85%     Aff Fees to Sat                 2.26               3.6%                                     -
                                                  [1.00,2.64]       [-9.4%,7.0%]                                     -
                         Cable + RSN Surplus            30.19               0.2%             0.9%                1.1%                6.5%
                                                [14.57,32.67]        [0.0%,2.4%]     [0.3%,13.7%]         [0.4%,3.3%]        [3.0%,20.5%]
                         Satellite Surplus               4.29              -0.9%            -0.8%               -2.1%               -1.8%
                                                  [1.26,4.70]     [-3.4%,-0.4%]     [-2.4%,-0.5%]       [-4.8%,-1.1%]       [-4.5%,-0.9%]
                         Consumer Welfare               31.21               0.6%             3.9%               -2.9%              -18.1%
                                                [16.82,34.81]        [0.2%,2.0%]     [1.4%,12.7%]        [-3.3%,1.5%]      [-21.8%,9.9%]
                         Total Welfare                  65.69               0.3%             4.0%               -1.0%              -13.4%
                                                [31.14,71.73]        [0.1%,1.9%]     [2.0%,25.2%]        [-1.1%,1.1%]    [-15.6%,14.7%]
      MSG                Cable Mkt Share                 0.63               3.3%                                 3.3%
      Cablevision                                 [0.62,0.67]        [0.3%,4.8%]                          [0.2%,4.7%]
      Pop 11.7M          Sat Mkt Share                   0.18              -4.3%                                -4.3%
      Footprint 42%                               [0.17,0.18]     [-7.1%,-0.4%]                         [-8.1%,-0.4%]
      Pred WTP $2.32     Cable Carriage                  0.68             10.5%                                 10.5%
                                                  [0.67,0.87]    [-2.5%,18.5%]                         [-3.1%,18.5%]
                         Cable Prices                   59.40              -2.4%                                -2.4%
                                                [56.80,60.81]       [-3.5%,0.0%]                         [-3.5%,0.2%]
      Foreclose: 1%      Aff Fees to Sat                 1.22              -3.3%                                22.4%
                                                  [0.42,1.28]    [-5.9%,10.4%]                        [17.1%,53.4%]
                         Cable + RSN Surplus            30.64               0.3%              4.4%               0.5%              6.8%
                                                [14.61,34.12]       [-0.1%,0.6%]      [-1.6%,7.4%]        [0.0%,1.3%]      [0.4%,14.6%]
                         Satellite Surplus               4.16              -4.2%             -7.5%              -5.5%             -9.9%
                                                  [1.24,4.48]     [-7.2%,-0.5%]    [-12.1%,-0.9%]       [-8.5%,-1.2%]    [-14.3%,-2.4%]
                         Consumer Welfare               33.80               3.1%            44.6%                3.0%             44.3%
                                                [18.38,38.14]        [0.3%,4.3%]     [4.4%,66.3%]        [-0.4%,4.3%]     [-6.3%,66.0%]
                         Total Welfare                  68.60               1.4%            41.4%                1.4%             41.2%
                                                [32.06,76.01]        [0.1%,1.9%]     [3.4%,60.9%]         [0.1%,1.9%]      [2.5%,60.7%]
      NON-INTEGRATED RSN
      NESN          Cable Mkt Share                      0.61               7.6%                                9.4%
      *Comcast                                    [0.59,0.65]       [1.6%,11.2%]                       [2.7%,12.5%]
      Pop 5.20M     Sat Mkt Share                        0.13              -7.8%                              -22.3%
      Footprint 85%                               [0.12,0.14]    [-12.6%,-1.8%]                      [-26.5%,-7.2%]
      WTP $6.91     Cable Carriage                       0.92               6.2%                                3.6%
                                                  [0.68,0.98]       [0.0%,33.1%]                      [-0.5%,38.1%]
                         Cable Prices                   56.73              -4.7%                               -3.9%
                                                [54.24,57.88]      [-6.6%,-0.5%]                        [-6.0%,0.6%]
      Foreclose: 96%     Aff Fees to Sat                 3.32               3.1%                                    -
                                                  [1.23,3.79]   [-12.6%,16.9%]                                      -
                         Cable + RSN Surplus            28.38               0.9%             3.6%               2.0%                8.2%
                                                [13.68,31.36]        [0.1%,2.4%]     [0.9%,10.6%]        [0.7%,4.0%]        [5.4%,16.7%]
                         Satellite Surplus               2.96              -8.3%            -3.5%             -10.9%               -4.7%
                                                  [0.84,3.24]    [-13.2%,-1.8%]     [-5.5%,-1.3%]    [-13.9%,-3.0%]        [-6.3%,-1.7%]
                         Consumer Welfare               28.36               6.4%            26.5%               3.3%               13.5%
                                                [15.54,31.97]       [1.4%,10.0%]     [8.2%,40.8%]       [-1.7%,7.1%]      [-9.0%,29.2%]
                         Total Welfare                  59.70               3.1%            26.5%               2.0%               17.0%
                                                [29.79,65.84]        [0.5%,5.1%]     [7.8%,43.7%]       [-0.2%,4.5%]      [-2.5%,37.5%]


Notes: Scenarios (i)-(iii) correspond to the integration scenarios described at the beginning of Section 6. Beneath the RSN
name is either the name of the RSN’s owner (observed or, if non-integrated, assigned, which is denoted by ∗ ), the number
of television households in the RSN’s relevant markets, the MVPD owner’s footprint (% of households passed) in the RSN’s
relevant markets, and the estimated mean consumer WTP for the RSN. Scenario (i) reports household weighted averages over
all relevant markets for each RSN, where all levels except for market shares and cable carriage are in $/household/month.
Scenarios (ii) and (iii) report changes from scenario (i), where %∆lvl (respectively, %∆W T P ) represent changes from scenario
(i) expressed as a percentage of changes in household weighted averages of levels (respectively, estimated mean consumer WTP
for the channel). Affiliate fees to satellite are reported conditional on supply; missing values indicate foreclosure. 95% confidence
intervals, constructed from 150 simulations, are reported below each figure; the fraction of simulations in which the RSN is
predicted to foreclose at least one rival distributor under scenario (iii) is reported last under each RSN’s name (“Foreclose: %”).
Results for all other RSNs are contained in Appendix Tables A.5-A.10.




                                                                 41
                          Table 5: Average Simulated Market Outcomes Across All RSNs
                              (i) No VI             (ii) VI PARs                                      (iii) VI No PARs

                                                    (vs. No VI)                        (vs. No VI)                       (vs. VI PARs)

                                  Level           %∆lvl        %∆W T P              %∆lvl            %∆W T P             %∆lvl      %∆W T P
  ALL RSNs
  Cable Mkt Share                   0.60             2.1%                              2.2%                               0.1%
                             [0.59,0.62]      [0.4%,2.6%]                       [0.4%,2.6%]                       [-0.2%,0.3%]
  Sat Mkt Share                     0.20            -2.0%                             -2.7%                              -0.8%
                             [0.20,0.21]   [-2.6%,-0.4%]                     [-4.1%,-0.8%]                       [-2.6%,-0.0%]
  Cable Carriage                    0.72             9.4%                              8.6%                              -0.7%
                             [0.66,0.80]    [3.1%,21.5%]                      [0.8%,19.1%]                        [-4.4%,0.9%]
  Cable Prices                     55.10            -1.2%                             -1.1%                               0.1%
                           [54.25,55.90]   [-1.5%,-0.1%]                     [-1.4%,-0.0%]                         [0.0%,0.3%]
  Aff Fees to Rivals(a)             1.36            -0.7%                            17.1%                              18.0%
                             [0.54,1.45]     [-3.2%,4.4%]                   [11.0%,28.5%]                       [12.1%,28.6%]
  Cable + RSN Surplus              23.04             0.3%            3.1%              0.6%              5.0%             0.2%            1.9%
                           [11.13,25.17]      [0.1%,0.6%]     [1.4%,5.4%]       [0.2%,0.9%]       [2.6%,8.1%]      [0.1%,0.5%]     [0.5%,4.2%]
  Satellite Surplus                 5.10            -2.2%           -4.3%             -3.2%             -6.0%            -1.0%           -1.7%
                             [1.56,5.51]   [-3.1%,-0.5%]    [-6.7%,-0.3%]    [-3.9%,-1.0%]      [-8.4%,-1.1%]    [-1.3%,-0.4%]   [-2.5%,-0.6%]
  Consumer Welfare                 30.99             1.5%           18.0%              1.3%             16.2%            -0.2%           -1.7%
                           [16.15,34.47]      [0.3%,1.8%]    [5.5%,23.8%]      [-0.1%,1.5%]    [-1.3%,20.4%]     [-0.7%,-0.1%]    [-8.4%,0.0%]
  Total Welfare                    59.13             0.7%           16.8%              0.6%             15.3%            -0.1%           -1.5%
                           [27.59,64.41]      [0.1%,0.9%]    [5.4%,22.2%]       [0.0%,0.8%]      [0.8%,18.7%]    [-0.2%,-0.0%]    [-6.4%,0.1%]
  # Foreclosed:                                                                   4/26 [0,9]


Notes: Average simulated market outcomes across the 26 RSNs in our analysis, weighted by the number of households
in each RSN’s relevant markets. Percentages are the averages of percentage changes across RSNs, weighted by the
number of households in each RSN’s relevant markets. “# Foreclosed” reports the number of RSNs that are not
provided to rival distributors under (iii) VI No PARs. See Table 4 and main text for additional details.
(a)
    “Fees to Rival” represents average affilliate fees (to the satellite MVPDs for cable-integrated RSNs, and to cable
MVPDs and the rival satellite distributor for satellite-integrated RSNs) conditional on supply in each relevant scenario.


intervals are constructed by taking 150 draws from the joint distribution of the estimated coefficients
and re-computing the equilibrium for each draw. The fraction of the scenario (iii) draws for which
the RSN is predicted to foreclose and not supply at least one rival distributor is also shown last
under each RSN name (“Foreclose: %”).
    For each of the three RSNs shown in Table 4 vertical integration with PARs in effect leads the
integrated distributor to increase carriage and reduce its bundle price at our point estimates, and
in each case we can reject a zero effect for at least one of the carriage or price effects. Cable’s
market share increases in each case, and satellite’s share decreases; as well, satellite surplus falls,
consumer welfare increases, and total welfare rises (all such effects are statistically significant).
    When integration occurs without PARs in effect, two of these three RSNs—CSN Philadelphia
and NESN—deny access to both rival satellite producers.                                   Despite this exclusion, only for CSN
Philadelphia are the point estimates for the effects of vertical integration on consumer and total
welfare negative, and for neither of these two RSNs can we reject zero net consumer and total
welfare effects. For the third RSN, MSG, the two satellite distributors continue to have access
to the RSN, although paying higher affiliate fees (22.4% higher according to our point estimates,
and statistically significantly different from zero). For all three RSNs, vertical integration without
PARs in effect lowers the satellite distributors’ profits by between 2-11% (statistically significant
in each case).
    Results for all other RSNs are contained in Appendix Tables A.5-A.10. Overall, the outcomes
for different RSNs display considerable heterogeneity.




                                                                      42
6.2.2      Average Results

We now turn to the average effects of vertical integration. Table 5 reports market outcomes
for each of the three vertical integration scenarios, averaged across RSNs and weighted by the
number of households in each RSN’s relevant markets. The structure is the same as in Table 4,
with the following adjustments. First, “Aff Fees to Rivals” represents the affiliate fees charged
to the integrated MVPD’s rival distributors, conditional on the channel being supplied to those
distributors.     These rival distributors are the two satellite distributors if the channel is cable-
integrated; if instead the channel is DirecTV-integrated, these rivals are the cable distributors in
the RSN’s relevant markets and Dish. Second, “# Foreclosed” represents the number of RSNs that
are not provided to at least one rival distributor for the case of integration without PARs in effect
(integration scenario (iii)). Third, in the rightmost two columns, we report the weighted average
change in predicted outcomes between scenarios (ii) and (iii); these changes are expressed both as
percentages of scenario (ii) levels and of an RSN’s estimated mean WTP, and isolate the impact of
program access rules given integration. Finally, percentages are the averages of percentage changes
across RSNs, weighted by the number of households in each RSN’s relevant markets.

Efficiency Effects: Reduction of Double Marginalization and Increased Carriage. We
first focus on the potential efficiency gains from vertical integration. These are highlighted by the
differences between integration scenario (ii) with PARs and non-integration scenario (i), reported
in the second and third columns of Table 5.
       Across all RSNs, we predict that integration of a single RSN when PARs are in effect yields on
average a (statistically significant) 9.4% increase in carriage of the RSN by cable distributors.62 It
also results on average in a (statistically significant) 1.2% decrease in cable prices (corresponding
to an average $0.67 reduction in the price consumers pay).63,64 As discussed in Section 6.1, pricing
reductions arise primarily from the reduction of double marginalization. However, there are offset-
ting effects that may mitigate downward pricing incentives: integrated distributors now internalize
affiliate fees paid by rival MVPDs, and (as we have noted) carriage of the RSN by cable providers
increases when the channel is integrated (thereby increasing the utility delivered by bundles in
certain markets). Even so, cable prices fall on average.65
       We find that joint RSN and integrated cable surplus increases on average when moving from
non-integration to integration with PARs: when a cable MVPD is integrated (and since µ̂ is greater
than 0), its pricing decisions will partially internalize RSN profits (even if, under PARs, the channel
  62
     This average includes carriage changes by cable operators for the three satellite-owned RSNs.
  63
     The values reported for scenarios (ii) and (iii) in Tables 4-5 are the (household weighted) averages of percentage
changes, not the percentage change in the average levels. Thus, the average $0.67 decrease in price that we describe
here does not equal the product of the values in scenarios (i) and (ii) in Table 5.
  64
     Though integration of most RSNs yields less than a 1% decrease in cable prices, there are several cases where
price decreases are much larger: e.g., integrating NESN with Comcast, reported in the bottom panel of Table 4,
results in average cable prices falling by nearly 5% (corresponding to an average reduction in the price consumers pay
of $2.67) due to NESN’s high estimated affiliate fees to Comcast (predicted to be approximately $4.70 per month).
  65
     In fact, in our individual RSN results average cable prices do not increase for any RSN in the presence of PARs.



                                                          43
                                Table 6: Welfare Changes From Foreclosure

                     Percentage change in levels between (ii) VI PARs and (iii) VI No PARs
                                                    %∆ Consumer Welfare %∆ Total Welfare
                  Are Rival Distributors Excluded -1.95***                    -0.72***
                                                    (0.53)                    (0.22)
                  N                                 3900                      3900
                  R2                                0.52                      0.52

Notes: Regression where the dependent variable is the percentage change in either consumer or total welfare in
levels between integration scenarios (ii) and (iii) (with and without PARs in effect). Each observation is an RSN-
counterfactual simulation (26 × 150). Specifications include RSN fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at RSN
level, and ∗∗∗ represents significance at the 1% level.


does not act upon rival foreclosure incentives). Satellite surplus, on average across all RSNs, falls
by 2.2% when RSNs are integrated with PARs in effect.66 Consumer welfare and total welfare
increase by, on average, 1.5% and 0.7% respectively (18.0% and 16.8%, respectively, as percentage
gains of WTP for the RSN). The change in total welfare represents an average increase of $0.43
per household per month. Each of these changes is statistically significant.

Foreclosure Effects: Raising Rivals’ Costs and Exclusion. The comparison of scenarios
(ii) and (iii), shown in the last two columns of Table 5 provides the impact of removing PARs given
that RSNs are integrated, and isolates the impact of foreclosure incentives on market outcomes.
Allowing for foreclosure is predicted to reduce both consumer and total welfare from the integration
scenario with PARs by 0.2% and 0.1%, respectively; both are statistically significant, and represent
average changes of 1.7% and 1.5% as a percentage of the WTP for the RSN.
    The reduction in welfare from the absence of PARs stems primarily from two effects. The
first occurs when an RSN is completely withheld from rival MVPDs. Though we predict that
none of the three DirecTV-owned RSNs would choose to exclude cable providers, we predict that
3 out of the 14 RSNs integrated with a cable provider in the data (the two loophole RSNs and
CSN New England) and one previously non-integrated RSN (NESN) would exclude both satellite
distributors.67 Conditional on integration occurring, exclusion of a rival distributor is associated
with a negative change in welfare: Table 6 reports results from a regression of the change in
consumer and total welfare between VI scenarios with and without PARs on whether or not rival
distributors are denied access to the RSN. Results indicate that the exclusion of rival distributors
is associated with a 1.9% and 0.7% reduction in consumer and total welfare, which roughly equals
the predicted average welfare gains from integration with PARs (%∆lvl in scenario (ii)).
    To examine when exclusion is more likely to occur, Table 7 reports results from a linear prob-
ability regression of whether rival distributors are denied access to an RSN when PARs are not in
effect; the footprint, or percentage of households in the RSN’s relevant markets that the integrated
distributor can serve, is positive and statistically significant. This is consistent with the discussion
  66
     This percentage includes both cable and satellite integration of RSNs, although it is primarily reflecting cable
ownership of RSNs. In Appendix Table A.7, we report market outcomes for the three satellite integrated RSNs.
  67
     The 95% confidence interval for the number of RSNs that exclude is [0,9].


                                                         44
                                       Table 7: Probability of Exclusion

                        Exclusion of Rival Distributors by Integrated RSN (Without PARs)
                        Footprint of Integrated Owner 0.67**
                                                         (0.25)
                        WTP for RSN                      0.07
                                                         (0.05)
                        N                                26
                        R2                               0.29

Notes: Linear probability regression where the dependent variable is whether rival distributors are denied access to
an RSN under integration scenario (iii) without PARs. Each observation is an RSN. Specification includes a fixed
effect for whether the RSN owner is a cable operator. ∗∗ represents significance at the 5% level.


in Section 4.2 (i.e., larger cable footprints increase the potential losses incurred by an integrated
cable provider from supplying the RSN to rival satellite distributors), and reflects the fact that the
cable owners for the four RSNs that are predicted to foreclose satellite distributors all have greater
than an 85% footprint.
       The second effect that reduces welfare arises when an integrated RSN still supplies rival dis-
tributors but raises their affiliate fees, which in turn affects downstream distributor pricing and
carriage. Table 5 indicates that affiliate fees for integrated RSNs charged to rivals, conditional
on supply, increase on average by a statistically significant 18.0% from the levels predicted when
PARs are in effect.68 Even though we have assumed that satellite distributors do not adjust their
prices in our counterfactuals, higher satellite affiliate fees can negatively harm consumer welfare by
inducing the integrated cable owner to increase its own downstream prices or reduce its carriage.
Intuitively, if a cable-integrated RSN increases its affiliate fees with satellite distributors, then the
RSN’s downstream cable MVPD sees a greater benefit to its integrated RSN from raising its price
or reducing its carriage, which will move subscribers to the now higher-paying satellite distributors.
Indeed, we find that cable prices increase, on average, by a small, but statistically significant 0.1%;
carriage falls in our point estimates by 0.7%, although this change is not statistically significant.69
These changes also further reduce satellite firms’ surplus by a statistically significant 1.0% beyond
the reduction caused by integration when PARs are in effect.

Net Effects.       The comparison of scenarios (iii) and (i), shown in the fourth and fifth columns
of Table 5, gives the overall net impact of integration of RSNs when PARs are not in effect. On
average across all RSNs, the efficiency effects dominate the foreclosure effects when examining
consumer and total welfare—both increase by approximately 1.3% and 0.6%, representing 15-16%
of the total WTP generated by an RSN.70 This is driven by an increase in RSN carriage (9% on
average) and a reduction in cable prices (1.1%). However, satellite market shares and profits are
  68
      In some cases this increase represents an increase of nearly $0.50 per month per subscriber, as with CSN Mid-
Atlantic (see Table A.6).
   69
      This effect is discussed in Chen (2001). As a specific example, Comcast, the owner of CSN Mid-Atlantic, increases
its own price of a bundle by $0.11 between scenarios (ii) and (iii) as a result of negotiating a significantly higher
affiliate fee for CSN Mid-Atlantic from satellite distributors.
   70
      On average, consumer welfare rises by $0.39 and total welfare by $0.38 per household per month.


                                                          45
predicted to fall by 2.7% and 3.2%, respectively, when RSNs are integrated.71
    Looking separately at the 4 markets in which exclusion occurs at our point estimates, consumer
and total welfare increase on average by small amounts (0.4% and 0.3% respectively) and we
cannot reject zero effects. In contrast, consumer and total welfare rise on average by a statistically
significant 1.4% and 0.7% respectively in the 22 markets in which exclusion does not occur.

6.3    Robustness
Internalization and Rival Foreclosure Parameters.                      We conducted our counterfactuals under
the assumption that our rival foreclosure parameter λR equals the largest estimated lower bound
across the two terrestrial loophole RSNs. However, it may be that this bound is not binding, and
the value of λR is much larger. To understand the sensitivity of our results to this assumption, we
have compared the average percentage change in consumer and total welfare between integration
without PARs and no integration (scenarios (iii) and (i)) for different values of λR at our estimated
                                                                             P hil
parameter values. Under our main specification when λR = λ̂R                         = 1.4, the predicted average
changes in consumer and total welfare are 1.3% and 0.6%; at λR = 2, they are 0.4% and 0.3%,
and at λR = 3, they are -0.2% and -0.03%. Thus, our rival foreclosure parameter would need to
be significantly larger than our estimated lower bounds for the predicted overall average welfare
effects from vertical integration (without PARs) to be reversed.
    We also have examined the sensitivity of our results to the assumption that internalization
is imperfect, and recomputed our counterfactual simulations when µ = λR = 1.72 Our findings
are broadly similar: again, examining average changes between integration without PARs and no
integration (scenarios (iii) and (i)), we find that consumer and total welfare gains are slightly larger
(1.5% and 0.7%); this is attributable to larger increases in carriage (11.5%) and reductions in cable
prices (-1.3%). These differences are not statistically significant.

Satellite Re-Pricing. Our consideration of one vertical merger or divestiture at a time motivated
our holding satellite distributors’ prices fixed in our primary counterfactual specification—i.e.,
as each RSN is only active in a subset of markets, changes brought on by adjustments in its
ownership might not warrant a change in either satellite distributor’s national prices. However,
were integration to increase nationally and lead to foreclosure or higher affiliate fees charged to
satellite distributors in many markets, we may expect satellite prices to adjust, thereby altering
our predicted welfare effects. To address this concern, we repeat our counterfactual simulations
under the alternative assumption that satellite prices for both DirecTV and Dish are chosen at the
   71
      These average net welfare changes mask considerable heterogeneity in the point estimates for individual RSNs.
For instance, we find that foreclosure effects dominate for consumer welfare in the terrestrial loophole markets, where
4SD and CSN Philadelphia are predicted to exclude both satellite distributors, and reduce consumer welfare by 8-18%
($0.13-0.90) of the average WTP generated by the channel. On the other hand, average net consumer welfare gains
from integration for some RSNs reach approximately $1 per household per month (e.g., $1.03 for MSG and $0.94 for
NESN).
   72
      We conduct these exercises at our estimated parameters, only varying µ and λR ; we do not re-estimate our model
under the assumption that µ = 1. For these exercises, we also assume that µ = 0.99 so that internal negotiated
affiliate fees are not indeterminate when Of ct = 1 (see footnote 36).


                                                          46
DMA (as opposed to national) level, and can adjust across integration scenarios (see Appendix C.4
for implementation details).
    In Appendix Table A.11, we report market outcomes averaged across all RSNs from these addi-
tional simulations. When satellite prices are allowed adjust, they fall on average by approximately
1.0% when RSNs are integrated and PARs are not in effect; compared to the predicted changes
when satellite prices are held fixed (Table 5), the negative impact on satellite market shares and
surplus is slightly mitigated, as is the increase in negotiated affiliate fees (e.g., when moving from
non-integration to VI without PARs, affiliate fees to rivals increase by 16.5% on average as opposed
to by 17.1% when satellite prices are held fixed). Nevertheless, none of the predicted levels or
changes are statistically different from the case in which satellite prices are held fixed. In addition,
our main findings also do not change.


7     Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have developed a framework for the analysis of vertical integration and merg-
ers, and applied it to examine the welfare effects of—and regulatory policy regarding—vertical
integration of high value sports content in the U.S. cable and satellite television industry. The
framework accounts for consumer viewership and subscription decisions, distributor pricing and
carriage decisions, and channel-distributor bargaining over affiliate fees. Most importantly, it al-
lows for vertical integration to reduce double marginalization and increase carriage as well as result
in foreclosure of rivals from integrated content or raise their costs of carriage. We also allow for
imperfect internalization of incentives across integrated divisions within a firm.
    Our main results are as follows: (i) vertical integration leads to welfare gains when program
access rules are effectively enforced; (ii) failure to effectively enforce program access rules for inte-
grated RSNs leads to consumer and total welfare losses; (iii) in the absence of program access rules,
predicted efficiency effects of vertical integration outweigh foreclosure effects on average, resulting
in net consumer and total welfare increases compared to non-integration; (iv) welfare gains from
vertical integration in the absence of program access rules appear to be largely absent in cases in
which exclusion of rival distributors occurs, but positive when rivals continue to have access to the
RSN; and (v) rival distributors are harmed when an RSN becomes integrated.
    As we have noted previously, our analysis is partial and can be extended in a number of di-
rections. First, our model has focused on comparing the efficiency effects of vertical integration
to potential foreclosure of downstream distributors by integrated channels, and does not examine
the foreclosure of “upstream” rival channels by an integrated distributor.73 Second, investment
effects—both on the part of content providers and distributors in channel, programming, and dis-
tribution service quality—may change upon integration (Grossman and Hart, 1986; Bolton and
   73
      See, e.g., Waterman and Weiss (1996) who provide reduced form evidence that integration reduces carriage of
rival channels. This finding could be due to foreclosure, but could also arise simply because the increased carriage of
the integrated channel makes carriage of the rival channel less attractive. Our model does include the possibility of
the latter effect, but does not incorporate any mechanism that might cause foreclosure of rival channels, such as an
impact on the integrated channel’s advertising revenues.


                                                          47
Whinston, 1991; Hart, 1995), and are absent from the current study. As noted in the introduction,
the impact of such investment effects on welfare is ambiguous, and is the subject of future work.
Our estimates and counterfactual exercises also relied on a number of modeling assumptions regard-
ing bargaining, the form of affiliate fee pricing, and the effects of program access rule enforcement
that could usefully be further examined. Finally, incorporating additional responses to vertical
integration, examining how predictions might be impacted by weakened information sharing or
misalignment of incentives within the firm, and documenting and measuring the strength of these
vertical integration effects in other industries remain promising areas for future research.




                                                 48
References
Ackerberg, Daniel A. (2009). ‘A New Use of Importance Sampling to Reduce Computational
  Burden in Simulation Estimation’, Quantitative Marketing and Economics 7(4), 343–376.

Asker, John. (2016). ‘Diagnosing Foreclosure due to Exclusive Dealing’, Journal of Industrial
  Economics 64(3), 375–410.

Azar, Jose, Schmalz, Martin C. and Tecu, Isabel. (2016), Anti-Competitive Effects of Com-
  mon Ownership. Unpublished.

Berry, Steven, Levinsohn, James and Pakes, Ariel. (1995). ‘Automobile Prices in Market
  Equilibrium’, Econometrica 63(4), 841–890.

Bolton, Patrick and Whinston, Michael D. (1991). ‘The “Foreclosure” Effects of Vertical
  Mergers’, Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 147, 207–226.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Salop, Steven C. (1986). ‘Quantifying the Competitive Effects
  of Production Joint Ventures’, International Journal of Industrial Organization 4, 155–175.

Bresnahan, Timothy and Levin, Jonathan. (2013), Vertical Integration and Market Struc-
  ture, in Robert Gibbons and John Roberts., eds, ‘Handbook of Organizational Economics’,
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Caves, Kevin W., Holt, Chris C. and Singer, Hal J. (2013). ‘Vertical Integration in Multi-
  channel Television Markets: A Study of Regional Sports Networks’, Review of Network Economics
  12(1), 61–92.

Chen, Dong and Waterman, David. (2007). ‘Vertical Ownership, Program Network Carriage,
  and Tier Positioning in Cable Television: An Empirical Study’, Review of Industrial Organization
  30(3), 227–251.

Chen, Yongmin. (2001). ‘On vertical mergers and their competitive effects’, RAND Journal of
  Economics 32(4), 667–685.

Chipty, Tasneem. (2001). ‘Vertical Integration, Market Foreclosure, and Consumer Welfare in
  the Cable Television Industry’, American Economic Review 91(3), 428–453.

Collard-Wexler, Allan, Gowrisankaran, Gautam and Lee, Robin S. (2015), “Nash-in-
  Nash” Bargaining: A Microfoundation for Applied Work. NBER Working Paper 20641.

Conlon, Christopher T. and Mortimer, Julie H. (2015), All Units Discount: Experimental
  Evidence from the Vending Industry. Unpublished.

Crawford, Gregory S. and Yurukoglu, Ali. (2012). ‘The Welfare Effects of Bundling in
  Multichannel Television Markets’, American Economic Review 102(2), 643–685.

                                               49
Draganska, Michaela, Klapper, Daniel and Villas-Boas, Sofia B. (2010). ‘A Larger Slice
  or a Larger Pie? An Empirical Investigation of Bargaining Power in the Distribution Channel’,
  Marketing Science 29(1), 57–74.

Dubin, Jeffrey A. and McFadden, Daniel L. (1984). ‘An Econometric Analysis of Residential
  Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption’, Econometrica 52(2), 345–362.

FCC. (2012), Report and Order in MB Docket Nos. 12-68, 07-18, 05-192; Further Notice of Pro-
  posed Rulemaking in MB Docket No. 12-68; Order on Reconsideration in MB Docket No. 07-29,
  Technical report. FCC 12-123, released October 5, 2012.

FCC. (2013), Fifteenth Report: Annual Assessment of the Status of Competition in the Market
  for the Delivery of Video Programming, Technical report. FCC 13-99, released July 22, 2013.

Goolsbee, Austan and Petrin, Amil. (2004). ‘Consumer Gains from Direct Broadcast Satellites
  and the Competition with Cable TV’, Econometrica 72(2), 351–81.

Gouriéroux, Christian and Monfort, Alain. (1996), Simulation-Based Econometric Methods,
  Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Nevo, Aviv and Town, Robert. (2015). ‘Mergers When Prices Are
  Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry’, American Economic Review 105(1), 172–203.

Grennan, Matthew. (2013). ‘Price Discrimination and Bargaining: Empirical Evidence from
  Medical Devices’, American Economic Review 103(1), 147–177.

Grossman, S. and Hart, O. (1986). ‘The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical
  and Lateral Integration’, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691–796.

Hanemann, W. Michael. (1984). ‘Discrete/Continuous Models of Consumer Demand’, Econo-
  metrica 52(3), 541–561.

Hart, Oliver. (1995), Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Oxford University Press, New
  York.

Hart, Oliver and Tirole, Jean. (1990). ‘Vertical Integration and Market Foreclosure’, Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics 1990, 205–286.

Hastings, Justine S. (2004). ‘Vertical Relationships and Competition in Retail Gasoline Markets:
  Empirical Evidence from Contract Changes in Southern California’, American Economic Review
  94, 317–328.

Hastings, Justine S. and Gilbert, Richard J. (2005). ‘Market Power, Vertical Integration and
  the Wholesale Price of Gasoline’, Journal of Industrial Economics 53(4), 469–492.

Ho, Kate and Lee, Robin S. (2017). ‘Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets’, Economet-
  rica 85(2), 379–417.

                                               50
Horn, Hendrick and Wolinsky, Asher. (1988). ‘Bilateral Monopoly and Incentives for Merger’,
  The RAND Journal of Economics 19, 408–419.

Hortacsu, Ali and Syverson, Chad. (2007). ‘Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integration,
  Foreclosure, Productivity, and Prices’, Journal of Political Economy 115(2), 250–301.

Houde, Jean-Francois. (2012). ‘Spatial Differentiation and Vertical Mergers in Retail Markets
  for Gasoline’, American Economic Review 102(5), 2147–2182.

Krattenmaker, Thomas G. and Salop, Steven C. (1986). ‘Anticompetitive Exclusion: Raising
  Rivals’ Costs to Achieve Power over Price’, The Yale Law Journal 2, 209–293.

Lee, Robin S. (2013). ‘Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets’,
  American Economic Review 103(7), 2960–3000.

Michel, Christian. (2013), Identification and Estimation of Intra-Firm and Industry Competition
  via Ownership Change. Unpublished.

Mortimer, Julie H. (2008). ‘Vertical Contracts in the Video Rental Industry’, Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 75, 165–199.

Nocke, Volker and White, Lucy. (2007). ‘Do Vertical Mergers Facilitate Upstream Collusion’,
  American Economic Review 97(4), 1321–1339.

O’Brien, Daniel P. and Salop, Steven C. (2000). ‘Competitive Effects of Partial Ownership:
  Financial Interest and Corporate Control’, Antitrust Law Journal 67, 559–614.

Ordover, J., Saloner, G. and Salop, S. (1990). ‘Equilibrium Vertical Foreclosure’, American
  Economic Review 80, 127–142.

Perry, Martin K. (1990), Vertical Integration:         Determinants and Effects, in Richard
  Schmalensee and Robert Willig., eds, ‘Handbook of Industrial Organization’, Vol. 1, North
  Holland, Amsterdam.

Rey, Patrick and Tirole, Jean. (2007), A Primer on Foreclosure, in Mark Armstrong and
  Rob Porter., eds, ‘Handbook of Industrial Organization’, Vol. 3, North-Holland Press, Amster-
  dam.

Riordan, Michael H. (2008), Competitive Effects of Vertical Integration, in Paolo Buccirossi.,
  ed., ‘Handbook of Antitrust Economics’, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Rogerson, William P. (2014), Vertical Mergers in the Video Programming and Distribution
  Industry: The Case of Comcast-NBCU, in Jr. John E. Kwoka and Lawrence J. White.,
  eds, ‘The Antitrust Revolution, 6th Edition’, Oxford University Press, New York.

Salop, Steven C. and Scheffman, David T. (1983). ‘Raising Rivals’ Costs’, American Economic
  Review 73(2), 267–271.

                                               51
Shepard, Andrea. (1993). ‘Contractual Form, Retail Price, and Asset Characteristics in Gasoline
  Retailing’, RAND Journal of Economics 24(1), 58–77.

Spengler, Joseph J. (1950). ‘Vertical integration and antitrust policy’, The Journal of Political
  Economy pp. 347–352.

Suzuki, Ayako. (2009). ‘Market foreclosure and vertical merger: A case study of the vertical
  merger between Turner Broadcasting and Time Warner’, International Journal of Industrial
  Organization 27(4), 523–543.

Villas-Boas, Sofia B. (2007). ‘Vertical Relationships between Manufacturers and Retailers: In-
  ference with Limited Data’, Review of Economic Studies 74(2), 625–652.

Waterman, David and Weiss, Andrew A. (1996). ‘The Effects of Vertical Integration between
  Cable Television Systems and Pay Cable Networks’, Journal of Econometrics 72(1-2), 357–95.

Willamson, Oliver. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York, NY.




                                               52
A      Appendix Tables

                  Table A.1: Sample Statistics - Prices, Market Shares, and Channels

                                                     Unweighted                          Weighted by HHs
                                 # Obs    Mean     StdDev      Min      Max     Mean     StdDev     Min      Max
 Total Markets                    6,928   6,928
 Average Households (millions)    6,928                                           39.7
 Cable
    Year                          6,928     2004      2.9      2000      2010     2004      2.8     2000      2010
    Price                         6,928   $50.67   $10.31     $8.67   $130.96   $52.20    $8.86    $8.67   $130.96
    Market Share                  6,928    0.628    0.162     0.001     0.965    0.639    0.135    0.001     0.965
    Cable Networks                6,928     67.0     18.1         0       101     72.1     14.8        0       101
    RSNs                          6,928      1.6      0.8         0         5      1.8      0.9        0         5
    Total Channels                6,928     68.6     18.4         0       103     73.8     15.0        0       103
 DirecTV
    Year                          6,928     2004      2.9      2000      2010     2004      2.8     2000      2010
    Price                         6,928   $52.76    $6.36    $46.05    $76.73   $52.66    $6.08   $46.05    $76.73
    Market Share                  6,928    0.090    0.060     0.002     0.499    0.091    0.063    0.002     0.499
    Cable Networks                6,928     79.4     10.4        66        97     79.8     10.2       66        97
    RSNs                          6,928      1.9      1.0         0         7      1.9      1.0        0         7
    Total Channels                6,928     84.3     10.9        69       107     84.7     10.7       69       107
 Dish
    Year                          6,928     2004      2.9      2000      2010     2004      2.8     2000      2010
    Price                         6,928   $53.43    $4.81    $44.28    $68.33   $53.47    $4.63   $44.28    $68.33
    Market Share                  6,928    0.062    0.054     0.000     0.472    0.058    0.052    0.000     0.472
    Cable Networks                6,928     69.4     13.3        54        91     70.0     13.1       54        91
    RSNs                          6,928      1.8      0.9         0         6      1.7      0.8        0         6
    Total Channels                6,928     73.7     13.9        56        99     74.4     13.6       56        99
Notes: Reported are the average price, market share, and number of cable networks, Regional Sport Networks (RSNs),
and total channels for the local cable operators as well as the two national satellite providers serving each of our
markets. Markets are defined as the set of continuous zip codes within a cable system facing the same portfolio of
competitors. We exclude (the relatively few) markets facing competition between cable operators. All the data cover
the years 2000-2010. To be included, we required information on each of price, market share, and channels. Cable
system subscriber and channel information is from the Nielsen FOCUS dataset. Cable system price information is
drawn from the Internet Archive, newspaper reports, and the TNS Bill Harvesting database. Satellite system channel
and price information is drawn from the Internet Archive. Cable and satellite subscriber market shares are estimated
from the MRI (2000-2007) and Simmons (2008-2010) household surveys and Nielsen FOCUS dataset. See the text
for more details.




                                                        53
                  Table A.2: National Cable Channels: Affiliate Fees and Viewership

                                         Affiliate Fees                                         Viewership
                                            Kagan                          Nielsen Ratings       Combined MRI / Simmons
                            Years   Mean    StDev          Min      Max    Obs      Mean        Obs    Mean    SDev    Frac > 0
    ABC Family Channel         11   $0.19    $0.02        $0.16    $0.22   747      0.418    277,535   0.344   1.149      0.176
    AMC                        11   $0.22    $0.02        $0.20    $0.25   747      0.491    277,535   0.351   1.183      0.156
    Animal Planet              11   $0.07    $0.01        $0.06    $0.09   747      0.275    277,535   0.344   1.108      0.203
    A&E                        11   $0.21    $0.03        $0.16    $0.26   747      0.664    277,535   0.472   1.373      0.230
    BET                        11   $0.14    $0.02        $0.11    $0.17   747      0.382    277,535   0.184   1.017      0.070
    Bravo                      11   $0.15    $0.03        $0.11    $0.20   747      0.277    277,535   0.169   0.804      0.092
    Cartoon Network            11   $0.14    $0.03        $0.08    $0.18   747      0.989    277,535   0.231   1.098      0.106
    CMT                        11   $0.06    $0.02        $0.01    $0.08   747      0.142    277,535   0.120   0.732      0.067
    CNBC                       11   $0.24    $0.04        $0.16    $0.30   747      0.217    277,535   0.313   1.185      0.170
    CNN                        11   $0.43    $0.05        $0.35    $0.52   747      0.550    277,535   0.701   1.744      0.319
    Comedy Central             11   $0.11    $0.02        $0.08    $0.14   747      0.449    277,535   0.280   0.997      0.162
    Discovery Channel          11   $0.27    $0.04        $0.22    $0.35   747      0.535    277,535   0.628   1.462      0.327
    Disney Channel             11   $0.81    $0.06        $0.75    $0.91   747      1.171    277,535   0.246   1.074      0.116
    E! Entertainment TV        11   $0.19    $0.02        $0.15    $0.21   747      0.315    277,535   0.201   0.788      0.137
    ESPN                       11   $2.81    $1.12        $1.14    $4.34   747      0.836    277,535   0.675   1.767      0.257
    ESPN 2                     11   $0.37    $0.14        $0.17    $0.58   747      0.262    277,535   0.334   1.220      0.151
    ESPN Classic Sports        11   $0.14    $0.03        $0.10    $0.18   636      0.037    277,535   0.072   0.521      0.047
    Food Network               11   $0.06    $0.03        $0.03    $0.14   747      0.411    277,535   0.396   1.364      0.175
    Fox News Channel           11   $0.32    $0.18        $0.17    $0.70   747      0.785    277,535   0.697   1.961      0.267
    FX                         11   $0.34    $0.06        $0.27    $0.43   747      0.463    277,535   0.258   0.976      0.137
    Golf Channel               11   $0.20    $0.05        $0.13    $0.26   580      0.065    277,535   0.084   0.633      0.041
    Hallmark Channel           11   $0.04    $0.02        $0.01    $0.06   699      0.307    225,618   0.301   1.268      0.088
    Headline News              —       —        —            —        —    747      0.214    277,535   0.278   0.983      0.173
    HGTV                       11   $0.08    $0.04        $0.03    $0.14   747      0.500    277,535   0.397   1.446      0.162
    History Channel            11   $0.18    $0.04        $0.13    $0.23   747      0.531    277,535   0.531   1.462      0.251
    Lifetime                   11   $0.21    $0.06        $0.13    $0.29   747      0.679    277,535   0.554   1.650      0.199
    MSNBC                      11   $0.14    $0.02        $0.12    $0.17   747      0.343    277,535   0.330   1.181      0.182
    MTV                        11   $0.27    $0.05        $0.20    $0.35   747      0.568    277,535   0.235   0.983      0.127
    Nickelodeon                11   $0.37    $0.05        $0.29    $0.47   747      1.555    277,535   0.200   0.991      0.096
    SyFy                       11   $0.17    $0.04        $0.12    $0.22   747      0.427    277,535   0.301   1.207      0.126
    TBS                        11   $0.37    $0.12        $0.19    $0.54   747      0.905    277,535   0.497   1.345      0.243
    TLC                        11   $0.16    $0.01        $0.14    $0.17   747      0.422    277,535   0.342   1.151      0.173
    truTV                      11   $0.09    $0.01        $0.08    $0.10   747      0.384    277,535   0.233   1.081      0.101
    Turner Classic Movies      11   $0.22    $0.03        $0.16    $0.27   580      0.286    277,535   0.268   1.142      0.105
    TNT                        11   $0.83    $0.16        $0.55    $1.10   747      1.219    277,535   0.592   1.553      0.263
    USA                        11   $0.46    $0.07        $0.36    $0.57   747      1.081    277,535   0.503   1.442      0.230
    VH1                        11   $0.12    $0.02        $0.09    $0.16   747      0.336    277,535   0.151   0.717      0.101
    Weather Channel            11   $0.10    $0.01        $0.08    $0.12   747      0.234    277,535   0.380   1.046      0.326

Notes: Reported are average affiliate fees and viewership of the 38 non-RSN cable television networks included in
our demand system. The averages are over the years 2000-2010 for SNL Kagan affiliate fees, over DMA-years for
the Nielsen (DMA-level) viewership data, and over households and years for the MRI (2000-2007) and Simmons
(2008-2010) household-level viewership data. Affiliate fees are the monthly per subscriber fees paid by cable and
satellite distributors to television networks for the right to distribute the network’s programming to subscribers. The
Nielsen “rating” is the percentage of US households watching a given program on a given channel at a given time. We
average program-level ratings across programs within a channel-DMA-year, and report the across-DMA-year average
here. MRI/Simmons viewership is reported as the average number of hours watching that channel in a typical week.
It is converted to a Nielsen-equivalent “rating” by dividing by the number of hours in a week and rescaling it to lie
between 0 and 100. The average fraction of households viewing a channel at all (“Frac > 0”) is the average percentage
of households that reported positive viewing of a channel in a typical week.




                                                              54
                                     Table A.3: Regional Sports Networks: Availability, Affiliate Fees, and Viewership

                                                                 Kagan                             Kagan                                         Nielsen
                                                               Availability                     Affiliate Fees                                   Viewing
                                                            Systems       HH                                                              All      Has      Has   Has
                                                             Served    Served       Years   Mean    StDev         Min    Max     # Obs    HH      Cable    DTV    Dish
                Comcast RSNs
                   CSN Bay Area                                 137        4.7        11    $1.70   $0.53        $1.01   $2.52      720   0.41     0.48    0.45   0.33
                   CSN California                               135       10.0         7    $0.91   $0.14        $0.75   $1.10      360   0.22     0.26    0.20   0.22
                   CSN Chicago                                  335        5.7         7    $2.02   $0.18        $1.90   $2.37      360   0.54     0.66    0.59   0.36
                   CSN Mid-Atlantic                             194        6.2        11    $2.03   $0.74        $0.85   $3.10    1,440   0.13     0.17    0.09   0.03
                   CSN New England                              222        4.8        11    $1.26   $0.32        $0.90   $1.89    1,080   0.27     0.29    0.30   0.17
                   CSN Philadelphia                             102        4.6        11    $1.94   $0.61        $1.05   $2.85      360   0.91     1.15    0.06   0.05
                News Corp RSNs
                   Fox Sports Detroit                           284        5.3        11    $1.75   $0.45        $1.05   $2.34      360   1.02     1.25    0.94   0.68
                   Fox Sports Florida                           152        6.7        11    $1.34   $0.33        $0.90   $1.95    2,160   0.14     0.16    0.12   0.12
                   Fox Sports Midwest                           695        7.4        11    $1.42   $0.44        $0.57   $2.01    1,800   0.31     0.40    0.31   0.26
                   Fox Sports North                             620        4.5        11    $1.97   $0.60        $1.15   $2.88      720   0.79     1.01    1.04   0.70
                   Fox Sports Ohio                              306        7.0        11    $1.61   $0.49        $0.75   $2.42    2,160   0.34     0.42    0.31   0.29
                   Fox Sports South                             905       15.3        11    $1.40   $0.52        $0.52   $2.17    2,880   0.14     0.19    0.09   0.08
                   Fox Sports Southwest                         924       12.7        11    $1.68   $0.50        $0.80   $2.43    4,320   0.16     0.21    0.17   0.13
                   Fox Sports West                              167        9.2        11    $1.80   $0.44        $0.87   $2.35    1,080   0.16     0.21    0.12   0.07
                   Prime Ticket (New)                           132        8.2        11    $1.52   $0.46        $0.60   $2.07      720   0.16     0.22    0.12   0.09
                   Sun Sports                                   234        8.3        11    $1.36   $0.54        $0.55   $2.27    1,440   0.18     0.00    0.11   0.09




55
                Liberty RSNs
                   Root Sports Northwest                        281           5.4     11    $1.73   $0.52        $0.70   $2.54     256    0.23     0.30    0.19   0.15
                   Root Sports Pittsburgh                       316           4.5     11    $1.81   $0.53        $1.05   $2.55     512    0.06     0.07    0.06   0.03
                   Root Sports Rocky Mountain                   479           5.4     11    $1.58   $0.42        $0.75   $2.06     384    0.08     0.10    0.10   0.13
                Cablevision RSNs
                   Madison Square Garden Network (MSG)          219           9.9     11    $1.82   $0.30        $1.45   $2.44    1,080   0.23     0.07    0.24   0.17
                   MSG Plus                                     165           7.5     11    $1.24   $0.15        $1.01   $1.61      360   0.07     0.27    0.05   0.06
                Cox RSNs
                   Channel 4 San Diego                            15          1.0     11    $0.87   $0.26        $0.53   $1.32     360    0.48     0.60    0.03   0.00
                Time Warner RSNs
                   SportsNet New York                           314       20.1         5    $1.91   $0.18        $1.71   $2.20    1,080   0.13     0.15    0.13   0.09
                Independent/Other RSNs
                   Altitude Sports & Entertainment              130           2.8      7    $1.99   $0.29        $1.70   $2.47      360   0.24     0.30    0.21   0.22
                   Mid-Atlantic Sports Network (MASN)           109           5.2      6    $1.58   $0.12        $1.45   $1.77    1,800   0.11     0.13    0.08   0.11
                   New England Sports Network (NESN)            213           4.5     11    $1.99   $0.49        $1.30   $2.72    1,080   0.95     1.02    1.00   0.48
     Notes: Reported are the average availability, affiliate fees, and viewing of the 26 Regional Sports Networks (RSNs) active in 2007 that we focus on in our analysis.
     “Systems served” is the number of systems carrying the RSN, and “HH served” is the number of households to which the RSN is available. Affiliate fees are the
     monthly per subscriber fees paid by cable and satellite distributors to television networks for the right to distribute the network’s programming to subscribers.
     Availability and affiliate fee information is provided by SNL Kagan. RSN viewership is provided by Nielsen. For availability and affiliate fees, the average is over
     the years 2000-2010, and for viewing the average is over DMA-years between 2007-2011 among the top 56 DMAs for which the RSN is deemed to be “relevant”
     (which occurs if at least 30 percent of the teams carried by that RSN are not “blacked out”; see text for further details). Nielsen viewing is the average“rating,”
     the percentage of US households watching a given program on a given channel at a given time, reported for all US households as well as for those households that
     subscribe to cable or to the two national satellite providers, DirecTV (DTV) and Dish.
                                      Table A.4: Estimates of Additional Viewership Parameters and Channel WTPs

                                             Viewership Parameters                 WTP                            Viewership Parameters                      WTP
                                               ρ1c                 ρ0c             Mean                              ρ1c                 ρ0c                 Mean
                  National Channels         Est       SE    Est           SE     All    >0     RSNs               Est       SE    Est           SE     All    SE     >0
                  ABC Family Channel        1.85     0.06   0.33         0.01   0.54    1.15   Altitude Sports   13.97     1.83   0.14         0.01   3.22   0.39    5.76
                  AMC                       2.16     0.10   0.31         0.02   0.63    1.85   4SD                0.81     0.53   0.66         0.08   1.54   0.03    1.77
                  Animal Planet             1.53     0.05   0.41         0.02   0.31    0.53   CSN Bay Area       6.68     0.50   0.24         0.01   4.16   0.19    7.40
                  Arts Entertainment AE     2.29     0.08   0.37         0.02   0.81    1.74   CSN CA             6.55     6.61   0.05         0.08   1.04   0.09    6.84
                  BET                       2.68     0.28   0.13         0.02   0.38    1.83   CSN Chicago        7.92     0.53   0.19         0.01   3.44   0.22    6.75
                  Bravo                     1.92     0.09   0.21         0.01   0.37    1.25   CSN Mid-Atl        8.64     0.82   0.16         0.01   3.27   0.21    6.22
                  Cartoon Network           2.96     0.23   0.24         0.02   0.82    2.19   CSN NE             2.99     0.97   0.28         0.02   1.47   0.08    5.61
                  CMT                       1.69     0.17   0.15         0.02   0.18    1.31   CSN Phil           7.41     0.92   0.26         0.01   4.99   0.21   17.63
                  CNBC                      1.51     0.06   0.38         0.02   0.41    1.18   FS Detroit         9.88     0.51   0.16         0.00   4.38   0.24   11.28
                  CNN                       2.05     0.05   0.58         0.02   0.96    1.43   FS Florida         8.21     1.65   0.22         0.01   2.59   0.24   11.85
                  Comedy Central            2.17     0.12   0.28         0.02   0.54    1.41   FS Midwest        12.13     2.05   0.15         0.01   2.44   0.32   16.19
                  Discovery Channel         1.80     0.04   0.60         0.02   0.94    1.33   FS North          15.01     2.18   0.17         0.01   4.50   0.40   21.31
                  Disney Channel            2.94     0.16   0.24         0.02   0.89    2.64   FS Ohio            8.61     1.01   0.23         0.01   3.70   0.25    6.87
                  E Entertainment TV        1.58     0.05   0.33         0.01   0.37    1.28   FS South          10.03     1.34   0.10         0.00   1.63   0.21    3.92
                  ESPN                     11.06     0.56   0.29         0.01   7.66   16.41   FS Southwest      10.52     1.37   0.18         0.01   3.07   0.31   16.83
                  ESPN 2                    5.45     0.45   0.26         0.01   1.63    3.57   FS West            6.07     0.52   0.22         0.01   4.06   0.18    8.16
                  ESPN Classic              1.26     0.76   0.08         0.02   0.65    2.21   MSG Plus           4.49     0.63   0.16         0.01   1.66   0.11   10.97
                  Food Network              1.83     0.05   0.42         0.02   0.68    1.16   MSG                7.29     0.62   0.19         0.01   2.32   0.19    4.75
                  Fox News Channel          2.36     0.09   0.49         0.02   1.14    1.98   MASN              10.09     1.70   0.16         0.01   2.21   0.27   13.11




56
                  FX                        2.08     0.09   0.28         0.01   0.52    1.42   NESN               7.58     0.45   0.32         0.01   6.91   0.24   20.12
                  Golf Channel              2.30     0.84   0.05         0.02   0.09    0.46   Prime Ticket       5.36     0.33   0.20         0.01   3.11   0.13    5.37
                  Hallmark Channel          3.59     0.86   0.15         0.02   0.45    1.92   Root NW            6.25     1.15   0.23         0.02   1.79   0.20    7.88
                  Headline News             1.51     0.05   0.35         0.01   0.37    0.96   Root Pitts         4.81     0.73   0.19         0.01   2.17   0.12   11.70
                  HGTV                      2.41     0.10   0.29         0.01   0.73    1.50   Root Rocky Mth     7.16     1.81   0.17         0.03   1.79   0.20   10.67
                  History Channel           2.25     0.09   0.42         0.02   0.83    1.18   SNY                5.74     0.61   0.16         0.02   2.51   0.14    5.11
                  Lifetime                  2.61     0.11   0.34         0.02   0.92    2.01   Sun Sports         8.53     1.94   0.12         0.01   1.65   0.18   11.09
                  MSNBC                     1.69     0.06   0.39         0.02   0.52    1.23
                  MTV                       2.19     0.11   0.25         0.02   0.52    1.38
                  Nickelodeon               4.74     0.41   0.16         0.01   1.07    3.06
                  SyFy, Sci-Fi              2.19     0.11   0.24         0.02   0.54    1.56
                  TBS                       2.16     0.06   0.49         0.02   0.99    1.88
                  TLC                       2.23     0.12   0.29         0.02   0.58    1.79
                  truTV, Court TV           2.56     0.21   0.21         0.01   0.46    1.91
                  Turner Classic Movies     3.58     0.86   0.12         0.02   0.48    1.54
                  TNT                       2.34     0.07   0.53         0.02   1.36    2.14
                  USA                       2.36     0.07   0.42         0.02   1.07    1.82
                  VH1                       2.31     0.22   0.14         0.02   0.34    0.82
                  Weather Channel           1.38     0.04   0.54         0.02   0.48    0.79

     Notes: This table reports estimated viewership parameters ρ and implied willingness-to-pay (WTP) amounts (in dollars per household per month) for the
     national channels and RSNs in our analysis. Parameter ρ0c is the probability that a household has positive marginal utilty from channel c, and parameter ρc is the
     exponential parameter governing the distribution of marginal utility if positive. Mean WTP amounts are computed for all households (“All”), and for households
     conditional on deriving positive utility from the channel (“> 0”). Asymptotic GMM standard errors are computed using numerical derivatives and 1500 bootstrap
     draws of markets to estimate the variance-covariance matrix of the moments.
                          Table A.5: Simulated Market Outcomes for RSNs (1/6)
                                                (i) No VI                 (ii) VI PARs                          (iii) VI No PARs

                                                                           (vs. No VI)                             (vs. No VI)

                                                     Level             %∆lvl             %∆W T P              %∆lvl              %∆W T P
     CABLE OWNED      RSNs (1/2)
     4SD              Cable Mkt Share                  0.74                0.1%                                   1.4%
     Cox                                        [0.66,0.77]        [-0.7%,3.3%]                           [-0.1%,7.9%]
     Pop 2.81M         Sat Mkt Share                   0.16                0.0%                                  -5.6%
     Footprint 100%                             [0.15,0.19]        [-3.6%,2.6%]                        [-13.4%,0.5%]
     WTP $1.54         Cable Carriage                  0.49                0.0%                                   0.0%
                                                [0.49,0.49]    [0.0%,105.5%]                          [0.0%,105.5%]
                       Cable Prices                  51.05                 0.0%                                  -0.2%
                                             [50.00,55.39]         [-2.3%,0.4%]                           [-4.5%,0.6%]
     Foreclose: 69%    Aff Fees to Sat                 0.78                1.2%                                       -
                                               [-0.07,1.45]   [-13.4%,18.9%]                                          -
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           28.87                 0.0%              0.1%                 0.3%                5.9%
                                             [16.84,34.38]          [0.0%,2.2%]      [0.0%,87.9%]          [0.0%,3.1%]        [1.3%,93.5%]
                       Satellite Surplus               3.71               -0.1%             -0.2%                -2.3%               -5.4%
                                                [1.08,4.37]        [-3.9%,2.5%]    [-12.5%,14.6%]      [-11.2%,0.0%]         [-27.9%,0.0%]
                       Consumer Welfare              34.43                 0.0%              0.7%                -0.4%               -8.3%
                                             [18.90,38.61]         [-0.3%,2.1%]    [-18.9%,72.8%]         [-1.8%,5.0%]    [-32.8%,112.3%]
                       Total Welfare                 67.01                 0.0%              0.6%                -0.2%               -7.8%
                                             [34.21,73.77]         [-0.1%,1.6%]    [-5.2%,148.2%]         [-0.7%,2.3%]    [-27.1%,165.7%]
     CSN BAY AREA      Cable Mkt Share                 0.61                2.3%                                   2.2%
     Comcast                                    [0.57,0.65]         [0.8%,7.5%]                            [0.8%,7.5%]
     Pop 6.03M         Sat Mkt Share                   0.22               -1.9%                                  -1.8%
     Footprint 54%                              [0.21,0.24]      [-7.3%,-0.8%]                          [-7.3%,-0.7%]
     WTP $4.16         Cable Carriage                  0.57                0.0%                                   0.0%
                                                [0.48,0.62]        [-8.1%,9.8%]                           [-8.1%,9.8%]
                       Cable Prices                  55.64                -1.7%                                  -1.7%
                                             [53.77,58.92]       [-4.6%,-0.2%]                          [-4.6%,-0.2%]
     Foreclose: 0%     Aff Fees to Sat                 1.69                0.5%                                 17.7%
                                                [0.76,2.01]        [-3.8%,9.3%]                          [8.6%,32.7%]
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           23.96                 0.1%               0.4%                0.3%                1.9%
                                             [13.04,26.89]         [-0.4%,0.5%]       [-3.6%,2.8%]        [-0.2%,0.8%]        [-1.6%,4.4%]
                       Satellite Surplus               5.62               -2.0%              -2.7%               -3.1%               -4.2%
                                                [1.69,6.16]      [-8.2%,-0.9%]     [-10.8%,-1.5%]       [-9.5%,-1.6%]      [-12.8%,-2.9%]
                       Consumer Welfare              33.25                 1.3%             10.6%                 1.3%              10.5%
                                             [17.78,37.30]          [0.5%,4.4%]      [4.4%,37.6%]          [0.5%,4.4%]       [4.1%,37.5%]
                       Total Welfare                 62.83                 0.5%               8.3%                0.5%                8.2%
                                             [29.93,68.46]          [0.0%,1.8%]      [1.3%,30.6%]          [0.0%,1.8%]       [1.2%,30.6%]
     CSN CA            Cable Mkt Share                 0.61                0.4%                                   0.4%
     Comcast                                    [0.55,0.65]        [-4.8%,4.8%]                           [-4.8%,4.8%]
     Pop 3.86M         Sat Mkt Share                   0.26               -0.2%                                  -0.2%
     Footprint 10%                              [0.23,0.29]        [-3.5%,6.4%]                           [-3.5%,6.4%]
     WTP $1.04         Cable Carriage                  0.36                0.0%                                   0.0%
                                                [0.32,0.36]       [0.0%,64.4%]                           [0.0%,64.4%]
                       Cable Prices                  53.88                -0.2%                                  -0.2%
                                             [51.89,57.25]         [-3.0%,3.3%]                           [-3.0%,3.4%]
     Foreclose: 0%     Aff Fees to Sat                 0.14                0.2%                                   5.9%
                                               [-0.08,0.61]   [-26.0%,15.1%]                           [-8.4%,45.7%]
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           23.13                 0.0%               -0.1%               0.0%                0.1%
                                             [12.36,26.22]          [0.0%,0.4%]       [-0.2%,14.8%]        [0.0%,0.5%]        [0.0%,16.9%]
                       Satellite Surplus               6.32               -0.2%               -1.1%              -0.2%               -1.3%
                                                [1.92,6.81]        [-3.6%,6.7%]     [-44.3%,24.5%]        [-3.8%,6.6%]      [-46.3%,24.1%]
                       Consumer Welfare              35.17                 0.2%                6.6%               0.2%                6.6%
                                             [18.63,39.77]         [-2.2%,2.2%]   [-54.6%,135.7%]         [-2.2%,2.2%]    [-54.7%,135.7%]
                       Total Welfare                 64.62                 0.1%                5.4%               0.1%                5.4%
                                             [30.68,71.11]         [-0.6%,1.0%]   [-26.1%,109.5%]         [-0.6%,1.0%]    [-26.1%,109.4%]
     CSN CHICAGO       Cable Mkt Share                 0.58                1.2%                                   0.8%
     Comcast                                    [0.57,0.62]        [-0.1%,1.5%]                           [-0.1%,1.4%]
     Pop 9.62M         Sat Mkt Share                   0.23               -0.8%                                  -0.6%
     Footprint 76%                              [0.22,0.23]        [-1.5%,0.2%]                           [-1.4%,0.2%]
     WTP $3.44         Cable Carriage                  0.78               -1.3%                                  -1.3%
                                                [0.70,0.79]     [-0.4%,19.4%]                          [-0.5%,18.8%]
                       Cable Prices                  58.98                -0.7%                                  -0.4%
                                             [56.78,59.57]         [-0.8%,0.3%]                           [-0.8%,0.3%]
     Foreclose: 0%     Aff Fees to Sat                 1.59                0.2%                                 12.5%
                                                [0.65,1.75]        [-6.1%,1.1%]                          [4.4%,19.4%]
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           22.55                 0.0%               0.0%                0.2%                1.2%
                                             [10.47,25.54]          [0.0%,0.8%]       [-0.2%,5.5%]         [0.1%,1.0%]         [0.9%,6.6%]
                       Satellite Surplus               5.78               -0.8%              -1.4%               -1.3%               -2.2%
                                                [1.81,6.21]        [-1.4%,0.2%]       [-2.0%,0.3%]      [-2.4%,-0.4%]        [-3.1%,-0.9%]
                       Consumer Welfare              31.69                 0.6%               5.9%                0.4%                3.9%
                                             [16.88,35.79]         [-0.1%,1.1%]     [-0.8%,10.5%]         [-0.1%,1.0%]        [-0.9%,9.1%]
                       Total Welfare                 60.01                 0.3%               4.5%                0.2%                2.9%
                                             [27.90,66.79]          [0.0%,0.7%]     [-0.7%,11.8%]          [0.0%,0.7%]      [-0.7%,11.6%]


Notes: Simulated market outcomes across three integration scenarios. See Table 4 for details.




                                                                57
                          Table A.6: Simulated Market Outcomes for RSNs (2/6)
                                                (i) No VI               (ii) VI PARs                         (iii) VI No PARs

                                                                         (vs. No VI)                            (vs. No VI)

                                                    Level             %∆lvl            %∆W T P              %∆lvl             %∆W T P
     CABLE OWNED       RSNs (2/2)
     CSN MID-ATL       Cable Mkt Share                0.65                0.6%                                  0.3%
     Comcast                                   [0.62,0.66]         [0.1%,3.4%]                          [-0.5%,3.7%]
     Pop 6.55M         Sat Mkt Share                  0.18               -0.4%                                 -0.1%
     Footprint 70%                             [0.18,0.19]        [-2.8%,0.0%]                          [-9.3%,0.2%]
     Pred WTP $3.27    Cable Carriage                 0.59                2.9%                                  5.5%
                                               [0.42,0.82]   [-17.6%,67.1%]                        [-26.2%,80.4%]
                       Cable Prices                  55.63               -0.4%                                 -0.1%
                                             [55.08,57.75]        [-1.7%,0.3%]                          [-1.5%,1.6%]
     Foreclose: 20%    Aff Fees to Sat                1.35                3.0%                                38.2%
                                               [0.49,1.59]     [-10.3%,9.0%]                        [13.5%,53.3%]
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           23.95                0.1%             0.8%                 0.5%                 3.9%
                                             [11.54,26.29]        [-0.3%,1.6%]   [-2.7%,11.0%]          [-0.3%,2.0%]       [-2.5%,14.0%]
                       Satellite Surplus              4.53               -0.6%            -0.8%                -2.3%                -3.1%
                                               [1.35,5.00]        [-2.6%,0.1%]     [-4.0%,0.1%]       [-4.5%,-0.1%]         [-6.1%,-0.2%]
                       Consumer Welfare              30.76                0.5%             4.5%                 0.3%                 2.5%
                                             [15.74,33.88]         [0.1%,2.4%]    [1.7%,22.8%]          [-3.1%,2.0%]     [-26.8%,20.6%]
                       Total Welfare                 59.24                0.2%             4.5%                 0.2%                 3.3%
                                             [27.92,65.09]         [0.2%,1.4%]    [2.8%,24.1%]          [-1.2%,1.3%]     [-19.3%,23.8%]
     CSN NE            Cable Mkt Share                0.63                1.0%                                  1.7%
     Comcast                                   [0.61,0.66]         [0.0%,1.6%]                           [0.1%,2.7%]
     Pop 5.2M          Sat Mkt Share                  0.13               -1.1%                                 -5.4%
     Footprint 85%                             [0.12,0.13]        [-1.8%,0.0%]                        [-7.2%,-0.2%]
     WTP $1.47         Cable Carriage                 0.77              12.2%                                   9.7%
                                               [0.62,0.83]       [3.3%,33.8%]                          [3.3%,35.5%]
                       Cable Prices                  56.17               -0.5%                                 -0.4%
                                             [54.37,57.34]        [-1.0%,0.2%]                          [-1.3%,0.5%]
     Foreclose: 89%    Aff Fees to Sat                0.78               -4.7%                                      -
                                               [0.20,0.91]        [-3.8%,9.6%]                                      -
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           26.78                0.2%             3.6%                 0.6%                10.2%
                                             [12.90,29.35]         [0.0%,0.5%]      [1.4%,9.7%]          [0.2%,1.1%]         [4.8%,18.7%]
                       Satellite Surplus              2.98               -1.0%            -2.1%                -2.4%                -4.8%
                                               [0.85,3.21]        [-1.8%,0.0%]    [-3.4%,-0.1%]       [-3.7%,-0.5%]         [-8.2%,-0.9%]
                       Consumer Welfare              29.21                0.8%            15.0%                 0.1%                 2.7%
                                             [15.79,33.11]         [0.1%,1.3%]     [1.7%,28.7%]         [-0.9%,1.4%]     [-20.0%,31.8%]
                       Total Welfare                 58.97                0.4%            16.5%                 0.2%                 8.1%
                                             [28.89,64.91]         [0.1%,0.7%]     [4.5%,30.2%]         [-0.2%,0.8%]       [-6.9%,34.1%]
     MSG PLUS          Cable Mkt Share                0.66                3.1%                                  3.1%
     Cablevision                               [0.65,0.70]         [0.1%,5.1%]                           [0.1%,4.9%]
     Pop 9.46M         Sat Mkt Share                  0.19               -4.6%                                 -4.6%
     Footprint 49%                             [0.17,0.19]      [-7.5%,-0.4%]                         [-9.4%,-0.7%]
     WTP $1.66         Cable Carriage                 0.42              54.6%                                 54.6%
                                               [0.41,0.89]     [-0.3%,85.8%]                       [-23.0%,85.8%]
                       Cable Prices                  59.59               -2.2%                                 -2.2%
                                             [57.46,61.09]        [-4.0%,0.0%]                          [-3.8%,0.8%]
     Foreclose: 6%     Aff Fees to Sat                0.75                0.9%                                31.1%
                                               [0.32,0.89]   [-17.8%,17.0%]                            [2.6%,64.0%]
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           32.81                0.6%             11.7%                0.7%               14.3%
                                             [15.57,36.92]        [-0.1%,0.9%]     [-2.2%,17.0%]        [-0.1%,1.3%]       [-1.4%,24.0%]
                       Satellite Surplus              4.39               -4.7%            -12.3%               -5.6%              -14.8%
                                               [1.32,4.71]      [-7.5%,-0.3%]    [-19.7%,-0.9%]         [-7.8%,0.0%]      [-21.6%,-0.1%]
                       Consumer Welfare              35.59                3.2%             67.6%                3.1%               67.2%
                                             [19.34,39.95]         [0.4%,4.8%]    [8.2%,110.9%]         [-1.0%,4.5%]    [-21.2%,108.9%]
                       Total Welfare                 72.78                1.5%             67.0%                1.5%               66.7%
                                             [33.33,80.75]         [0.2%,2.1%]    [10.0%,96.8%]         [-0.2%,2.0%]       [-9.4%,95.8%]
     SNY               Cable Mkt Share                0.63                3.8%                                  3.8%
     Comcast, TWC                              [0.62,0.67]         [0.5%,6.1%]                           [0.5%,6.1%]
     Pop 11.7M         Sat Mkt Share                  0.18               -4.5%                                 -4.5%
     Footprint 35%                             [0.17,0.18]      [-8.2%,-0.7%]                         [-8.2%,-0.7%]
     WTP $2.51         Cable Carriage                 0.79                1.9%                                  1.9%
                                               [0.75,0.89]     [-10.3%,8.3%]                         [-10.3%,7.7%]
                       Cable Prices                  59.80               -2.9%                                 -2.9%
                                             [56.97,61.32]      [-4.5%,-0.3%]                         [-4.5%,-0.3%]
     Foreclose: 0%     Aff Fees to Sat                1.40               -4.0%                                 -3.9%
                                               [0.45,1.54]        [-6.2%,6.3%]                          [-6.0%,6.3%]
                       Cable + RSN Surplus           30.12                0.0%             -0.6%                0.0%               -0.6%
                                             [14.34,33.64]        [-0.6%,0.2%]      [-9.6%,2.7%]        [-0.6%,0.2%]        [-9.6%,2.3%]
                       Satellite Surplus              4.16               -4.3%             -7.2%               -4.3%               -7.2%
                                               [1.26,4.49]      [-8.4%,-0.7%]    [-13.8%,-1.1%]       [-8.4%,-0.7%]      [-13.8%,-1.1%]
                       Consumer Welfare              33.69                3.3%            43.9%                 3.3%              43.9%
                                             [18.22,37.96]         [0.4%,5.2%]     [5.9%,72.8%]          [0.4%,5.2%]       [5.9%,72.8%]
                       Total Welfare                 67.96                1.3%            36.1%                 1.3%              36.1%
                                             [31.47,75.26]         [0.2%,2.0%]     [4.2%,58.3%]          [0.2%,2.0%]       [4.2%,58.3%]


Notes: Simulated market outcomes across three integration scenarios. See Table 4 for details.




                                                               58
                         Table A.7: Simulated Market Outcomes for RSNs (3/6)
                                                     (i) No VI               (ii) VI PARs                      (iii) VI No PARs

                                                                              (vs. No VI)                         (vs. No VI)

                                                         Level             %∆lvl            %∆W T P           %∆lvl             %∆W T P
   SATELLITE OWNED RSNs
   ROOT NW         Cable Mkt Share                         0.61                0.7%                               0.6%
   DirecTV                                          [0.58,0.62]        [-0.4%,2.8%]                       [-0.6%,2.6%]
   Pop 4.15M       Sat Mkt Share                           0.23               -0.5%                              -0.4%
   WTP $1.79                                        [0.22,0.23]        [-2.3%,0.4%]                       [-2.1%,1.1%]
                   Cable Carriage                          0.78                0.0%                               0.0%
                                                    [0.52,1.00]    [-13.4%,14.2%]                      [-31.3%,4.9%]
                        Cable Prices                      52.90               -0.4%                              -0.4%
                                                  [51.94,54.61]        [-1.9%,0.3%]                       [-2.0%,0.4%]
   Foreclose: 0%        Aff Fees to Rivals                 0.75                1.1%                               6.4%
                                                    [0.26,0.98]        [-7.8%,3.1%]                    [-3.4%,11.3%]
                        Cable Surplus                     21.94                0.0%            -0.3%             -0.2%              -2.4%
                                                   [9.99,25.20]        [-0.2%,0.2%]     [-2.1%,2.2%]      [-0.6%,0.2%]       [-5.8%,2.3%]
                        Satellite + RSN Surplus            6.69               -0.4%            -1.4%              0.2%               0.9%
                                                    [2.25,7.14]        [-2.3%,1.1%]     [-7.7%,3.3%]      [-3.1%,1.0%]     [-10.9%,3.0%]
                        Consumer Welfare                  33.05                0.4%             7.6%              0.4%               6.7%
                                                  [17.39,36.63]        [-0.2%,1.7%]   [-4.8%,31.3%]       [-0.9%,1.6%]   [-15.6%,28.9%]
                        Total Welfare                     61.68                0.2%             5.9%              0.2%               5.2%
                                                  [29.41,67.77]        [-0.3%,0.8%]   [-9.1%,27.5%]       [-0.7%,0.7%]   [-23.7%,24.9%]
   ROOT PITT            Cable Mkt Share                    0.62                1.6%                               1.1%
   DirecTV                                          [0.60,0.63]         [0.3%,2.4%]                       [-0.1%,2.1%]
   Pop 5.09M            Sat Mkt Share                      0.16               -1.9%                              -1.2%
   WTP $2.17                                        [0.16,0.16]       [-2.2%,-0.2%]                       [-1.8%,0.7%]
                        Cable Carriage                     0.62                0.0%                              -4.3%
                                                    [0.51,0.69]      [-22.1%,5.0%]                     [-29.4%,0.0%]
                        Cable Prices                      55.64               -1.2%                              -1.0%
                                                  [54.70,56.76]       [-1.8%,-0.2%]                     [-1.9%,-0.1%]
   Foreclose: 0%        Aff Fees to Rivals                 1.24               -0.1%                               8.4%
                                                    [0.53,1.51]        [-2.2%,6.2%]                      [5.1%,19.7%]
                        Cable Surplus                     23.54                0.0%            -0.1%             -0.3%             -3.0%
                                                  [10.87,25.69]        [-0.4%,0.0%]     [-4.2%,0.4%]    [-0.7%,-0.1%]      [-7.2%,-1.1%]
                        Satellite + RSN Surplus            5.04               -1.4%            -3.3%             -0.1%             -0.1%
                                                    [1.51,5.39]        [-4.5%,0.0%]     [-9.4%,0.1%]      [-5.1%,1.0%]      [-8.4%,2.3%]
                        Consumer Welfare                  28.01                1.1%           14.5%               0.8%            10.7%
                                                  [14.67,31.16]         [0.2%,1.8%]    [2.5%,25.4%]       [-0.1%,1.6%]    [-1.0%,22.2%]
                        Total Welfare                     56.59                0.4%           11.1%               0.3%              7.6%
                                                  [27.15,61.63]        [-0.2%,0.6%]   [-4.5%,16.5%]       [-0.4%,0.5%]    [-9.8%,13.2%]
   ROOT ROCKY MTN       Cable Mkt Share                    0.50                0.0%                               1.0%
   DirecTV                                          [0.44,0.53]        [-5.1%,0.0%]                       [-7.0%,2.9%]
   Pop 4.19M            Sat Mkt Share                      0.30                0.0%                              -0.3%
   WTP $1.79                                        [0.29,0.33]         [0.0%,4.5%]                       [-1.0%,5.6%]
                        Cable Carriage                     0.59                0.0%                             -17.3%
                                                    [0.48,0.84]      [-27.5%,0.0%]                     [-37.0%,0.0%]
                        Cable Prices                      55.84                0.0%                              -0.7%
                                                  [54.03,59.28]        [-0.2%,2.4%]                       [-1.5%,3.1%]
   Foreclose: 0%        Aff Fees to Rivals                 0.96                0.3%                               7.9%
                                                    [0.26,1.29]      [-0.5%,15.5%]                       [4.6%,28.7%]
                        Cable Surplus                     13.89                0.0%            -0.1%             -0.4%             -3.1%
                                                   [6.45,15.15]        [-0.8%,0.0%]     [-5.6%,0.2%]    [-1.4%,-0.2%]     [-10.2%,-0.7%]
                        Satellite + RSN Surplus            8.90                0.0%             0.2%             -0.9%             -4.3%
                                                    [3.10,9.44]        [-1.2%,3.6%]   [-4.0%,16.9%]       [-2.7%,4.8%]   [-13.9%,22.8%]
                        Consumer Welfare                  32.59                0.0%            -0.4%              0.3%              4.9%
                                                  [16.28,35.90]        [-2.5%,0.0%]   [-55.1%,0.3%]       [-2.7%,0.9%]   [-63.3%,19.7%]
                        Total Welfare                     55.38                0.0%            -0.3%             -0.1%             -2.4%
                                                  [25.12,60.28]        [-1.1%,0.0%]   [-47.3%,0.0%]       [-1.3%,0.0%]     [-50.2%,0.1%]
   NON-INTEGRATED       RSNs (1/4)
   ALTITUDE             Cable Mkt Share                    0.54               0.2%                                0.1%
   *Comcast                                         [0.48,0.57]       [-0.9%,6.1%]                        [-1.0%,5.2%]
   Pop 7.12M            Sat Mkt Share                      0.28              -0.1%                               -0.1%
   Footprint 74%                                    [0.26,0.30]       [-5.9%,0.3%]                        [-5.2%,0.4%]
   WTP $3.22            Cable Carriage                     0.48               0.0%                                0.0%
                                                    [0.23,0.60]     [0.0%,213.0%]                      [0.0%,213.0%]
                        Cable Prices                      56.41              -0.1%                               -0.1%
                                                  [54.26,59.69]       [-2.8%,1.2%]                        [-2.6%,1.2%]
   Foreclose: 1%        Aff Fees to Sat                    1.20               5.0%                              33.8%
                                                    [0.39,1.48]    [-21.2%,10.8%]                        [2.0%,52.8%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus               16.97               0.1%             0.6%               0.7%              3.5%
                                                   [8.43,18.54]        [0.1%,2.4%]     [0.4%,13.2%]        [0.5%,2.9%]      [2.7%,16.5%]
                        Satellite Surplus                  6.97              -0.4%            -0.8%              -1.7%             -3.6%
                                                    [2.12,7.54]       [-5.8%,0.2%]    [-10.9%,0.4%]     [-5.4%,-0.6%]     [-12.1%,-0.8%]
                        Consumer Welfare                  32.60               0.1%             0.8%               0.0%              0.4%
                                                  [16.47,36.56]       [-0.2%,3.0%]    [-2.6%,28.9%]       [-1.0%,2.3%]   [-10.0%,26.2%]
                        Total Welfare                     56.54               0.0%             0.6%               0.0%              0.3%
                                                  [26.28,62.37]       [-0.1%,1.4%]    [-1.2%,23.3%]       [-0.4%,1.1%]     [-6.3%,20.7%]


Notes: Simulated market outcomes across three integration scenarios. “Satellite + RSN Surplus” includes profits for both
DirecTV and Dish. See Table 4 for details.




                                                                  59
                           Table A.8: Simulated Market Outcomes for RSNs (4/6)
                                                 (i) No VI             (ii) VI PARs                      (iii) VI No PARs

                                                                        (vs. No VI)                          (vs. No VI)

                                                     Level           %∆lvl         %∆W T P               %∆lvl             %∆W T P
        NON-INTEGRATED RSNs (2/4)
        FS DETROIT    Cable Mkt Share                  0.56              3.1%                                 3.0%
        *Comcast                                [0.54,0.58]       [0.3%,6.4%]                          [0.2%,6.3%]
        Pop 4.84M     Sat Mkt Share                    0.17             -3.7%                                -3.6%
        Footprint 82%                           [0.17,0.18]    [-7.1%,-0.4%]                     [-11.8%,-0.3%]
        WTP $4.38     Cable Carriage                   0.76             27.6%                               27.6%
                                                [0.55,0.87]     [6.7%,77.4%]                         [6.7%,77.4%]
                        Cable Prices                  50.34             -1.0%                                -1.0%
                                              [49.71,51.44]      [-3.0%,0.1%]                         [-2.8%,0.5%]
        Foreclose: 7%   Aff Fees to Sat                2.10            -11.4%                               12.7%
                                                [0.76,2.69]   [-30.7%,2.4%]                     [-14.9%,33.3%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus           20.37              1.2%            5.6%                 1.6%              7.5%
                                               [9.70,22.30]       [0.3%,2.5%]    [1.8%,11.5%]          [0.7%,3.1%]      [3.7%,13.0%]
                        Satellite Surplus              4.38             -2.8%           -2.8%                -4.6%             -4.6%
                                                [1.33,4.74]    [-4.9%,-0.3%]    [-4.8%,-0.4%]       [-6.8%,-1.4%]      [-6.3%,-1.8%]
                        Consumer Welfare              26.64              2.4%           14.4%                 2.3%             13.9%
                                              [13.84,29.68]       [0.2%,5.2%]    [1.4%,30.8%]         [-1.5%,5.0%]    [-9.2%,30.2%]
                        Total Welfare                 51.38              1.5%           17.2%                 1.4%             16.8%
                                              [24.53,56.31]       [0.2%,3.3%]    [3.7%,38.5%]         [-0.2%,3.2%]    [-2.7%,36.6%]
        FS FLORIDA      Cable Mkt Share                0.60              0.8%                                 0.7%
        *Comcast                                [0.59,0.61]       [0.1%,3.4%]                         [-0.1%,3.1%]
        Pop 6.20M       Sat Mkt Share                  0.23             -0.8%                                -0.7%
        Footprint 67%                           [0.22,0.23]    [-3.7%,-0.1%]                          [-9.6%,0.0%]
        WTP $2.59       Cable Carriage                 0.90              2.2%                                 2.2%
                                                [0.53,0.94]     [0.5%,68.6%]                         [0.0%,68.6%]
                        Cable Prices                  54.19             -0.4%                                -0.3%
                                              [53.95,54.93]      [-1.4%,0.2%]                         [-1.1%,1.0%]
        Foreclose: 9%   Aff Fees to Sat                1.47             -0.7%                               25.8%
                                                [0.64,1.71]   [-14.1%,5.5%]                          [3.3%,40.1%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus           19.84              0.1%            0.9%                 0.6%              4.4%
                                               [8.90,21.98]       [0.1%,1.6%]    [0.5%,13.0%]          [0.3%,2.1%]      [3.5%,16.5%]
                        Satellite Surplus              6.08             -0.8%           -1.9%                -2.2%             -5.2%
                                                [1.79,6.69]    [-3.3%,-0.2%]    [-9.7%,-0.5%]       [-4.5%,-0.6%]     [-12.8%,-1.3%]
                        Consumer Welfare              31.20              0.5%            5.5%                 0.4%              4.6%
                                              [15.35,34.16]       [0.1%,2.4%]    [1.2%,35.4%]         [-2.7%,2.2%]   [-33.2%,32.5%]
                        Total Welfare                 57.11              0.2%            4.5%                 0.2%              3.9%
                                              [24.93,62.59]       [0.1%,1.3%]    [1.3%,37.2%]         [-1.2%,1.3%]   [-25.1%,35.6%]
        FS MIDWEST      Cable Mkt Share                0.60              1.8%                                 1.7%
        *Comcast                                [0.59,0.62]       [0.1%,2.1%]                          [0.1%,2.1%]
        Pop 10.40M      Sat Mkt Share                  0.21             -1.2%                                -1.2%
        Footprint 26%                           [0.21,0.21]      [-1.5%,0.0%]                         [-1.5%,0.1%]
        WTP $2.44       Cable Carriage                 0.43             29.5%                               29.5%
                                                [0.26,0.55]     [3.3%,51.4%]                    [-13.9%,50.4%]
                        Cable Prices                  52.15             -0.8%                                -0.7%
                                              [51.19,52.45]      [-1.0%,0.1%]                         [-1.0%,0.1%]
        Foreclose: 0%   Aff Fees to Sat                1.18             -1.5%                               17.1%
                                                [0.55,1.31]      [-6.5%,3.1%]                     [10.5%,31.9%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus           19.92              0.3%            2.8%                 0.6%               4.7%
                                               [9.44,21.77]       [0.0%,0.6%]     [0.0%,4.8%]         [-0.1%,0.7%]       [-0.9%,6.8%]
                        Satellite Surplus              5.26             -1.2%           -2.6%                -2.0%              -4.4%
                                                [1.69,5.66]      [-1.4%,0.0%]   [-2.7%,-0.2%]       [-2.5%,-0.7%]      [-4.7%,-1.9%]
                        Consumer Welfare              29.92              1.3%           15.8%                 1.3%             15.6%
                                              [15.57,33.40]       [0.1%,1.4%]    [1.2%,16.7%]          [0.0%,1.4%]      [0.1%,16.6%]
                        Total Welfare                 55.10              0.7%           16.0%                 0.7%             15.9%
                                              [26.21,60.16]       [0.1%,0.8%]    [1.3%,16.6%]         [-0.1%,0.8%]    [-2.5%,16.5%]
        FS NORTH        Cable Mkt Share                0.61              0.1%                                 0.1%
        *Charter                                [0.59,0.64]       [0.0%,0.7%]                          [0.0%,0.7%]
        Pop 5.77M       Sat Mkt Share                  0.15             -0.2%                                -0.2%
        Footprint 12%                           [0.14,0.16]      [-1.4%,0.0%]                         [-1.4%,0.0%]
        WTP $4.50       Cable Carriage                 0.87              0.0%                                 0.0%
                                                [0.62,0.90]       [0.0%,7.4%]                          [0.0%,7.1%]
                        Cable Prices                  52.04             -0.1%                                -0.1%
                                              [50.73,53.33]      [-0.3%,0.1%]                         [-0.3%,0.1%]
        Foreclose: 0%   Aff Fees to Sat                2.42              0.5%                                 7.7%
                                                [0.89,3.09]      [-7.1%,1.7%]                      [-0.4%,12.6%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus           23.02              0.0%           0.1%                  0.1%             0.6%
                                              [10.75,25.23]       [0.0%,0.4%]    [0.0%,1.8%]           [0.1%,0.4%]      [0.6%,2.0%]
                        Satellite Surplus              3.71             -0.2%          -0.2%                 -0.9%            -0.8%
                                                [1.22,4.00]      [-1.1%,0.0%]   [-0.8%,0.0%]        [-2.0%,-0.5%]     [-1.4%,-0.6%]
                        Consumer Welfare              27.70              0.1%           0.6%                  0.1%             0.6%
                                              [14.35,31.04]       [0.0%,0.6%]    [0.0%,3.7%]           [0.0%,0.6%]     [-0.1%,3.6%]
                        Total Welfare                 54.43              0.0%           0.5%                  0.0%             0.5%
                                              [25.87,59.69]       [0.0%,0.3%]    [0.0%,4.5%]           [0.0%,0.3%]     [-0.1%,3.9%]


Notes: Simulated market outcomes across three integration scenarios. See Table 4 for details.




                                                               60
                          Table A.9: Simulated Market Outcomes for RSNs (5/6)
                                                  (i) No VI               (ii) VI PARs                       (iii) VI No PARs

                                                                          (vs. No VI)                           (vs. No VI)

                                                      Level             %∆lvl            %∆W T P              %∆lvl           %∆W T P
      NON-INTEGRATED RSNs (3/4)
      FS OHIO       Cable Mkt Share                     0.60                2.0%                                  2.0%
      *TWC                                       [0.60,0.62]         [0.1%,2.4%]                           [0.1%,2.4%]
      Pop 8.16M     Sat Mkt Share                       0.18               -1.7%                                 -1.7%
      Footprint 51%                              [0.18,0.18]      [-2.5%,-0.1%]                           [-2.6%,0.0%]
      WTP $3.70     Cable Carriage                      0.72                5.3%                                  5.3%
                                                 [0.41,0.78]       [0.0%,46.0%]                          [0.0%,46.0%]
                         Cable Prices                  52.43               -1.2%                                 -1.2%
                                               [51.32,52.52]        [-1.3%,0.2%]                          [-1.2%,0.3%]
      Foreclose: 1%      Aff Fees to Sat                1.72                2.4%                                20.1%
                                                 [0.75,1.94]        [-7.1%,8.8%]                         [5.4%,32.3%]
                         Cable + RSN Surplus           22.39                0.3%            1.6%                  0.5%            3.0%
                                               [10.30,25.14]         [0.0%,1.4%]     [0.3%,9.1%]           [0.3%,1.7%]    [1.7%,10.8%]
                         Satellite Surplus              4.47               -1.9%           -2.2%                 -3.1%           -3.7%
                                                 [1.39,4.76]      [-2.3%,-0.2%]    [-2.7%,-0.2%]        [-4.0%,-0.6%]    [-3.9%,-0.8%]
                         Consumer Welfare              28.65                1.4%           10.7%                  1.4%           10.5%
                                               [15.23,32.22]         [0.1%,2.2%]    [0.7%,17.3%]           [0.0%,2.1%]    [0.3%,16.0%]
                         Total Welfare                 55.51                0.7%           10.0%                  0.7%            9.9%
                                               [26.41,61.52]         [0.1%,1.4%]    [0.8%,23.9%]           [0.0%,1.4%]    [0.7%,22.4%]
      FS SOUTH           Cable Mkt Share                0.62                0.3%                                  0.3%
      *TWC                                       [0.61,0.63]        [-0.1%,1.0%]                          [-0.2%,1.0%]
      Pop 13.20M         Sat Mkt Share                  0.21               -0.7%                                 -0.7%
      Footprint 33%                              [0.21,0.22]        [-1.3%,0.2%]                          [-1.3%,0.3%]
      WTP $1.63          Cable Carriage                 0.83              12.1%                                 12.1%
                                                 [0.58,0.94]     [-7.0%,37.3%]                         [-7.1%,37.3%]
                         Cable Prices                  55.63                0.0%                                  0.0%
                                               [55.40,56.48]        [-0.6%,0.3%]                          [-0.6%,0.3%]
      Foreclose: 0%      Aff Fees to Sat                0.87               -7.2%                                  5.2%
                                                 [0.28,0.96]        [-7.1%,5.6%]                       [-0.2%,23.1%]
                         Cable + RSN Surplus           22.29                0.3%             4.0%                 0.4%             5.5%
                                               [10.89,24.52]        [-0.2%,0.6%]     [-2.8%,9.1%]         [-0.1%,0.7%]   [-2.9%,10.5%]
                         Satellite Surplus              5.76               -0.4%            -1.6%                -0.8%            -3.0%
                                                 [1.80,6.25]        [-1.0%,0.2%]     [-3.7%,0.6%]       [-1.4%,-0.2%]     [-5.0%,-0.8%]
                         Consumer Welfare              30.70                0.3%             5.9%                 0.3%             5.7%
                                               [15.81,33.88]         [0.0%,0.8%]   [-0.6%,15.9%]           [0.0%,0.8%]   [-0.8%,15.8%]
                         Total Welfare                 58.75                0.2%             8.3%                 0.2%             8.2%
                                               [26.82,64.29]        [-0.1%,0.6%]   [-2.2%,23.3%]          [-0.1%,0.6%]   [-3.9%,23.2%]
      FS SOUTHWEST       Cable Mkt Share                0.57                2.5%                                  2.5%
      *Cox                                       [0.56,0.59]         [0.3%,4.1%]                           [0.3%,4.1%]
      Pop 12.70M         Sat Mkt Share                  0.23               -1.1%                                 -1.1%
      Footprint 37%                              [0.22,0.23]      [-2.8%,-0.2%]                         [-2.6%,-0.1%]
      WTP $3.07          Cable Carriage                 1.00                0.0%                                  0.0%
                                                 [0.71,1.00]     [-6.3%,28.8%]                       [-16.7%,22.3%]
                         Cable Prices                  51.20               -1.3%                                 -1.3%
                                               [49.89,51.38]        [-2.0%,0.0%]                        [-2.4%,-0.1%]
      Foreclose: 0%      Aff Fees to Sat                1.56                0.1%                                  8.4%
                                                 [0.62,1.74]     [-10.4%,3.7%]                           [0.1%,21.4%]
                         Cable + RSN Surplus           18.87                0.1%             0.5%                 0.2%              1.4%
                                                [8.25,20.63]        [-0.2%,1.2%]     [-1.5%,7.5%]         [-0.8%,1.0%]      [-5.0%,5.9%]
                         Satellite Surplus              5.98               -1.1%            -2.2%                -1.6%             -3.2%
                                                 [1.90,6.39]      [-2.2%,-0.2%]    [-4.5%,-0.4%]        [-2.9%,-0.5%]     [-5.1%,-1.2%]
                         Consumer Welfare              29.80                1.3%           12.3%                  1.3%            12.2%
                                               [14.95,33.03]         [0.2%,2.3%]    [1.7%,21.4%]           [0.1%,2.2%]     [1.4%,21.1%]
                         Total Welfare                 54.64                0.6%           10.6%                  0.6%            10.5%
                                               [24.40,59.98]         [0.1%,1.3%]    [1.3%,23.7%]           [0.0%,1.1%]   [-0.7%,19.2%]
      FS WEST            Cable Mkt Share                0.55                5.8%                                  5.7%
      *TWC                                       [0.51,0.56]         [0.5%,7.7%]                           [0.5%,7.6%]
      Pop 8.43M          Sat Mkt Share                  0.25               -4.2%                                 -4.2%
      Footprint 53%                              [0.24,0.26]      [-5.9%,-0.3%]                         [-6.2%,-0.2%]
      WTP $4.06          Cable Carriage                 0.81              10.0%                                 10.0%
                                                 [0.63,0.99]   [-10.8%,37.4%]                        [-10.8%,37.4%]
                         Cable Prices                  53.50               -2.9%                                 -2.9%
                                               [52.57,55.80]      [-3.9%,-0.1%]                         [-3.8%,-0.1%]
      Foreclose: 1%      Aff Fees to Sat                1.82               -2.5%                                15.3%
                                                 [0.67,1.99]     [-12.5%,8.8%]                         [-1.7%,36.4%]
                         Cable + RSN Surplus           19.56                1.0%              4.6%                1.3%             6.5%
                                               [10.03,21.49]        [-0.7%,1.8%]      [-3.6%,9.4%]        [-0.3%,2.2%]   [-1.5%,11.1%]
                         Satellite Surplus              6.17               -4.1%             -6.3%               -5.3%            -8.1%
                                                 [1.86,6.68]      [-5.5%,-0.5%]     [-7.9%,-1.0%]       [-6.7%,-1.0%]     [-9.7%,-3.0%]
                         Consumer Welfare              32.01                2.6%            20.8%                 2.6%            20.5%
                                               [16.15,35.45]         [0.3%,3.8%]     [2.6%,30.3%]          [0.3%,3.7%]     [2.2%,30.0%]
                         Total Welfare                 57.75                1.3%            19.1%                 1.3%            18.9%
                                               [26.58,62.69]         [0.0%,1.9%]   [-0.5%,26.9%]          [-0.1%,1.9%]   [-1.7%,26.8%]


Notes: Simulated market outcomes across three integration scenarios. See Table 4 for details.




                                                               61
                         Table A.10: Simulated Market Outcomes for RSNs (6/6)
                                                 (i) No VI              (ii) VI PARs                       (iii) VI No PARs

                                                                         (vs. No VI)                          (vs. No VI)

                                                     Level           %∆lvl             %∆W T P             %∆lvl            %∆W T P
      NON-INTEGRATED RSNs (4/4)
      MASN          Cable Mkt Share                    0.64              4.5%                                  4.4%
      *Comcast                                  [0.61,0.66]       [1.0%,5.6%]                           [0.9%,5.5%]
      Pop 8.25M     Sat Mkt Share                      0.18             -4.1%                                 -3.9%
      Footprint 52%                             [0.17,0.18]    [-7.1%,-1.0%]                      [-10.7%,-1.0%]
      WTP $2.21     Cable Carriage                     0.51            10.2%                                   6.1%
                                                [0.41,0.71]     [2.6%,39.0%]                          [2.2%,39.0%]
                        Cable Prices                  56.71             -2.5%                                 -2.6%
                                              [55.59,58.38]    [-2.9%,-0.1%]                         [-2.8%,-0.1%]
      Foreclose: 3%     Aff Fees to Sat                1.47              0.2%                                27.2%
                                                [0.53,1.70]      [-7.4%,6.8%]                      [13.9%,38.5%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus           23.52              0.1%              1.0%                0.3%             3.3%
                                              [11.47,26.15]      [-0.1%,0.9%]      [-1.6%,8.5%]         [0.1%,1.5%]     [1.3%,16.5%]
                        Satellite Surplus              4.44             -4.2%             -8.4%               -5.7%           -11.4%
                                                [1.34,4.87]    [-6.6%,-0.9%]    [-14.0%,-2.6%]       [-7.5%,-1.5%]    [-16.8%,-4.6%]
                        Consumer Welfare              29.80              3.4%            45.3%                 3.3%            44.4%
                                              [15.53,32.88]       [0.8%,4.2%]    [11.3%,65.2%]         [-0.7%,4.2%]    [-9.9%,64.3%]
                        Total Welfare                 57.76              1.5%            37.9%                 1.4%            36.3%
                                              [27.68,63.28]       [0.4%,1.9%]    [12.7%,51.3%]         [-0.1%,1.9%]    [-1.8%,51.2%]
      PRIME TICKET      Cable Mkt Share                0.55              3.2%                                  3.2%
      *TWC                                      [0.51,0.56]       [0.4%,7.1%]                           [0.5%,6.8%]
      Pop 8.32M         Sat Mkt Share                  0.25             -2.2%                                 -2.2%
      Footprint 53%                             [0.24,0.26]    [-4.7%,-0.3%]                         [-4.7%,-0.3%]
      WTP $3.11         Cable Carriage                 0.79              8.3%                                  8.3%
                                                [0.60,0.87]   [-1.0%,23.8%]                         [-1.0%,23.8%]
                        Cable Prices                  53.29             -1.7%                                 -1.7%
                                              [52.73,55.97]    [-3.6%,-0.1%]                         [-3.3%,-0.1%]
      Foreclose: 1%     Aff Fees to Sat                1.48              0.2%                                18.3%
                                                [0.59,1.70]      [-8.3%,6.1%]                         [3.5%,34.2%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus           19.19              0.5%              3.0%                0.8%             5.0%
                                               [9.68,21.21]       [0.0%,1.0%]      [-0.1%,6.5%]         [0.3%,1.5%]      [1.8%,9.7%]
                        Satellite Surplus              6.09             -2.2%             -4.3%               -3.2%            -6.2%
                                                [1.86,6.69]    [-4.6%,-0.4%]     [-9.0%,-1.0%]       [-5.7%,-0.9%]    [-10.5%,-2.7%]
                        Consumer Welfare              32.33              1.5%            15.5%                 1.5%            15.2%
                                              [16.15,35.63]       [0.3%,3.5%]     [3.4%,34.9%]          [0.3%,3.4%]     [3.1%,34.6%]
                        Total Welfare                 57.61              0.8%            14.2%                 0.8%            14.1%
                                              [26.19,62.28]       [0.2%,1.7%]     [3.9%,29.1%]          [0.1%,1.6%]     [3.5%,28.7%]
      SUN SPORTS        Cable Mkt Share                0.60              1.4%                                  1.3%
      *TWC                                      [0.59,0.61]       [0.1%,2.2%]                           [0.1%,2.2%]
      Pop 3.41M         Sat Mkt Share                  0.18             -1.2%                                 -1.2%
      Footprint 65%                             [0.17,0.18]      [-1.8%,0.0%]                          [-1.8%,0.1%]
      WTP $1.65         Cable Carriage                 0.97              0.0%                                  0.0%
                                                [0.84,0.97]      [-2.0%,7.4%]                          [-2.0%,7.4%]
                        Cable Prices                  55.39             -0.7%                                 -0.7%
                                              [54.84,56.06]      [-1.1%,0.0%]                          [-1.1%,0.0%]
      Foreclose: 0%     Aff Fees to Sat                0.62             -0.2%                                17.1%
                                                [0.29,0.81]      [-5.3%,6.1%]                         [8.8%,33.3%]
                        Cable + RSN Surplus           18.85              0.0%              0.3%                0.1%              1.5%
                                               [8.69,21.04]      [-0.1%,0.5%]      [-1.3%,5.7%]         [0.0%,0.5%]      [-0.2%,7.2%]
                        Satellite Surplus              4.61             -1.3%             -3.5%               -1.7%             -4.7%
                                                [1.36,4.94]    [-1.7%,-0.1%]     [-4.8%,-0.2%]       [-2.3%,-0.3%]     [-6.2%,-1.1%]
                        Consumer Welfare              27.02              1.0%            16.9%                 1.0%            16.7%
                                              [13.49,29.81]       [0.1%,1.7%]     [1.5%,26.7%]          [0.0%,1.7%]     [0.5%,26.7%]
                        Total Welfare                 50.48              0.4%            13.7%                 0.4%            13.5%
                                              [22.93,55.42]       [0.0%,0.9%]     [1.2%,25.2%]          [0.0%,0.9%]     [1.1%,25.1%]


Notes: Simulated market outcomes across three integration scenarios. See Table 4 for details.




                                                              62
  Table A.11: Average Simulated Market Outcomes Across All RSNs (Satellite Adjusts Prices)
                          (i) No VI             (ii) VI PARs                                       (iii) VI No PARs

                                                (vs. No VI)                        (vs. No VI)                        (vs. VI PARs)

                              Level           %∆lvl        %∆W T P             %∆lvl             %∆W T P          %∆lvl           %∆W T P
 ALL RSNs
 Cable Mkt Share                0.61             1.5%                             1.5%                                0.0%
                         [0.61,0.62]      [0.2%,2.1%]                      [0.4%,2.1%]                        [-0.2%,0.2%]
 Sat Mkt Share                  0.19             0.0%                            -0.5%                               -0.5%
                         [0.18,0.20]     [-1.3%,1.1%]                     [-2.0%,0.8%]                        [-1.2%,0.3%]
 Cable Carriage                 0.75             5.8%                             5.4%                               -0.4%
                         [0.69,0.80]    [4.0%,15.9%]                     [3.4%,15.7%]                         [-2.4%,1.1%]
 Cable Prices                  55.06            -1.1%                            -1.0%                                0.1%
                       [54.25,55.98]   [-1.5%,-0.1%]                      [-1.4%,0.0%]                         [0.0%,0.4%]
 Sat Prices                    57.75            -0.8%                            -1.0%                               -0.1%
                       [56.34,61.30]   [-1.5%,-0.1%]                      [-1.8%,0.0%]                        [-0.5%,0.3%]
 Aff Fees to Rivals             1.48            -1.8%                           16.5%                               18.2%
                         [0.46,1.76]     [-5.2%,1.7%]                    [1.9%,43.0%]                        [8.0%,50.3%]
 Cable + RSN Surplus           23.10             0.2%            1.9%             0.5%              4.0%              0.3%              2.1%
                       [10.40,25.27]      [0.2%,0.5%]     [0.9%,7.5%]      [0.3%,0.7%]      [1.7%,14.2%]       [0.1%,0.4%]       [0.4%,5.5%]
 Satellite Surplus              5.06            -1.9%           -3.7%            -2.8%             -5.4%             -1.0%             -1.7%
                         [1.56,5.44]   [-2.8%,-0.5%]    [-9.4%,-0.3%]   [-3.6%,-1.2%]     [-12.1%,-0.9%]    [-1.3%,-0.5%]      [-3.5%,-0.4%]
 Consumer Welfare              31.02             1.4%           17.4%             1.2%             15.6%             -0.2%             -1.8%
                       [13.10,34.10]      [0.3%,1.8%]    [2.4%,33.4%]      [0.0%,1.6%]     [-0.2%,29.5%]    [-0.7%,-0.1%]    [-10.0%,-0.2%]
 Total Welfare                 59.17             0.7%           15.7%             0.6%             14.2%             -0.1%             -1.5%
                       [24.85,64.45]      [0.2%,0.8%]    [2.6%,32.2%]      [0.1%,0.8%]      [1.4%,29.2%]      [-0.3%,0.0%]     [-8.7%,-0.3%]
 # Foreclosed:                                                               4/26 [1,9]


Notes: Average simulated market outcomes for all RSNs, weighted by the number of households in each RSN’s
relevant DMAs, where satellite prices are allowed to adjust. See Table 5 and Appendix C.4 for details.




                                                                  63
B      Necessary Equilibrium Conditions for Affiliate Fee Bargaining
In this section, we describe an infinite-horizon extensive form bargaining game between channels and distrib-
utors that leads to the necessary equilibrium conditions that we employ in our analysis. This bargaining is
conducted between the channel and a representative for each distributor; as noted in the main text, pricing
and carriage decisions, possibly determined by other agents (e.g., local offices of each distributor), are taken
as given by the bargaining agents.
      Initially, assume that there are no agreements formed. In each bargaining period t, either the channel or
the distributors make private offers (if it is the distributors, they make these offers simultaneously). An offer
in bargaining period t to form an agreement between the channel c and distributor f specifies the affiliate fee
τf ct . In each bargaining period, those receiving offers simultaneously announce whether they will accept or
reject the offer made to them. At the end of each bargaining period, the set of agreements is observed by all
players. Payoffs in a period depend on the set of agreements in force following that period’s bargaining. Once
an agreement is reached between c and a distributor g, that agreement remains in force for the remainder of
the game. The channel has discount factor δc ∈ (0, 1) while each distributor has discount factor δd ∈ (0, 1).
We assume that when receiving off-equilibrium path offers the distributors have passive beliefs: that is, they
continue to believe that the rival distributor has received their equilibrium offer (or no offer at all, if that is
what happens on the equilibrium path).
      This setup matches the structure studied by Collard-Wexler et al. (2015) and yields, when players have
passive beliefs in a perfect Bayesian equilibrium, the necessary conditions that we employ in estimating our
model in our cases of “No Integration” and “VI with PARs”.

B.1     Negative Three-Party-Surplus as a Necessary Condition for Non-Supply
For the rest of this section, we consider a situation in which neither satellite distributor (labeled here as
g and g 0 ) is supplied with channel c and we have equilibrium bundles B o , bundle prices po , affiliate fees
τ o , and implied bundle marginal costs mco .74 We focus on stationary perfect Bayesian equilibria, in which
continuation play depends only on the set of agreements already reached.
      We now show that if three-party-surplus, given by the left-hand side of (16), is positive, then there
cannot be a perfect Bayesian equilibrium with passive beliefs in the bargaining game described above in
which, starting in any subgame with no deals yet reached (including at the start of the game), it is certain
that no deals will be reached in the continuation game. To do so, we show that if that was the case, then at
channel c’s first opportunity to make an offer it could deviate and simultaneously make an affiliate fee offers
τ̃gc to distributor g and τ̃g0 c to distributor g 0 having the properties that:

(i) both satellite distributors anticipate greater expected profit by accepting their offer than if no agree-
      ments are reached, regardless of each satellite distributor’s beliefs regarding whether the other satellite
      distributor will be supplied;
(ii) channel c’s profits are greater if both offers are accepted than if no agreements are reached.

     By hypothesis, if channel c makes these offers, then—given passive beliefs—each distributor, say distrib-
utor g, believes that the rival distributor g 0 will not reach an agreement in this bargaining period. Thus,
distributor g believes that no deals will be reached in this period if it rejects the offer made to it, and hence
no deals will occur in the continuation play either. On the other hand, if g accepts, then while only g will
accept this period, once it has accepted channel c and the rival distributor g 0 may reach a deal in the future.
If pt denotes the probability that a deal is reached between channel c and the rival distributor g 0 exactly t
periods after the deal with g (where p0 ≡ 0), then g’s expected payoff from acceptance is a weighted average
of its payoffs when only it accepts offer τ̃gc and when distributor g is also immediately supplied (recall that
g’s payoff depends only on whether g 0 reaches an agreement with channel P c, not on the level of the affilliate
fee c and g 0 agree to), where the weight on the latter payoff is φg ≡ t=0 δdt pt . Thus, property (i) implies
that distributor g will prefer to accept channel c’s offer regardless of its belief about φg . Since this is true
for both distributors, property (ii) implies that the deviation is profitable for channel c.
  74
    For expositional convenience, we suppress the bargaining with the integrated distributor. The channel’s deviation
described below could be done once the channel has reached its internal agreement.


                                                         64
    In the remainder of this appendix we show that if three-party-surplus, given by the left-hand side of (16),
is positive and a certain positive margin condition holds (which we verify in our empirical work), then there
is a pair of affiliate fees (τ̃gc , τ̃g0 c ) at which properties (i) and (ii) hold. This motivates our use of negative
three-party-surplus as a necessary condition for non-supply of both satellite distributors g and g 0 to be an
equilibrium, as otherwise c would find it profitable to make such offers.

Notation. Define
                                         X
                                                    o
                            Dg (A) =          Dgm (Bm ∪ A, pom , ·) ,
                                          m
                                         X
                                                    o
                              πg (A) =        Dgm (Bm ∪ A, pom , ·) × (po,pre-tax
                                                                        gm        − mcogm ) ,
                                          m                           |         {z       }
                                                                                       o
                                                                                   marggm


to be distributor g’s demand
                           P and profits when the distributor-channel P pairs contained in A are added to all
bundles; e.g., Dg (gc, ∅) = m Dgm (Bmo
                                       ∪ {gc}, ·) and Dg (gc, g 0 c) = m Dgm (Bm o
                                                                                   ∪ {gc, g 0 c}, ·). Define
                           X
                                     o                  o
             [∆B Dg (A)] =    Dgm (Bm  ∪ A, ·) − Dgm (Bm  ∪ {A \ B}, ·) ,
                            m
                              |                   {z                   }
                                                       ∆B Dgm (A)
                              X
                                          o                    o
              [∆B πg (A)] =        (Dgm (Bm    ∪ A, ·) − Dgm (Bm ∪ {A \ B}, ·)) × (po,pre-tax
                                                                                    gm        − mcogm ) ,
                               m

for B ⊆ A to be distributor g’s change in demand and profits when the distributor-channel pairs contained
in B are removed from A: e.g., ∆gc πg (gc, g 0 c) represents the difference in distributor g’s profits from when
both g and g 0 carry channel c versus when only g 0 carries c (not including and affiliate fees paid to channel
c). In terms of notation used in the main text,
                                                 X
                                πg (gc, g 0 c) ≡    ΠM    o          0    o    0
                                                     gm (Bm ∪ {gc, g c}, pm , τ ),
                                                       m
                                                       X
                           ∆gc,g0 c πg (gc, g 0 c) ≡       ∆gc,g0 c ΠM    o         0     o    0
                                                                     gm (Bm ∪ {gc, g c}, pm , τ ),
                                                       m

where τ 0 ≡ {τ o ∪ (τgc = 0, τg0 c = 0)}.

Acceptable Offers. Satellite distributor g will accept an affiliate fee offer τ̃gc from channel c and carry
the channel if its expected increase in profits from doing so exceeds the expected payments; i.e., if the
following inequality holds:
                                                                                                                
       φg × [∆gc πg (gc, g 0 c)] + (1 − φg ) × [∆gc πg (gc, ∅)] > τ̃gc φg × Dg (gc, g 0 c) + (1 − φg ) × Dg (gc, ∅) ,

where φg ∈ [0, 1] represents distributor g’s discounted probability that after accepting deviant offer τ̃gc from
channel c, the other distributor g 0 is also supplied. This condition is equivalent to:
                                                                                         
                                  φg × [∆gc πg (gc, g 0 c)] + (1 − φg ) × [∆gc πg (gc, ∅)]
                         τ̃gc <                                                           .                (17)
                                        φg × Dg (gc, g 0 c) + (1 − φg ) × Dg (gc, ∅)

    Define
                                         [∆gc πg (gc, g 0 c)]                 [∆gc πg (gc, ∅)]
                                Ag ≡                          ,        Bg ≡                    .
                                           Dg (gc, g 0 c)                       Dg (gc, ∅)
Note that the numerators of both Ag and Bg are positive: i.e., the change in g’s profits from carrying
channel c equals the increase in g’s demand due to carrying channel c multiplied by strictly positive margins
in every market (which is the case in the data for both satellite distributors at estimated marginal costs).
The derivative of the right-hand side of (17) with respect to φg is weakly positive if Ag ≥ Bg , and strictly


                                                                  65
negative otherwise. Thus, if:
                                                      [∆ π (gc, g 0 c)] [∆ π (gc, ∅)] 
                                                         gc g               gc g
                                    τ̃gc (ε) = min                       ,               −ε,                                     (18)
                                                         Dg (gc, g 0 c)     Dg (gc, ∅)
                                                       |     {z         } |     {z     }
                                                                Ag                 Bg


for ε > 0, then (17) is satisfied for any φg ∈ [0, 1], and g will accept τ̃gc (ε). Define τ̃g0 c (ε) similarly.

Profitable for Channel c to Make Offers. Consider now the decision by channel c to offer both
satellite distributors the set of affiliate fees {τ̃gc (ε), τ̃g0 c (ε)} as defined in (18), where ε > 0. Assume that the
following positive margin condition holds:

                                           (po,pre-tax
                                             gm        − mcogm − τ̃gc (0)) > 0 for all m,

a condition that we have verified holds for each satellite distributor in every market for every RSN when
program access rules are not enforced.
    We now establish that if three-party-surplus is positive, then c wishes to make such offers; i.e.,:75
                   "
               X
                                                0                                          0
                     [∆gc,g0 c ΠM     o                                 M        o
                                gm ({Bm ∪ {gc, g c}}, ·)] + [∆gc,g 0 c Πg 0 m ({Bm ∪ {gc, g c}}, ·)] . . . (19)
                      m
                                                                             #
                                                              0
                                 + [∆gc,g0 c ΠC     o
                                              cm ({Bm ∪ {gc, g c}}, ·)] ≡ E > 0


implies that, for sufficiently small ε > 0,
              X
                                             0                    0                        0
                  [∆gc,g0 c ΠC     o
                             cm ({Bm ∪ {gc, g c}}, ·)] + Dg (gc, g c)τ̃gc (ε) + Dg 0 (gc, g c)τ̃g 0 c (ε) > 0 ,
                  m
                 |                                                {z                                              }
                                                                Π̃C (ε)


where all profit changes are evaluated at prices po and affiliate fees τ 0 . Using (19) and our previously defined
notation, the left-hand side of the previous equation can be re-written as
                                                                                           
                           Π̃C (ε) = E − [∆gc,g0 c πg (gc, g 0 c)] − Dg (gc, g 0 c)τ̃gc (ε)                   (20)
                                                                                             
                                       − [∆gc,g0 c πg0 (gc, g 0 c)] − Dg0 (gc, g 0 c)τ̃gc (ε)

where the terms subtracted from E on the right-hand side are the realized changes in either g or g 0 ’s profits
when both satellite distributors are supplied with c at affiliate fees {τ̃gc (ε), τ̃g0 c (ε)}. Consider the following
two cases:

       • If Ag ≤ Bg , then

                      [∆gc,g0 c πg (gc, g 0 c)] − Dg (gc, g 0 c)τ̃gc (ε)
                                                                                        [∆gc πg (gc, g 0 c)]
                      = [∆gc πg (gc, g 0 c)] + [∆g0 c πg (∅, g 0 c)] − Dg (gc, g 0 c)                        + Dg (gc, g 0 c)ε
                                                                                          Dg (gc, g 0 c)
                      = [∆g0 c πg (∅, g 0 c)] + Dg (gc, g 0 c)ε
                      ≤ Dg (gc, g 0 c)ε                                                                                          (21)
                      ≤ Dg (gc, ∅)ε ,                                                                                            (22)

         where the third line follows because ∆gc,g0 c πg (gc, g 0 c) = ∆gc πg (gc, g 0 c) + ∆g0 c π(∅, g 0 c) and from sub-
  75
   For simplicity, we suppress the notation for the arguments of the profit functions; note, however, that, given
bundle prices po , the three party surplus is unaffected by the levels of (τgc , τg0 c ).


                                                                       66
      stituting for τ̃gc (ε) from (18), using the fact that Ag ≤ Bg ; and the final inequality follows from g
      obtaining weakly more subscribers when g 0 doesn’t carry c, which implies (under the positive margin
      condition) that [∆g0 c πg (∅, g 0 c)] ≤ 0.
    • If Ag > Bg , then:

              [∆gc,g0 c πg (gc, g 0 c)] − Dg (gc, g 0 c)τ̃gc (ε)
               = [∆g0 c πg (gc, g 0 c)] + [∆gc πg (gc, ∅)] − (Dg (gc, g 0 c) − Dg (gc, ∅)) τ̃gc (ε) − Dg (gc, ∅)τ̃gc (ε)
                                                                 |         {z            }
                                                                   [∆g0 c Dg (gc,g 0 c)]
                                 0                      0
               = [∆g0 c πg (gc, g c)] − [∆g0 c Dg (gc, g c)]τ̃gc (ε) + [∆gc πg (gc, ∅)] − Dg (gc, ∅)τ̃gc (ε)
                                                                       |                {z                 }
                                                                                           Dg (gc,∅)ε
                   "                                          #
                    X
                                         0o,pre-tax
               =        [∆g0 c Dgm (gc, ggm         − mcogm ) − [∆g0 c Dg (gc, g 0 c)]τ̃gc (ε) + Dg (gc, ∅)ε
                    m
                                                                            
                 X
               =   [∆g0 c Dgm (gc, g 0 c)] × (po,pre-tax − mcogm − τ̃gc (ε)) + Dg (gc, ∅)ε
                                                                            
                                                gm
                  m
                    |        {z           }   |             {z              }
                                ≤0 ∀m                         >0 ∀m
               ≤ Dg (gc, ∅)ε                                                                                               (23)

      where the fourth line follows from re-arranging terms, and the last inequality holds under the positive
      margin condition.

    Similar conclusions apply for g 0 when Ag0 ≤ Bg0 and when Ag0 > Bg0 .
    Substituting the inequalities in (21) and (23) for both g and g 0 into (20) implies that:

                                     Π̃C (ε) ≥ E − ε × (Dg (gc, ∅) + Dg0 (∅, g 0 c)) .

Thus, if ε > 0, Π̃C (ε) > 0 for any ε ≤ E/(Dg (gc, ∅) + Dg0 (∅, g 0 c)), and channel c will find it profitable to
make offers to g and g 0 that will be accepted.

Remark. The idea behind this necessary condition is as follows. If a satellite distributor’s willingness to
pay for channel c is lowest when the rival satellite distributor also has access to channel c, then the affiliate
fee offers described above make each satellite distributor indifferent to accepting given that its rival will
have access. But its resulting profit level is lower than when neither satellite distributor has access (granting
access to just its rival lowers a satellite distributor’s profit when margins are positive). As a result, if three-
party surplus from supply to both distributors is positive, channel c’s profit would increase by making these
offers. Suppose, instead, that a satellite distributor’s’ willingness to pay for channel c is lowest when the rival
satellite distributor does not have access to channel c. Then the above offers make the satellite distributor
indifferent to accepting if its rival does not have access. But, when its rival does gain access (which happens
with these simultaneous offers), each satellite distributor’s profit falls below its level when neither has access
(given positive margins) and, again, three-party surplus being positive implies that channel c’s profit rises
when both distributors accept.


C     Modeling & Estimation Details
C.1     Ownership and Control Shares
We begin by defining the ownership variables OfMct , OfCct , and Ocdt
                                                                    CC
                                                                       that we use in our estimation, then
discuss the motivation behind these choices, and finally calculate our measures in a few examples.




                                                             67
Definitions. For any MVPD f and channels c and d, we define:
                                              P
                                                  j∈Of (ojf t   × ojct )/(ojf t + ojct )
                                   OfMct ≡        P                  2 /(o
                                                                                             ,
                                                     j∈Of (ojf t )        jf t   + ojct )
                                              P
                                                  j∈Oc (ojct    × ojf t )/(ojct + ojf t )
                                   OfCct ≡        P               2
                                                                                             ,
                                                      j∈Oc (ojct ) /(ojct        + ojf t )
                                              P
                                    CC            j∈Oc (ojct    × ojdt )/(ojct + ojdt )
                                   Ocdt   ≡       P                  2 /(o
                                                                                             ,
                                                      j∈Oc (ojct )        jct    + ojdt )

where Og represents the set of owners of firm g (either MVPD or channel), ojgt represents the ownership
share of firm g by owner j, OfMct represents the ownership coefficent used by an MVPD f when weighting an
integrated channel c’s profits, OfCct represents the ownership coefficent used by a channel c when weighting
                                           CC
an integrated MVPD f ’s profits, and Ocdt      represents the ownership coefficent used by a channel c when
weighting the profits of a channel d’s with which is shares a common owner.

Motivation. For the following discussion, assume that µ = 1.
    If vertical integration always involved full ownership there would be no question of how to form firms’
objective functions. The difficulty comes when there is partial ownerhsip, such as when an MVPD buys
a partial stake in an RSN. In that case, the various owners of the channel may have differing preferences
over the actions that the channel should take. While some papers have proposed partial ownership measures
(e.g., Bresnahan and Salop, 1986; O’Brien and Salop, 2000), little is known empirically about how conflicting
objectives among a firm’s owners translates into the firm’s behavior.
    Our approach to this issue and resulting measures can be understood as follows: consider, as an example,
a channel c that is partially owned by an MVPD f (and owned by no other entity with ownership stakes in
another distributor or channel). Denote the channel-specific profits as πc and MVPD-specific distribution
profits as πf . We assume that (the manager of) channel c maximizes an objective that is an ownership-share
weighted average (with weights representing “shares of control”) of its owners’ “normalized” preferences over
channel and MVPD distribution profits:
                                  X                   h     ojct               ojf t       i
                           Π̃ct =         ojct                       πc +               πf               (24)
                                   j
                                          |{z}          ojct + ojf t       ojct + ojf t
                                     Ownership Shares   |               {z               }
                                                                      Relative “Cash Flows”
                               ∝ πc + OfCct × πf ,

where the normalization for each owner j places weights on πc and πf that sum to 1. Similar logic underlies
the other ownership variables (OfMct and Ocdt CC
                                                 ).
     One can imagine various approaches to this issue. Our measures differ from those used in the literature
cited above on partial ownership by normalizing cash-flows for each owner (e.g., in (24), the weights on πc
and πf for each owner j sum to 1), and in using ownership shares as the control weights. Recent work by
Azar et al. (2016), for example, uses ownership shares as control weights as we do, but does not normalize
the cash flows. Absent this normalization, in the above        example channel   P c would maximize instead an
objective proportional to πc + ÕfCct πf , where ÕfCct = ( j∈Oc ojct × ojf t )/( j∈Oc o2jct ). Of course, these two
                                                           P
approaches do not exhaust the possibilities. For example, one could assume that a firm’s owners bargain
efficiently, resulting in behavior that maximizes their joint payoff. In that case, channel c would maximize
                                       C                C    P                P
an objective proportional to πc + Of ct πf , where Of ct = ( j∈Oc ojf t )/( j∈Oc ojct ).
     One reason that we depart from these two approaches is that these other measures can lead to some
counterintuitive predictions. For example, consider a situation in which an MVPD owns share x of channel
c, while N other shareholders each own share (1 − x)/N of channel c and nothing else. In that case,
                                  C
ÕfCct = x/(x2 + (1 − x)2 /N ), Of ct = 1, and our measure is OfCct = x. As N goes to ∞, the first measure
ÕfCct → 1/x. That is, no matter how small the MVPD’s ownership share x is, as N gets large the channel’s
behavior comes to be what the MVPD would want. The N shareholders with common interests are essentially
powerless. Indeed, for small x the channel simply maximizes the MVPD’s distribution profits. This outcome


                                                               68
                                                                                               C
puts even more weight on the MVPD’s distribution profits than the jointly efficient weight Of ct , which leads
the channel to maximize (πc + πf ) regardless of how small the MVPD’s ownership share x is. In contrast,
in this example our measure puts a weight on the MVPD’s distribution profits that equals the MVPD’s
ownership share in the channel (which is less than the jointly efficient weight).
    We next prove an important feature of our measure: if an MVPD and channel share at most a single
common owner (i.e., an entity that has positive ownership stakes in both firms), then OfMct = OfCct .

Lemma 1 Consider MVPD f and channel c. If there exists at most one owner j such that ojf t × ojct > 0,
then OfMct = OfCct .

Proof. Let ojct = x and ojf t = y. The numerators for OfMct and OfCct are equivalent. The denominator
for OfMct equals y 2 /(x + y) + (1 − y). The denominator for OfCct equals x2 /(x + y) + (1 − x). Both equal
(x + y − xy)/(x + y).                                                                                    
This property holds for all MVPD and channel pairs that we consider in our analysis.
    Finally, note one important empirical advantage of our measure OfCct : it is invariant to the distribution
of ownership among owners with no ownership interests in any other firms within the industry. For example,
in the above example, we would also have OfCct = x if instead there was a single firm owning the (1 − x)
share of channel c (and nothing else). As a result, we do not need data on the pattern of ownership except
that among firms who are vertically integrated.

Examples. We provide two examples of our ownership variables.
   1. Unitary MVPD ownership. Consider an MVPD f that owns of ct = x share of channel c. In this
      case, there is a single owner j of MVPD f , where ojf t = 1. Then the MVPD f places weight OfMct on
      channel c’s profits (relative to its own profits) when making decisions, where:

                                                            (1 × x)/(1 + x)
                                                  OfMct =                   =x.
                                                              (1)/(1 + x)

      For the channel c, there are essentially two owners: one that owns (1 − x) of c (and none of MVPD
      f ), and MVPD f that owns x of c. Here, channel c places weight OfCct on MVPD f ’s profits (relative
      to its own profits) when making decisions, where:

                                           (x × 1)/(1 + x)                    x
                       OfCct =                                     =                     =x.
                                 (1 −   x)2 /(1          2
                                               − x) + (x) /(1 + x)   (1 + x)(1 − x) + x2

      Thus, OfMct = OfCct when a channel only has a single integrated owner.
   2. Channel Conglomerates. Assume that a 3rd party owns x share of channel c and y share of channel
                                       CC
      d. Then channel c places weight Ocdt on channel d’s profits (relative to its own profits) when making
      decisions, where:

                  CC               (x × y)/(x + y)                   x×y              x×y
                 Ocdt =                                     =                     =         .
                          (1 − x)2 /(1 − x) + (x)2 /(x + y)   (x + y)(1 − x) + x2   x+y−x×y

C.2     Solving for Negotiated Affiliate Fees and Bundle Marginal Costs
We omit the subscript on Ψf ct ≡ (1 − ζf ct )/ζf ct for the expressions in this subsection. Let BfRmt be the
observed set of RSNs carried by f in market m in period t.
    Consider MVPD f bargaining with channel c over affiliate fee τf ct , where c has at most a single integrated




                                                              69
owner. Closed form expressions for MVPD and channel “GFT” terms in (9) are:
                             "
                                 h                       i
                                                    \f c
                     X                                                                             X                                                X
GF TfMct =                           µf ct Df mt − Df mt τf ct + µf ct × (Df mt +                             [∆f c Dgmt ])acmt + µf ct                     [∆f c Dgmt ]τgct
                 m∈Mf ct                                                                       g6=f :c∈Bgmt                                g6=f :c∈Bgmt
                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      pre-tax
                        X                X
                 +                                [∆f c Dgmt ]µf dt × (τgdt + admt ) + [∆f c Df mt ] pf mt − mcf mt    ,                                                        (25)
                     d∈Vf t \c g∈Fmt :d∈Bgmt
                             "
                                                    \f c
                     X                                                                     X                                   X
GF TfCct     =                   (Df mt − µf ct Df mt )τf ct + (Df mt +                            [∆f c Dgmt ])acmt +                     [∆f c Dgmt ](τgct )
                 m∈Mf ct                                                         g6=f :c∈Bgmt                              g6=f :c∈Bgmt
                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                               ppre-tax
                      X                                    X                                            X
                 +            λR:f ct [∆f c Dgmt ]                    µCC
                                                                       cdt   × (τgdt + admt ) +                µgct λR:f ct [∆f c Dgmt ]        gmt       − mcgmt           ,
                     g∈Fmt                           d∈Bgmt \c                                        g∈Fmt
                                                                                                                                                                                (26)

                 \f c
where: Df mt is the demand for f in market m if it dropped channel c; λR:f ct = λR if f and c are not
integrated, and λR:f ct = 1 otherwise; µf ct = µ × OfMct ; µCC         CC
                                                            cdt = µ × Ocdt ; and Vf t ≡ {c : Of ct > 0} is the set
of channels owned by MVPD f in period t.
     Focus on the bargain between an RSN c and MVPD f .76 Using (25) and (26), the Nash Bargaining
first-order condition ∀f ∈ Fmt , c ∈ CtR given by (10) (GF TfCct = ΨGF TfMct ) can be re-written as:
           X          h                           i                X                       X
 τf ct                    (1 + Ψ)(1 − µf ct )Df mt +                           τgct              (1 − Ψµf ct )[∆f c Dgmt ]                                                      (27)
         m∈Mf ct                                               g6=f :c∈Bgmt           m∈Mf ct

                              τgdt × ((Ψ − µf ct )1g=f + µCC
                                                                                                                                                       \R
         X           X                                                                         X                                      X
 +                                                        cdt − Ψµf dt )                              [∆f c Dgmt ] + (Ψ − µf ct )                   mcf mt [∆f c Df mt ] =
     g∈Fmt d∈Bgmt \c                                                                        m∈Mf ct                                 m∈Mf ct
                        "                                         #                   "
                                                                                                                                                                                
                          (Ψ − µf ct )[∆f c Df mt ]ppre-tax
             X                                                               X                                                                       X
                                                    f mt    −                             acmt × (1 − Ψµf ct )Df mt + (1 − Ψµf ct )                           [∆f c Dgmt ]
         m∈Mf ct                                                        m∈Mf ct                                                                g6=f :c∈Bgmt
                                                                                           #
                 X          X
         +                              admt × (µCC
                                                 cdt − Ψµf dt )([∆f c Dgmt ]) ,
             g∈Fmt d∈Bgmt \c


          \R                                                 \R             P
 where mcf mt represents non-RSN marginal costs: i.e., mcf mt ≡ mcf mt − d∈BR τf dt .
                                                                                   f mt
    We can also re-write the pricing first-order condition in (5), which provides the optimal set of prices for
every cable provider f in every market m, as:
                  X ∂Dgmt  \R                                
                           mcgmt 1g=f +    (1g=f − µf dt )τgdt =
                                        X
                                                                                                                                                                                (28)
                    ∂pf mt
                 g∈Fmt                   R                      d∈Bgmt
                                                           h      Df mt      ∂Df mt pre-tax X ∂Dgmt                                  X                     i
                                                                           +        pf mt +                                                      µf dt admt .
                                                               1 + taxf mt   ∂pf mt           ∂pf mt
                                                                                                                g∈Fmt                  R
                                                                                                                                    d∈Bgmt


     However, if f is a satellite provider (denoted f ∈ F sat ), we assume that there is a single national price
                                      \R
pf t and non-RSN marginal cost m̂cf mt that applies across all markets; this implies that there is only a single
pricing first-order condition for satellite firms:
       X X ∂Dgmt  \R                               
                  mcgt 1g=f +    (1g=f − µf dt )τgdt =
                              X
                                                                                                                                                                                (29)
       m
            ∂pf t
             g∈Fmt             R                           d∈Bgmt
                                        X       Df mt      ∂Df mt pre-tax   X ∂Dgmt                                   X                        
                                                          +        pf t    +                                                   µf dt admt                 ∀f ∈ F sat .
                                         m
                                              1 + taxf mt    ∂pf t             ∂pf mt
                                                                                                 g∈Fmt                  R
                                                                                                                     d∈Bgmt

  76
    In estimation, we are assuming that λR = 0 in the “non-loophole” markets, and thus omit terms that would
otherwise enter (e.g., if c were integrated with a rival MVPD f 0 ). In the counterfactuals, we re-introduce these terms.




                                                                                           70
    Equations (27), (28), and (29) express affiliate fees and marginal costs as a function of demand param-
eters, prices, and advertising rates. We thus solve for the vector of RSN affiliate fees {τf ct }∀f,t,c∈CtR for all
                                                              \R
RSNs and non-RSN bundle marginal costs {mcf mt }∀f mt via matrix inversion when evaluating the objective
for any parameter vector θ.

National Channels. We use our estimates of RSN affiliate fees and non-RSN bundle marginal costs to
recover {τf ct }∀f t,c∈C
                      / tR for non-RSN channels via matrix inversion on the following:
                   h               i
                              \f c
          X                                     X                     X
 τf ct              Df mt + ΨDf mt +                       τgct             [∆f c Dgmt ] =                                      (30)
         m∈Mf ct                            g6=f :c∈Bgmt          m∈Mf ct
                   "                                              #
             X                                                            X       X                     X
                       Ψ×   [∆f c Df mt ](ppre-tax
                                           f mt      − m̂cf mt ) +                      µf dt Ψτ̂gdt             [∆f c Dgmt ]
         m∈Mf ct                                                      g∈Fmt d∈Bgmt \c                  m∈Mf ct
                       "                                                                                                        #
              X                                 X                              X       X
         −                 acmt × Df mt +                   [∆f c Dgmt ] +                        admt × (−Ψµf dt )([∆f c Dgmt ]) ,
             m∈Mf ct                         g6=f :c∈Bgmt                       g∈Fmt d∈Bgmt \c


where we construct estimates of each bundle’s marginal costs from our recovered non-RSN marginal costs
                         \R    P
as follows: m̂cf mt ≡ m̂cf mt + d∈BR τ̂f dt . We assume away integration incentives for non-RSNs so that
                                               f mt

                  / CtR .
µf ct = 0 ∀f t, c ∈

C.3        Further Estimation and Simulation Details
Construction of Disagreement Payoffs. Computation of several moments in estimation require
constructing values of ∆f c [ΠM                    C
                              f mt (·)] and ∆f c [Πcmt (·)] for each MVPD f and channel c that contract in
each period. These “gains from trade” for each pair are functions of both agreement and disagreement
profits. Profits from agreement (as a function of θ) are computed using (4) and (7) with observed prices
and bundles. Consistent with our timing assumptions (i.e., bundle prices, channel carriage, and affiliate fees
are simultaneously determined), profits from disagreement between MVPD f and channel c are computed
by removing c from all bundles offered by f and holding fixed: (i) bundle prices for all cable and satellite
                                                        0
MVPDs; (ii) carriage decisions for other MVPDs (Bgmt        = Bgmt ∀ g 6= f ); and (iii) affiliate fees τ̂−f c,t for all
other MVPD-channel pairs.

Importance Sampling. We follow the importance sampling approach of Ackerberg (2009) to estimate
our model. We begin by simulating 350 households per market from an initial distribution of random
preferences, so that each household is characterized by a vector of preferences for each channel and satellite
distributor. For each of these simulated households, we solve the viewership problem given by (1) for each
downstream firm in the household’s market. To evaluate candidate parameter vectors in the estimation
objective function, we approximate the relevant integrals (e.g., for implied market shares or mean viewership
by channel) by weighting the initial simulated households by the implied importance sampling weights that
depend on the initial distribution and the candidate distribution. For example, if one were to draw from an
N (0, 1) distribution initially, and want to approximate the mean of an N (0.5, 1) distribution, one would put
relatively more weight on the initial draws near 0.5, and relatively less weight on negative draws.
    The approximation is more accurate the closer is the initial distribution to the candidate distribution.
Therefore, we iteratively updated the initial distribution several times through the process. That is, after
moving in the parameter space to lower objective function values, we re-simulated an initial distribution
from the distribution of preferences implied by the then current best parameter vector.

Estimation of Channel Decay Parameters. We allow for households to have variance in their
values of ν S in order to estimate this parameter using importance sampling. Without allowing for variance
in ν S , we would not be able to obtain any benefits of the importance sampling procedure as we would have
to resolve the viewership problem for each simulated household at each objective function valuation. We



                                                                      71
assume that households’ had a value of ν S drawn from a normal distribution with a common mean and
standard deviation of 0.015.
    As discussed in footnote 48, we estimate ν N S on a coarse grid (with values contained in {0.8, 0.91, 0.95, 0.99});
the objective function was minimized for ν N S = 0.95. The computational difficulty of estimating ν N S using
the same procedure as with ν S is the following: with positive variance in both ν S and ν N S , and given
that values of channel viewership utilities ρ are independent of decay parameters, there would commonly
be households whose parameter draws implied very unrealistic viewership patterns (e.g., spending 90% of
their full day watching a single channel). Such outlier households would imply very inelastic demand for
cable or satellite bundles, and consequently implausibly high mark-ups in certain markets. Although these
households would have negligible weight absent simulation error, memory and computational limitations
prevented us from using more than 350 household simulations per market in estimation.
    To examine the sensitivity of our results to different values of ν N S , we have also computed our counter-
factual simulations using parameter estimates obtained when ν N S = 0.91 and ν N S = 0.99. In both cases,
we find that average simulated changes in surplus or welfare across all RSNs are not statistically different
from those reported in Table 5 (which are computed using parameter estimates obtained when ν N S = 0.95);
and our main findings do not change.

C.4     Computing Counterfactual Equilibria
For each RSN channel c and each integration scenario—no vertical integration, vertical integration with
PARs, and vertical integration without PARs—we compute predicted outcomes in all of the RSN’s relevant
markets in 2007. We also recompute outcomes for the integration scenario that is “observed” in the data for
each RSN.
    We maintain the following assumptions: (i) if supplied, satellite distributors carry c in all of c’s relevant
markets; (ii) cable carriage decisions and affiliate fees for c are allowed to adjust, but those for all other
channels are held fixed. In our main counterfactual results (reported in the main text and in Tables A.5-
A.10), we allow only cable prices to adjust in each RSN’s relevant markets and hold fixed national satellite
prices at levels observed in the data. In a robustness test, we allow satellite prices to adjust under the
assumption that they are set at the DMA level; results from this specification are reported in Table A.11.
    As discussed in the main text and in footnote 61, if we are examining the vertical integration scenario
without PARs, we also allow for the channel’s supply decision to adjust: e.g., if RSN c is a cable-owned
RSN (or is non-integrated and assigned a cable owner under the vertical integration scenarios), we compute
outcomes under four “supply scenarios”—the channel is supplied to both satellite distributors, supplied to
only DirecTV or Dish, or supplied to neither satellite distributor—and test which supply scenario is robust
to deviations by the channel.
    For each RSN c, integration scenario, supply scenario, and set of carriage disturbances {∆f c ωf mt }f,m ,77
we compute outcomes in all of the RSN’s relevant markets by iterating over the following procedure until
prices, fees, and carriage decisions converge:78
   1. Given affiliate fees and carriage decisions, we update bundle prices for all cable (and satellite, when
      appropriate) distributors to maximize profits.
   2. Given bundle prices and carriage decisions, we update affiliate fees {τfCF
                                                                               ct }f using the following system

  77
     We draw a vector of carriage disturbances {∆f c ωf mt }f,m for all MVPDs and relevant markets for RSN c, where
each element ∆f c ωf mt is drawn from a truncated normal distribution with variance 4σ̂ω2 to rationalize observed
carriage decisions in the data given by (14). I.e., for every market m where c ∈ Bf mt , we draw ∆f c ωf mt conditional
on it being less than ∆f c πfMmt (Bmt , ·); and for every market m where c ∈
                                                                           / Bf mt , we draw ∆f c ωf mt conditional on it
being greater than ∆f c πfMmt (Bmt ∪ f c, ·). All counterfactuals outcomes are computed for and averaged over 10 sets
of carriage disturbance draws.
  78
     We iterate until the sum of absolute differences between all RSN affiliate fees and all downstream prices does not
change by more than 10− 3.




                                                           72
   of equations:
                   X          h                           i        X                    X
         τfCF
            ct                    (1 + Ψ)(1 − µf ct )DfCF
                                                        mt +
                                                                                CF
                                                                               τgct                                           CF
                                                                                                (1 − Ψµf ct − µgct λR )[∆f c Dgmt ]
                 m∈Mf ct                                                R,CF
                                                               g6=f :c∈Bgmt           m∈Mf ct


                                            × ((Ψ − µf ct )1g=f + µCC
                 X            X                                                                        X
                                        CF                                                                               CF
         +                             τgdt                        cdt − Ψµf dt − µgct λR )                       [∆f c Dgmt ]=
             g∈Fmt d∈BR,CF \c                                                                       m∈Mf ct
                      gmt
                     h                                                                                                                i
                                                         \R                                                            \R
                         (Ψ − µf ct )(ppre-tax,CF                                           pre-tax,CF
             X
                                       f mt       − m̂cf mt )[∆f c DfCF
                                                                      mt ] − µf 0 ct λR × (pf 0 mt     − m̂cf 0 mt )[∆f c DfCF
                                                                                                                             0 mt ]
         m∈Mf ct
                          "
                 X                                                                   X                       
         −                    acmt × (1 − Ψµf ct )DfCF
                                                     mt + (1 − Ψµf ct )
                                                                                                      CF
                                                                                               [∆f c Dgmt ]
             m∈Mf ct                                                                    R,CF
                                                                               g6=f :c∈Bgmt
                                                                                 #
                 X            X
         +                             admt × (µCC                    CF
                                                cdt − Ψµf dt )([∆f c Dgmt ])            ∀f, c ,                                           (31)
             g∈Fmt d∈BR,CF \c
                      gmt



   where f and f 0 represent the MVPDs with which c is potentially integrated. Equation (31) differs
   from (27) insofar that we now allow for the possibility that λR > 0, and that c may be integrated
   with a rival MVPD f 0 when bargaining with f . We only update {τf ct }∀f for the given channel c that
   is being examined, and not for other channels d that may be active in c’s relevant markets.
3. Given bundle prices, affiliate fees, and carriage disturbances, we update carriage decisions by checking
   in each relevant market whether or not the cable distributor wishes to carry the channel using (14).




                                                                    73
