                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE MINIMUM WAGE AND THE GREAT RECESSION:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE CURRENT POPULATION SURVEY

                                            Jeffrey Clemens

                                         Working Paper 21830
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21830


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2015




Significant portions of text draw heavily on the text of Clemens and Wither (2014), which this paper
supplements. This applies, in particular, to sections describing the minimum wage literature, the background
associated with the minimum wage changes analyzed, the backdrop of this period's aggregate employment
shifts, and the basic estimation framework. Special thanks to Michael Best, Marika Cabral, Joanna
Lahey, Neale Mahoney, Day Manoli, Jonathan Meer, John Shoven, Michael Strain, Rob Valletta, and
Stan Veuger, as well as to seminar participants at LSE and Marquette University, for valuable comments
and discussions. Thanks also to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research and the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco for their hospitality while working on this paper. Finally, special thanks
to Jean Roth for greatly easing the navigation of the CPS-MORG files as made available through NBER.
I gratefully acknowledge support from the UCSD Academic Senate through its small grant program.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jeffrey Clemens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence from the Current Population Survey
Jeffrey Clemens
NBER Working Paper No. 21830
December 2015
JEL No. E24,J21,J31,J38,K31

                                               ABSTRACT

I analyze recent federal minimum wage increases using the Current Population Survey. The relevant
minimum wage increases were differentially binding across states, generating natural comparison
groups. I first estimate a standard difference-in-differences model on samples restricted to relatively
low-skilled individuals, as described by their ages and education levels. I also employ a triple-difference
framework that utilizes continuous variation in the minimum wage's bite across skill groups. In both
frameworks, estimates are robust to adopting a range of alternative strategies, including matching on
the size of states' housing declines, to account for variation in the Great Recession's severity across
states. My baseline estimate is that this period's full set of minimum wage increases reduced employment
among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education by 5.6 percentage points. This
estimate accounts for 43 percent of the sustained, 13 percentage point decline in this skill group's employment
rate and a 0.49 percentage point decline in employment across the full population ages 16 to 64.


Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu
   The U.S. labor market recovered slowly in the Great Recession’s wake. Between
December 2006 and December 2009, the employment rate among individuals ages 16 to
64 declined from 72.2 to 66.4 percent. In December 2012 it stood at 67.2 percent and it has
more recently settled between 68 and 69 percent. Declines were particularly large and
prolonged among individuals with relatively low levels of observable skills. Between
December 2006 and December 2009, employment among individuals ages 16 to 30 with
less than a high school degree declined from 40 to 28 percent. Through 2014, this group’s
employment remained 13 percentage points (33 percent) below pre-recession levels.
   Analyses of the recovery’s sluggishness have considered a variety of potentially com-
plementary explanations. Some work highlights structural factors like slow-moving de-
mographic trends (Aaronson, Cajner, Fallick, Galbis-Reig, Smith, and Wascher, 2014).
Other work points to long-unfolding declines in manufacturing and provides evidence
that such trends were temporarily masked by the housing boom (Charles, Hurst, and
Notowidigdo, 2013). Additional research emphasizes macroeconomic factors ranging
from heightened economic uncertainty (Bloom, 2009; Baker, Bloom, and Davis, 2015;
Shoag and Veuger, 2014) to “scarring” resulting from the recession’s severity (DeLong
and Summers, 2012).
   A second set of candidate factors involves the landscape of policies with social in-
surance and/or redistributive objectives. Several papers consider the unemployment
insurance extensions enacted during this period (Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii, and
Mitman, 2013; Rothstein, 2011; Farber and Valletta, 2013). Additional analyses con-
sider expansions of redistributive programs involving health insurance, food stamps,
and disability benefits (Mulligan, 2012, 2014; Hall, 2014). Finally, Clemens and Wither
(2014b) consider the role of contemporaneous minimum wage changes, which brought
the federal minimum wage from $5.15 in 2007 to $7.25 in 2009. This paper supplements
Clemens and Wither’s (2014b) investigation of these minimum wage increases’ impact


                                            2
on the employment of low-education, low-experience workers during this time period.
   Clemens and Wither (2014b) analyze recent minimum wage increases’ effects using
the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The analysis
makes use of the fact that this period’s federal minimum wage increases were differen-
tially binding across states, generating natural comparison groups. As discussed below,
the SIPP has both advantages and disadvantages for analyzing these differentially bind-
ing minimum wage changes.
   The current paper analyzes this historical episode using the Current Population Sur-
vey (CPS). While the CPS lacks some of the SIPP’s novel features, it has advantages with
regards to data quality and the horizon over which it permits analysis. Because the CPS
underlies the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) unemployment series, in-sample employ-
ment changes map directly into standard regional and national employment statistics.
As shown below, this paper’s findings reinforce Clemens and Wither’s (2014b) conclu-
sion that this period’s minimum wage increases had significant, negative effects on low-
skilled workers’ employment.
   My analysis employs two estimation frameworks. I first conduct a standard difference-
in-differences analysis of the employment of a particularly low-skilled group, namely in-
dividuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education. I then introduce a triple-
difference extension of the difference-in-differences framework. The latter framework
exploits variation in the minimum wage’s bite across skill groups that fully partition the
working age population.
   The primary threat to these research designs is the possibility that low-skilled work-
ers were differentially affected by the Great Recession in states that were fully versus par-
tially bound by this period’s federal minimum wage increases. House price data make it
apparent that the housing crisis was relatively severe in states that were partially bound.
Macroeconomic conditions thus had a more negative effect on employment among low-


                                             3
skilled workers in partially bound states than in fully bound states. This will tend to
bias estimated effects of this period’s minimum wage increases on employment towards
zero. In the basic difference-in-differences framework, I take two approaches to address-
ing this concern. My simplest approach is to control directly for a proxy for the housing
decline’s severity, namely the all-transactions median house price index produced by
the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). Within this approach, I then explore the
baseline’s sensitivity to controlling further for a variety of macroeconomic aggregates,
including stimulus spending through the American Reinvestment and Recovery Act.
    My baseline estimate is that the differentially binding portion of this period’s mini-
mum wage increases reduced the employment of individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than
a high school education by 3.7 percentage points. Controlling for additional macroeco-
nomic covariates has little impact on this estimate. By contrast, taking no measure to
account for variation in the housing decline’s severity results in a downwardly biased
estimate. Employment among young, low-education adults declined by 1 percentage
point more in fully bound states than in partially bound states in spite of the fact that
the latter states’ housing declines were significantly more severe.1
    Within the difference-in-differences framework, my second approach involves match-
ing states on the basis of the severity of their housing declines. In the baseline version
of this approach, I restrict the sample to matches for which the difference in the me-
dian house price decline was less than $10,000. Using this criterion, I estimate that the
differentially binding portion of this period’s minimum wage increases reduced the em-
ployment of low-skilled individuals by 3.8 percentage points. This estimate involves no
additional effort to control for heterogeneity in the Great Recession’s severity. Including
the controls used in the more basic difference-in-differences design results in an estimate

   1 As discussed in section 3,the implied magnitude of the bias associated with taking no steps to account
for variation in the housing decline’s severity is roughly what one can infer using external estimates from
Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2013).

                                                    4
just over 4 percentage points. Allowing the threshold for what constitutes a sufficiently
good match to range from $5,000 to $20,000 has essentially no effect on the resulting
estimate.2
   My second estimation framework utilizes additional variation in the extent to which
minimum wage increases bite the wage distributions of different skill groups. Using
baseline wage information from the CPS’s Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups (CPS-
MORG), I estimate variation in the minimum wage’s bite across age-by-education cells.3
I then implement a triple-difference estimation framework in which the degree of the
minimum wage’s bite serves as a continuous treatment variable.4 This approach thus
makes more extensive use of the information on treatment intensity that can be har-
nessed in the CPS’s repeated cross sectional samples.
   Like the difference-in-differences estimates, the estimates exploiting differential bite
across skill groups provide evidence of negative effects on employment. That is, they
provide evidence that the differentially binding portion of this period’s minimum wage
increases reduced the employment of low-skilled workers. As in the difference-in-
differences results, the estimated employment declines are robust to augmenting the
baseline specification with additional controls for the evolution of macroeconomic ag-
gregates. They are similarly robust to restricting the sample to “good” matches based on
the size of states’ housing declines. Also as in the difference-in-differences framework,
estimates on the matched sample are robust to dropping controls for macroeconomic
conditions altogether.
   I next assess my estimates’ implications for the effects of this period’s minimum wage


   2I   also implement matching based on the percent decline rather than the level of the change.
   3 Theanalysis includes a 3 age group by 3 education group approach and a 5 age group by 4 education
group approach.
   4 For a recent example of a similar estimation framework, see Hoynes and Schanzenbach’s (2012)
analysis of the food stamp program’s employment effects.

                                                     5
increases on aggregate employment. From 2006 to 2012, the average effective minimum
wage rose by $1.72 across the United States. The differential change between fully and
partially bound states was $0.62. Extrapolating from in-sample estimates to the full effect
of the $1.72 increase comes with standard caveats, which are discussed in section 4. My
baseline estimate is that this period’s minimum wage increases reduced employment
among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school degree by 5.6 percentage
points. This amounts to 43 percent of the decline in this group’s employment between
2006 and 2012. Further, it accounts for a 0.49 percentage point decline in the employment
to population ratio across all individuals ages 16 to 64. This aggregate impact, which
is derived exclusively from impacts on individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high
school education, is modestly smaller than the full-population employment estimate
from Clemens and Wither (2014b).5
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 presents background information regarding
the minimum wage increases I analyze. Section 2 presents the difference-in-differences
model, matching strategy, and triple-difference model employed in the analysis. Section
3 presents the results. Section 4 extrapolates the baseline results into aggregate em-
ployment impacts. Section 5 briefly recapitulates the evidence. For interested readers,
Appendix A contrasts the analyses in this paper and in Clemens and Wither (2014b)
with other analyses of this period’s minimum wage increases.




   5 Inthe prior paper, the SIPP’s panel structure enabled a more concentrated harnessing of the mini-
mum wage’s bite on the workers it targets. Clemens and Wither’s (2014b) preferred estimate implied an
aggregate employment rate reduction of 0.7 percentage point.

                                                  6
1     Background on Recent Federal Minimum Wage Increases

    I estimate the minimum wage’s effects on employment using variation driven by fed-
erally mandated increases in the minimum wage rates applicable across the U.S. states.6
On May 25, 2007, Congress legislated a series of minimum wage increases through the
”U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans’ Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Ap-
propriations Act.” Increases went into effect on July 24th of 2007, 2008, and 2009. In July
2007, the federal minimum rose from $5.15 to $5.85, in July 2008 it rose to $6.55, and in
July 2009 it rose to $7.25.
    Figure 1 shows my division of states into those that were fully and partially bound
by changes in the federal minimum wage, which follows the division in Clemens and
Wither (2014b).7 The designation is based on whether a state’s January 2008 minimum
was below $6.55, rendering it at least partially bound by the July 2008 increase and fully
bound by the July 2009 increase. Using Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data on states’
prevailing minimum wage rates, 27 states fit this description.
    Figure 2 shows the time paths of the average effective minimum wage rates in fully
bound states relative to partially bound states.8 The average effective minimum wage
in partially bound states exceeded the minimum applicable in fully bound states prior
to the passage of the 2007 to 2009 federal increases. On average, the effective mini-
mum across partially bound states rose by $1.42 between 2006 and 2012. By contrast,
fully bound states saw their effective minimums rise by $2.04 as a result of the federal
minimum wage legislation.
    As observed in Clemens and Wither (2014b), the principal challenge to the estima-


    6 This   section draws liberally on the text of Clemens and Wither (2014b).
    7 Clemens    and Wither (2014b) is the original source for Figure 1.
    8 Figure
           2 is modified from the equivalent figure in Clemens and Wither (2014b) to incorporate the full
sample period analyzed in the present paper.

                                                       7
tion frameworks developed in the following section is the possibility that low-skilled
workers in fully and partially bound states were differentially affected by the Great Re-
cession. Figure 3 presents data from the BLS, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),
and the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) on the macroeconomic experiences of
fully and partially bound states over this time period.9 The economic indicators reveal
that fully bound states were less severely impacted by the Great Recession than were
partially bound states. Most notably, Panel C reveals that partially bound states had
relatively severe housing declines. This would, if controlled for insufficiently, tend to
bias the magnitudes of estimated employment impacts towards 0. The following section
describes my empirical strategy for addressing this concern.



2      Framework for Analyzing the Effects of Minimum Wage

       Increases Using the Current Population Survey

     My analysis uses monthly employment data from the Current Population Survey
(CPS), which underlies official BLS unemployment statistics.10 The primary analysis
sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. My sole sample inclusion
criterion is that surveyed individuals be between 16 and 64 years of age. The samples
are thus fully representative of the working age population during this time period.
     The estimation frameworks developed below make use of the fact that minimum
wage increases are differentially binding on the wage distributions of different skill
groups. Wage data in the CPS’s Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups (CPS-MORG) in-


     9 Figure
           3 is modified from the equivalent figure in Clemens and Wither (2014b) to incorporate the full
sample period analyzed in the present paper. All series are weighted by state population to reflect the
weighting applied in the regression analysis.
    10 Specifically,
                I use extracts generated using the Minnesota Population Center’s Integrated Public Use
Microsamples (Flood, King, Ruggles, and Warren, 2015).

                                                   8
form my assessment of the extent to which the relevant minimum wage increases were
binding on the wage distribution of a given age-by-education skill group.
   For an age-by-education group g, I use data from January 2006 through July 2009 to
estimate the fraction of months during which the relevant individuals had wage rates
between $5.15 and $7.25, which were the prevailing federal minimum wage rates on
January 1, 2006, and July 31, 2009, respectively.11 For each observation in the CPS-
MORG, I first construct an indicator equal to 1 if the individual’s self-reported wage rate
falls between $5.15 and $7.25:


                          Ai,s,t = 1{5.15 ≥ Hourly Wagei,s,t < 7.25}.                            (1)

For each demographic group g(i ), I then then average these Ai,s,t separately across in-
dividuals in fully and partially bound states over the period preceding July 2009. That
is, I estimate Eg [ Ai,s,t |(Bounds = 1, Postt = 0)] and Eg [ Ai,s,t |(Bounds = 0, Postt = 0)].
Finally, I construct:




    Biteg = Eg [ Ai,s,t |(Bounds = 1, Postt = 0)] − Eg [ Ai,s,t |(Bounds = 0, Postt = 0)].       (2)


Bite g thus describes the difference in the fraction of months individuals in each skill
group spent at affected wage rates in fully bound states relative to partially bound states.
   Table 1 presents the resulting estimates of the “bite” of this period’s minimum wage
increases across a set of 9 age-by-education skill groups. The minimum wage’s bite
across this set of skill groups is, unsurprisingly, strongest among individuals ages 16 to



  11 Some   workers report wage rates below the $5.15 federal minimum. Such cases reflect some combi-
nation of reporting error, employment in jobs not covered by the federal minimum (e.g., workers who
receive tips), and possibly some illegal evasion.

                                                 9
30 with less than a high school education.12 There is non-trivial, but significantly less,
bite among individuals ages 16 to 30 with a completed high school education, as well as
among dropouts between ages 31 and 45. This period’s minimum wage increases had
relatively trivial bite on the wage distributions of higher skilled individuals.



2.1       Difference-in-Differences Framework

    I begin my analysis by estimating the following difference-in-differences specification
on a sample restricted to the most affected skill group, namely individuals ages 16 to 30
with less than a high school education:




                            Yi,s,t =    ∑        β p(t) Bounds × Period p(t)
                                       p(t)6=0

                                 + α1s States + α2t Timet + Xs,t γ + ε i,s,t .                         (3)


The primary outcome variable of interest, Yi,s,t , is employment. The specification controls
for the standard features of difference-in-differences estimation, namely sets of state,
States , and time, Timet , fixed effects. The vector Xs,t contains time varying controls for
each state’s macroeconomic conditions. In my baseline specification, Xs,t includes the all-
transactions FHFA median house price index, which proxies for the state-level severity
of the housing crisis.13


  12 In the construction of Ai,s,t , I code individuals as 0 if they do not report being paid on any hourly
basis. Consequently, the fractions are lower than what one would obtain if one made additional use of
wage rates imputed on the basis of weekly earnings and hours.
  13 It is not uncommon for minimum wage studies to control directly for a region’s overall employment or

unemployment rate. Econometrically, it is likely preferable to exclude such variables. The policy change
of interest may directly affect statewide employment, for example, which is the aggregate outcome of
primary interest. Median house prices are less subject to this concern for two reasons. First, many
minimum wage workers are dependents. Many of their incomes will thus have minimal impact on their
households’ housing decisions. Second, even households headed by minimum wage workers will tend

                                                        10
    Equation (3) allows for two potentially important sources of dynamics in the federal
minimum wage legislation’s effects. First, and most importantly, the legislation was
enacted in May 2007, with wage increases going into effect in July of 2007, 2008, and
2009. The specification thus treats May 2007 through July 2009 as a period of transition
(period p = Transition) from the old policy regime to the new policy regime. Prior
months correspond to the baseline, or period p = 0.
    Second, as in Clemens and Wither (2014b), the specification allows the minimum
wage’s effects to unfold differentially over the short- and medium-run. I code August
2009 through July 2010 as period Post 1 and all subsequent months as period Post 2. This
straightforwardly allows for the possibility that firms’ and workers’ short- and medium-
run responses may differ. Within the recent minimum wage literature, evidence from
Aaronson, French, and Sorkin (2013), Meer and West (Forthcoming), and Sorkin (2015)
indicates that such effects may be important.14 The primary coefficients of interest are
β Post 1(t) and β Post 2(t) , which characterize the differential evolution of employment in
states that were fully bound by the new federal minimum relative to states that were
partially bound. I calculate the standard errors on these coefficients allowing for the
errors, ε i,s,t , to be correlated at the state level.



2.2        Matching on the Severity of States’ Housing Declines

    Within equation (3)’s difference-in-differences framework, I examine the results’ ro-
bustness to applying sample restrictions motivated by a matching procedure. I match
states on the size of their median house price declines between 2006 and 2012 (with

to have tangential if any influence on the housing market segments in which median home values are
determined. I present specifications with additional macroeconomic controls primarily to check whether
my results are sensitive to the inclusion of controls used regularly in the literature. The results are affected
little by the inclusion of these variables in Xs,t .
   14 In
       the current setting, the lag between legislation and full implementation is sufficiently long that the
relevant dynamics might largely be expected to unfold during the transition period.

                                                      11
values averaged across all months in these years). The matches are thus based on the
extent of the housing decline from the first to the last year of the baseline analysis sam-
ple. To be more precise regarding the procedure, I apply nearest neighbor matching
without replacement. I then restrict the sample on the basis of the quality of the re-
sulting matches. For example, the baseline matching sample requires that the difference
in matched states’ housing declines be no greater than $10,000.15 I explore the results’
robustness to applying alternative thresholds of $5,000, $20,000, and 5 log points.
   Table 2 presents summary statistics for the housing declines in fully and partially
bound states for the analysis samples I utilize. Row 1 shows the disparity in the severity
of the housing decline between the full sets of fully and partially bound states. Be-
tween 2006 and 2012, the FHFA’s all-transactions median house price index declined,
on average, by $72,000 in partially bound states and by $24,700 in fully bound states.
Row 2 shows the comparable means for the sample restricted to pairs with declines no
more than $5,000 apart from one another. For this sample, which retains 20 states, the
mean decline in partially bound states was $29,700 and the mean decline in fully bound
states was $27,400. The $10,000 matching criterion retains 24 states and yields means
of $32,000 and $29,700 respectively. The $20,000 matching criterion retains 32 states and
yields means of $38,500 and $27,200 respectively. Finally, the requirement that the de-
clines be within 5 log points of one another retains 30 states and yields means of $36,900
and $24,100. The difference in the means in the latter sample reflects the fact that the
baseline level of median house prices is, on average, higher in partially bound states than
in fully bound states.




  15 Thisapproach to sample selection is sometimes called the “caliper” method (Cochran and Rubin,
1973; Crump, Hotz, Imbens, and Mitnik, 2006).

                                               12
2.3    A Framework for Harnessing Heterogeneity in the Minimum Wage’s

       “Bite” across Skill Groups

    I make further use of variation in the minimum wage’s bite across skill groups by esti-
mating the specification below, which is a triple-difference framework with a continuous
treatment variable:




Yi,s,t =    ∑        β p(t) Period p(t) × Bounds × Biteg(i)
           p(t)6=0

      + α1s,p(t) States × Period p(t) + α2s,g(i) States × Groupg(i) + α3 p(t),g(i) Period p(t) × Groupg(i)

      + α4s States + α5t Timet + α6g Groupg(i) + Xs,t,g(i) γ + ε i,s,t .                              (4)


Equation (4) augments equation (3) with the standard components of triple-difference
estimation. These include group-by-time-period effects, group-by-state effects, and state-
by-time-period effects. These controls account for differential changes in employment
across skill groups over time, cross-state differences in the relative employment of these
groups at baseline, and time varying spatial heterogeneity in economic conditions. For
computational ease, I collapse the data set into state-by-group-by-month cells before
estimating equation (4).16
    A shortcoming of the triple-difference approach involves the possibility of employer
substitution of workers in low “bite” skill groups for workers in high “bite” skill groups.
Substitution of this form could lead the triple-difference approach to overstate a mini-
mum wage increases’ total employment impacts. In this paper’s empirical context, the
aggregate employment impacts implied by estimates of equations (3) and (4) are ulti-



   16 Weights   are utilized throughout to maintain the national and state-level representativeness of the
sample.

                                                      13
mately quite similar.



3     Estimates of Minimum Wage Increases’ Effects

    This section presents my estimates of the effects of binding minimum wage increases
on the employment and other outcomes of low-skilled workers. Its first sub-section
presents estimates of employment impacts using equation (3)’s difference-in-differences
specification. Its second sub-section explores this specification’s robustness. Its third
sub-section explores the minimum wage increases’ effects on additional employment and
earnings margins. Its fourth sub-section presents additional evidence of employment
impacts using equation (4)’s triple-difference specification. Its fifth subsection presents
estimates that allow the minimum wage increases’ effects to unfold with finer dynamics.
Finally, its sixth subsection presents estimates of equation (4) on samples that exclude
the very lowest skilled workers. This final piece of analysis explores whether there is
evidence of employment impacts on low-wage workers within skill groups outside of
individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education.



3.1   Baseline Estimates of Employment Impacts

    Column 1 of Table 3 reports the baseline estimates of differentially binding minimum
wage increases’ effects on employment among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than
a high school degree. Conditional on the decline in states’ median house prices, em-
ployment within this skill group declined by 3.7 percentage points more in fully bound
states than in partially bound states. This is an economically substantial 28 percent of
the total decline in this group’s employment rate over this time period. Because this skill
group accounts for 8.4 percent of the working age population, the associated in-sample
effect on fully bound states’ aggregate employment to population ratios is 0.31 percent-


                                            14
age point. In Section 4 I consider the assumptions needed to extrapolate this estimate to
infer the employment effects of this period’s full set of minimum wage increases.
   For columns 2 and 3, I estimate equation (3) on samples of higher-skilled workers.
The sample in column 2 includes skill groups for which the minimum wage’s “bite,” as
reported in column 3 of Table 1, was between 0.015 and 0.03. The estimated change in
this group’s employment is a negative, statistically insignificant -1.1 percentage points
in the short run and -0.5 percentage point in the medium run. The sample in column
3 includes skill groups for which the minimum wage’s “bite,” as reported in column 3
of Table 1, was less than 0.015. The estimated change in this group’s employment is an
even smaller, and again statistically insignificant, -0.4 percentage point in the short run
and -0.0 percentage point in the medium run.
   Across broad skill groups, the magnitudes of the estimates in Table 3 are monotoni-
cally increasing in the measure of the minimum wage’s bite. Reassuringly, the estimate
for the highest of these broad skill groups is economically quite close to 0. The employ-
ment decline estimated in column 1 thus does not appear to be associated with employ-
ment declines among skill groups that would implausibly be affected by increases in the
minimum wage.
   The estimates associated with the housing price index are also informative. The
housing price index is strongly, positively correlated with employment among individu-
als in each skill group. Consistent with findings from Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo
(2013), this is particularly true among the lowest skilled. For the lowest skilled, the es-
timate implies that a $100,000 decline in median house prices predicts a 2.8 percentage
point decline in employment. The associated estimate for relatively high skilled workers
is that a $100,000 decline in median house prices predicts a 0.5 percentage point decline
in employment. An implication of this finding for estimates that pool high and low
skilled workers, as in estimates of equation (4), is that the coefficients on proxies for the


                                             15
housing decline’s severity must be allowed to vary across skill groups.



3.2    Robustness of the Baseline Difference-in-Differences Estimates

    Table 4 explores the relevance of the inclusion of macroeconomic controls for the
baseline estimate from Table 3’s column 1. Column 2 repeats the baseline estimate.
Column 3 shows that controlling additionally for macroeconomic aggregates including
the statewide employment rate and personal income per capita yields an estimate of
-3.3 percentage points.17 Column 4 shows that controlling additionally for stimulus
spending associated with the American Reinvestment and Recovery Act has no effect on
this estimate.18 Consistent with Clemens and Wither’s (2014b) analysis using the SIPP,
columns 3 and 4 thus show that the baseline estimate is little affected by incorporating
additional macroeconomic controls.19
    Column 5 shows that, as implied by the data from Figure 3, taking no measures to
control for variation in the severity of the housing crisis yields a downwardly biased es-
timate. Specifically, it shows that employment among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less
than a high school degree declined by 1 percentage point more in fully bound states than
in partially bound states in spite of the fact that the housing crisis was much more severe
among partially bound states. The differential effect of the housing decline thus obscures

   17 Asdiscussed in Section 2, the inclusion of these controls is less econometrically attractive than the
inclusion of the median house price index. I present specifications with these additional controls primarily
to show that my results are relatively insensitive to the inclusion of controls used regularly in the literature.
   18 The stimulus variable is constructed using data from Chodorow-Reich, Feiveson, Liscow, and Wool-
ston (2012). Consistent with Chodorow-Reich, Feiveson, Liscow, and Woolston’s (2012) findings, I obtain a
positive coefficient on stimulus spending in regressions involving the samples of middle- and higher-skill
groups (results not shown). The implied “dollars per job” numbers have magnitudes similar to those
estimated by Chodorow-Reich, Feiveson, Liscow, and Woolston (2012). The associated t-statistics range
between 1.5 and 2.3 depending on the combination of macroeconomic covariates included as controls. The
absence of a positive correlation in my specification involving individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a
high school education suggests that stimulus spending created jobs more likely to be held by individuals
in groups with higher observable skill levels.
   19 The   relevant analysis in Clemens and Wither (2014b) appears in Appendix Table A6.

                                                       16
a substantial 2 to 3 percentage points of the effect of the differentially binding portion
of this period’s minimum wage increases. The magnitude of this bias is roughly what
one can infer using external estimates from Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2013).20
Because the housing decline is so relevant, the persuasiveness of the results rests in part
on the consistency of the estimates obtained using equations (3) and (4), the robustness
of each baseline to the matching strategy, the robustness of each baseline to the incor-
poration of additional controls, the plausibility of the underlying dynamics, and the
consistency of the results with the analysis in Clemens and Wither (2014b).
    Table 5 shows that the estimates in Table 4 are moderately reduced by expanding the
baseline period to include 2005. A comparison of Table 4 and Table 5’s first columns
provides an explanation for this result. The dependent variable in these columns is the
level of states’ effective minimum wage rates. The reported coefficients thus describe
the differential change, from the full pre-legislation period to the post-implementation
period, in fully and partially bound states’ average effective minimum wage rates. Ex-
panding the base period reduces this differential change, reflecting the fact that some of
the partially bound states increased their minimum wage rates between 2005 and 2006.
The estimated employment decline per $1 increase in the minimum wage is essentially
unchanged as one moves from Table 4 to Table 5.

   20 On  the upside of the housing boom, Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2013) estimate that a one
standard deviation change in housing demand predicts an 0.8 percentage point change in employment
among the full population ages 21 to 55 (in Table 2, see the entry in column 5 of the row labeled “Housing
Demand Change”). While their estimate is from the housing swing’s upside, Charles, Hurst, and No-
towidigdo (2013) emphasize that this period’s local housing booms and busts were roughly symmetric.
The housing decline was, on average, moderately less than 1 standard deviation (of the distribution across
all states) larger in partially bound states than in fully bound states. If my estimation sample consisted of
a skill group that exhibited the same sensitivity to housing demand, Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo’s
(2013) estimates would suggest a bias of just under 0.8 percentage points. The actual bias exceeds this
because, as shown in Table 3, the employment of high school dropouts ages 16 to 30 was more sensitive
to the housing crisis than the employment of other groups. For this group, the coefficient on the housing
price index was 0.28. When I estimate this coefficient on a sample containing all individuals ages 21 to
55, I obtain a coefficient of 0.10. The bias suggested by Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo’s (2013) estimate
is thus on the order of 0.8 × 0.28
                                 0.10 ≈ 2.4. This is roughly the difference between the estimates reported in
Table 4’s column 5 relative to columns 2 through 4.

                                                     17
   Tables 6 and 7 report estimates of equation (3) on samples that have been restricted
using the matching criteria described in Section 2.2. The results in Table 6 show the
estimates obtained when imposing the 4 match-quality thresholds described in Table 2.
In column 1 the criterion is that each match involve a house price decline that differs
no more than $10,000 between the fully and partially bound state. In column 2 the cri-
terion is $5,000. In column 3 the criterion is $20,000. Finally, in column 4 the criterion
is 5 log points. In all cases, the medium run estimate is between -3.7 and -4.0 percent-
age points. Note that these specifications include no direct controls for heterogeneity in
macroeconomic conditions.21 Matching on the size of states’ housing declines thus pro-
duces estimates in line with that in Table 3’s column 1 without taking additional steps
to control for macroeconomic conditions.
   Figure 4 presents time series tabulations of the employment rates in fully and par-
tially bound states that underlie the matching estimate from column 1. Panel A presents
unadjusted tabulations while Panel B presents tabulations adjusted to smooth out sea-
sonal fluctuations. Averages, taken over the relevant time periods, of the presented
data translate directly into the point estimates from column 1 of Table 7. Over the base-
line, low-skilled workers’ employment in fully bound states exceeded their counterparts’
employment in partially bound states by nearly 5 percentage points. This difference nar-
rowed to just under 2 percentage points over the year following July 2009 increase in the
federal minimum wage. It averaged roughly 1 percentage point over subsequent years.
   The results in Table 7 show that the estimates from column 1 of Table 6 are largely
insensitive to incorporating the macroeconomic controls considered in Table 4. The es-
timates range from -3.8 percentage points (the matching sample specification with no
controls) to -4.5 percentage points. Taken together, the results in Tables 4, 5, 6, and 7


  21 That is, the housing price index is used in the matching procedure, but then excluded from the
regression.

                                                18
provide evidence that the baseline result from column 1 of Table 3 is robust to taking a
range of approaches to controlling for heterogeneity in Great Recession’s severity across
states. Appendix Tables B.2, B.3, B.4, and B.5 present further estimates in which I aug-
ment the specifications already presented with flexible sets of time-varying controls for
individual-level demographics (specifically in age, education, race/ethnicity, and gen-
der). Estimates of the primary coefficient of interest range from -2.8 to -4.3 percentage
points and are statistically distinguishable from 0 at the 0.01 level in all cases.



3.3   Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Effects on Additional La-

      bor Market Markets

   This section reports estimates of equation (3) for additional labor market outcomes
of potential interest. While most of these outcomes are available in the full CPS, weekly
earnings are only available in the smaller samples associated with the CPS-MORG. Table
8 reports estimates for margins including full time employment, part time employment,
hours, and hours conditional on employment using the full CPS. Column 1 repeats the
baseline estimate. Columns 2 and 3 show that there was, on net, no change in the
number of part time jobs and a significant decline in the number of full time jobs held
by individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school degree.
   Columns 4 and 5 shed further light on the results in columns 2 and 3. The average
decline in hours, including both extensive and intensive margin adjustments, was be-
tween 1.7 and 1.8 hours per week. This 1.8 hour decline accounts for an economically
substantial 17 percent of this skill group’s labor input at baseline. Column 5 shows that
the decline in weekly hours conditional employment was roughly 1.3 over the long run.
The net stability of the number of part time jobs thus appears to reflect two offsetting
effects. The first effect is a conversion of some full time work into part time work. The
second effect is the elimination of some initially part time jobs.

                                             19
    Table 9 reports estimates that use the CPS-MORG to supplement the estimates of
effects on employment, hours, and hours conditional on employment with estimates of
effects on weekly earnings. Columns 1 through 3 show that the overall estimated effects
on employment, hours, and hours conditional on employment are quite similar when
comparing the full CPS and the CPS-MORG. Column 4 reports a $15 decline in weekly
earnings over the short run and a $13 decline over the medium run.22 These declines
follow directly from the overall reductions in hours. At the new minimum wage of $7.25,
a decline of 1.8 hours per week translates directly into a $13 decline in weekly earnings.
    The minimum wage increases’ mechanical effect on earnings offsets much less of the
decline due to reductions in hours than one might initially expect. Recall from Table 1
that the differential bite of this period’s minimum wage increases on the lowest-skilled
workers in fully bound states relative to partially bound states was only 5 percentage
points. This largely reflects three factors. First, individuals in this skill group worked
in just under 40 percent of months at baseline. Second, during months when these in-
dividuals were employed, their self-reported wage rates were between the old and new
federal minimum roughly one third of the time. Finally, some of the instances when in-
dividuals report wage rates in the affected range involve employment in uncovered jobs
(e.g., workers who receive tips). The minimum wage increases’ mechanical contribution
to this group’s average weekly earnings turns out to be less than $3.23

   22 These estimates relate quite closely to estimates from Clemens and Wither (2014b). The prior paper
analyzes a more concentrated sample of low wage workers. That paper’s estimates of employment effects
and declines in average earnings are correspondingly moderately larger. For example, Clemens and
Wither (2014b) estimate a $90 short run decline in average monthly earnings, which is moderately larger
the monthly decline implied by a $15 decline in weekly earnings. Clemens (Forthcoming) further analyzes
the implications of Clemens and Wither’s (2014b) estimates for payroll tax revenues and spending through
a variety of public assistance programs.
   23 The  steps in this calculation are as follows. First, the minimum wage increases’ differential bite on
this skill group’s wage distribution, in fully bound states relative to partially bound states, was 5 percent
of survey months as reported in Table 1. Second, this skill group’s average hours of work when working
is 27. The product of these values would thus yield a $2.84 increase in weekly earnings in fully bound
states relative to partially bound states if the minimum wage’s bite in each instance was the full $2.10
increase from $5.15 to $7.25. This is an upper bound because affected workers’ initial wage rates were

                                                     20
3.4    Estimates Utilizing Continuous Measures of the Minimum Wage’s

       “Bite” across Skill Groups

   Table 10 presents estimates of equation (4), in which identification comes from varia-
tion in the minimum wage’s bite across skill groups. Informally speaking, the procedure
involves stacking the skill groups on which separate difference-in-differences regressions
were estimated for Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 allow for variation across the 9 age-by-
education skill-groups described in Table 1. The 38,556 observations are the product of 9
skill groups by 84 months by 51 states. Columns 3 and 4 allow for 20 distinct skill groups
defined by four education groups (separating those with some college from those with
a BA or more education) and five 10-year age bands. The 85,680 observations are the
product of 20 skill groups by 84 months by 51 states. In columns 1 and 3 the housing
price index is the only macroeconomic control, while columns 2 and 4 control further for
the state employment rate, state personal income per capita, and stimulus spending per
capita. Because skill groups were differentially affected by the housing crisis, as found
by Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2013) and shown directly in Table 3, I allow the
relationship between these controls and employment to vary across groups.24
   The estimates in Table 10 provide evidence that, comparing changes in fully bound
states to partially bound states, skill groups more intensively affected by minimum wage
increases experienced greater declines in employment. The estimates, which fall between
-0.7 and -0.8, relate to the estimates from Table 3 as follows. Recall Table 3’s finding that,
comparing fully bound states to partially bound states, employment in the lowest skill
group declined by 3.7 percentage points. Recall further that employment among the
highest skill groups was essentially unchanged. Next, recall Table 1’s presentation of


often between $5.15 and $7.25 rather than pinned directly to $5.15.
  24 Note that if these controls were not allowed to vary across groups they would be perfectly collinear
with a complete set of state by time effects.

                                                   21
the measure of “bite.” Table 1 showed that “bite” is around 4 percentage points higher
among workers in the lowest skill group than in the highest skill groups. Multiplying
this 4 percentage point difference by -0.75, which is the average of the point estimates
from Table 10, yields 3 percentage points. This returns us to the estimated decline in
employment among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school degree net
of employment changes among higher skilled groups (that is, just over 3 percentage
points).
   Tables 11 and 12 explore the robustness of estimates of equation (4) to restricting the
sample using the matching criteria discussed in Section 2.2. Table 11 presents estimates
that allow the minimum wage’s bite to vary across 9 skill groups, while Table 12 allows
for 20 skill groups. As with the estimates reported in Table 7, none of these specifica-
tions contain direct controls for heterogeneity in macroeconomic conditions. The results
thus reveal that the estimated employment effects are robust to applying the matching
strategy in lieu of controlling directly for heterogeneity in the severity of the housing
crisis across states.



3.5   Graphical Presentation of Finer Dynamics

   The panels of Figure 5 display graphical presentations of regression estimates that
allow the effects of differentially binding minimum wage increases to unfold with finer
dynamics over time. Panels A and B present estimates of equation (3), while Panels C
and D present estimates of equation (4). In the underlying regressions, each time period
is a 6 month interval. Period p = 0, relative to which subsequent changes are estimated,
extends from January to June of 2006.
   In Panel A, the marker associated with July through December of 2008 reveals that
there was little net differential change in the employment of low-skilled workers in fully
and partially bound states between the base period and the second half of 2008. There is


                                           22
weak evidence of initial employment declines between July 2008 and June 2009, which
follows the second increment of the increase in the federal minimum wage. A 3 to
4 percentage point decline in low-skilled workers’ employment in fully bound states
relative to partially bound states emerges in all periods following July 2009. Panel B
shows that these declines were not experienced among higher-skilled worker groups, as
shown previously in Table 3.
   In Panels C and D, the estimates again reveal that there was little net differential
change in the employment of low-skilled workers (relative to higher-skilled workers)
in fully and partially bound states from the base period through the end of 2007. In
these specifications, initial evidence of employment declines emerges during 2008, as
the federal minimum wage rose from $5.85 to $6.55. Estimated employment declines
hold steady through 2009, 2010, and 2011, possibly moderating near the sample’s end.
   The dynamics displayed in Figures 4 and 5 provide evidence on two points deserv-
ing emphasis. First, the figures provide evidence against the concern that differential
declines in employment among low-skilled workers predated the legislation of this pe-
riod’s differentially binding minimum wage increases. That is, they provide evidence
against potentially confounding pre-existing trends. Second, they reveal economically
relevant dynamics in the legislation’s effects. Specifically, they provide evidence that
these minimum wage increases’ effects began to unfold around the time of the July 2008
implementation of the increase from $5.85 to $6.55.
   The observed dynamics are of precisely the sort that can be partially misattributed in
difference-in-differences specifications with state-specific trends. In the minimum wage
context, simulations from Meer and West (2013) demonstrate the downward bias that
can arise in such specifications. Studies in settings ranging from divorce law (Wolfers,
2006) to school desegregation (Baum-Snow and Lutz, 2011) have similarly demonstrated
that state-trends specifications can bias estimates when a policy change’s effects unfold


                                           23
with these kinds of dynamics.25



3.6    Estimates Excluding the Very Lowest Skilled Workers

    An important question for assessing the aggregate employment effects of this pe-
riod’s minimum wage increases is whether employment declined among low-wage work-
ers in groups other than the very lowest skilled. Recall from Table 3 that, across broad
skill groups, estimated employment declines increased monotonically in the extent of
the minimum wage’s bite. Estimates for skill groups outside of individuals ages 16 to
30 with less than a high school degree were negative, but small and statistically indis-
tinguishable from 0. While the point estimates were small, it is important to note that
the pools of individuals in these higher-skilled groups are much larger than the pool
of individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education. Small effects on
large skill groups can thus significantly alter one’s assessment of aggregate employment
impacts.
    I explore the presence of employment declines among low-wage workers in higher
skilled demographic groups by estimating equation (4) on samples that exclude the very
lowest skilled workers. Specifically, in both the 9-group and 20-group specifications I
drop groups for which the minimum wage’s estimated bite is greater than 0.05.26 I
present the estimates in Table 13. The estimates are negative, but vary nontrivially across
specifications and are generally not statistically distinguishable from 0. The presence
and magnitudes of effects within these groups is thus uncertain. The negative point
estimates suggest that estimates of aggregate employment impacts that assume effects


   25 Controlling directly for state-specific trends can,
                                                       of course, be appropriate in many circumstances. It is
also worth noting that fully saturated triple difference models are not sensitive to this form of specification
error because state-specific trends are subsumed by state by time period fixed effects.
   26 In the 9-group specification this drops individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education.

In the 20-group specification this drops individuals aged 16 to 25 with less than a high school education.

                                                        24
on these populations are 0 will be conservative.



4      Implications for Changes in Aggregate Employment Over

       the Great Recession

     Between 2006 and 2012, the average effective minimum wage rose from $5.82 to $7.55
across the United States. Over this same time period, the employment to population
ratio among adults ages 16 to 64 declined by nearly 5 percentage points. Clemens and
Wither (2014a) more fully characterize the demographic and cross-country dimensions of
this period’s employment declines. The demographic and cross-country data highlight
that U.S.-specific developments associated with low-skilled workers are an important
dimension of the employment slump.
     Sustained U.S. employment declines were particularly dramatic for low-education,
low-experience individuals. Figure 6’s Panels A and B provide detailed looks at the
evolution of the employment and wage distributions of individuals ages 16 to 30 with
less than a high school education between 2002 and 2014. Between 2006 and 2010, this
skill group’s employment rate declined by 13 percentage points, from 40 percent to 27
percent. It remained down by 13 percentage points through 2014.27 Panel A reveals that
the profile of this group’s real wage distribution either shifted down or was stagnant
from 2002 to 2006, from 2006 to 2010, and again from 2010 to 2014. These developments
are broadly consistent with findings from recent work on the labor market implications
of technological advance (Beaudry, Green, and Sand, 2013; Autor, Dorn, and Hanson,
Forthcoming) and the composition of recent trade growth (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson,
2013). For present purposes, these developments’ most relevant implication is that the

    27 This
         does not primarily reflect a shift between employment and schooling among teenage dropouts.
The employment rate among dropouts ages 20 to 25 similarly declined by 13 percentage points between
2006 and 2010 and remained down by 13 percentage points as of 2014.

                                                25
minimum wage has become more binding on the distribution of low-education, low-
experience individuals’ wages over time. The federal minimum wage’s rise from $5.15
to $7.25 occurred over the same time period as a 20 percent downward shift in the profile
of this group’s real wage distribution.
   Table 3 contains the full set of results underlying my extrapolation to aggregate em-
ployments effects. Recall that the table presents estimates of equation (3) on sub-samples
that fully partition the population ages 16 to 64. Column 1 reports a 3.7 percentage point
decline among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school degree. Columns 2
and 3 report near 0 estimates for groups with higher levels of experience and education.
   Extrapolating the estimates from Table 3 requires sensitivity to the fact that the em-
ployment effects of minimum wage increases may be non-linear, likely with larger effects
for final increments than for initial increases. Further, a given nominal value of the min-
imum wage has more purchasing power, and hence likely more bite, in the typical fully
bound state relative to the typical partially bound state. Figure 3 showed that fully
bound states have relatively low incomes and housing costs, perhaps making it unsur-
prising that they had not voluntarily brought their minimums to the levels seen in the
partially bound states. Indeed, the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage
brought the minimum to nearly 50 percent of the median wage in many fully bound
states, and did so during the weakest national labor market of the last 75 years.
   The extrapolation proceeds as follows. My in-sample estimate is that the differentially
binding portion of this period’s minimum wage increases reduced the employment of
individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education by 3.7 percentage points
(9 percent). The 95 percent confidence interval on this estimate extends from 1.5 to
5.9 percentage points. Applying the relevant sample weights, this group accounted for
8.4 percent of the full population ages 16 to 64. A 3.7 percentage point decline in this
group’s employment thus implies an 8.4 × 0.037 = 0.31 percentage point decline in fully


                                            26
bound states’ employment to population ratios. The confidence interval on this estimate
extends from 0.13 to 0.49 percentage point. Because fully bound states account for 41
percent of the full U.S. population, the purely in-sample decline in employment implies
a 0.31 × 0.41 ≈ 0.13 percentage point decline in the national, working-age employment
to population ratio.
    The 0.13 percentage point decline in the national employment to population ratio is
a purely in-sample estimate for the differential change in the minimum wage in fully
bound states relative to partially bound states. That is, it is an estimate of the effect of
a $0.62 differential increase in the minimum wage in states that account for 41 percent
of the working age population. On average across all states, the effective minimum
wage rose by $1.72 over this time period. A purely linear extrapolation, both within
                                                                                       1        1.72
and across states, thus implies an aggregate effect of roughly 0.13 ×                 .41   ×    .62   ≈ 0.86
percentage point.
    My baseline extrapolation splits the difference between a purely linear extrapolation
and failing to extrapolate at all. I estimate that this period’s minimum wage increases
account for a 0.49 percentage point decline in the employment to population ratio among
all individuals ages 16 to 64. This estimate is derived solely from estimated employment
declines among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school degree, as my
estimates of effects on low-wage workers within older and more educated demographic
groups were relatively imprecise.28 Among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than

  28 In Figure 6’s panels C and D, the 2010 and 2014 wage distributions provide additional, suggestive
evidence that this period’s minimum wage increases reduced employment among the lowest-skilled in-
dividuals in slightly higher observable skill groups. The panels plot wage distributions for high school
dropouts between ages 31 and 45. The relevant feature of this group’s real wages, as shown in Panel C, is
that the 2010 and 2014 distributions were indistinguishable from one another at all wage rates above $7.25
in nominal terms. That is, the real wages of individuals in percentiles 1 through 55 of this skill group
were essentially the same in 2014 as in 2010. Between 2010 and 2014, the real value of the minimum wage
declined by 8 percent, from $7.25 to $6.68 in 2010 dollars. In 2014, the figure reveals that employment had
emerged at wage rates between $7.25 and $6.68 (again in 2010 dollars). Erosion of the minimum wage’s
real value corresponded with a 3 percentage point, or 5 percent, increase in this skill group’s employment
rate. The absence of shifts elsewhere in the wage distribution is suggestive that, as the minimum wage’s

                                                    27
a high school degree, I estimate that this period’s minimum wage increases reduced
employment by 5.6 percentage points. This amounts to 43 percent of the decline in this
group’s employment from 2006 to 2010, as illustrated in Figure 6.



5    Concluding Discussion

    I conclude by briefly recapitulating the key elements and findings of this paper’s
analysis. I analyze the effects of recent federal minimum wage increases, which were
differentially binding across states. Because these minimum wage increases took effect
during the Great Recession, I document heterogeneity in the housing decline’s severity
and implement several approaches to accounting for its influence on low-skilled workers’
employment.
    My analysis of this period’s minimum wage increases’ effects has the following struc-
ture. First, I take a straightforward approach to controlling for heterogeneity in the
housing decline’s severity within a standard difference-in-differences specification. Sec-
ond, I show that controlling for additional macroeconomic covariates has little effect on
the initial estimates. Third, I show that the bias associated with making no attempt
to control for heterogeneity in the housing decline’s severity is of a magnitude in line
with what one can infer from Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo’s (2013) analysis of the
housing boom and bust. Fourth, I show that the results are robust to implementing
triple-difference specifications that make relatively extensive use of variation in the min-
imum wage’s relevance across skill groups. Finally, I show that the results from both
the difference-in-differences and triple-difference specifications are robust to accounting

real value eroded, we are observing movement down a labor demand curve. A similar picture emerges
among individuals ages 16 to 30 with exactly a high school degree. By contrast, employment among
individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school degree did not recover between 2010 and 2014. As
shown in Panel A, this group’s real wage distribution shifted modestly down between 2010 and 2014, such
that its nominal wage distribution (and with it the $7.25 minimum wage rate’s bite) had not shifted (Panel
B). The $7.25 minimum wage was thus similarly binding on this group’s wage distribution in both years.

                                                   28
for heterogeneity in the housing decline’s severity using a standard matching proce-
dure. The evidence supports the view that this period’s minimum wage increases had
significant, negative effects on low-skilled workers’ employment.




                                          29
References

Aaronson, D., E. French, and I. Sorkin (2013): “Firm Dynamics and the Minimum
  Wage: A Putty-Clay Approach,” Discussion paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Aaronson, S., T. Cajner, B. Fallick, F. Galbis-Reig, C. L. Smith, and W. Wascher
  (2014): “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Dis-
  cussion paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

Acemoglu, D., and J.-S. Pischke (1999): “Minimum wages and on-the-job training,”
  NBER Working Paper 7184.

Addison, J. T., M. L. Blackburn, and C. D. Cotti (2013): “Minimum wage increases in
  a recessionary environment,” Labour Economics, 23, 30–39.

Arulampalam, W., A. L. Booth, and M. L. Bryan (2004): “Training and the new mini-
  mum wage*,” The Economic Journal, 114(494), C87–C94.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
  Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review,
  103(6), 2121–68.

        (Forthcoming): “Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence from Local Labor
  Markets,” The Economic Journal.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2015): “Measuring Economic Policy Uncer-
  tainty,” NBER Working Paper 21633.

Baum-Snow, N., and B. F. Lutz (2011): “School desegregation, school choice and changes
  in residential location patterns by race,” The American economic review, 101(7), 3019.

Beaudry, P., D. A. Green, and B. M. Sand (2013): “The great reversal in the demand for
  skill and cognitive tasks,” NBER Working Paper 18901.

                                            30
Bloom, N. (2009): “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77(3), 623–685.

Burkhauser, R. V., and J. J. Sabia (2007): “The Effectiveness of Minimum Wage Increases
  in Reducing Poverty: Past, Present, and Future,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 25(2),
  262–281.

Card, D. (1992a): “Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of Califor-
  nia, 1987-89,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46(1), 38–54.

           (1992b): “Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal
  Minimum Wage,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46(1), 22–37.

Card, D., and A. B. Krueger (1994): “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
  of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,” American Economic Review,
  84(4).

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2013): “Manufacturing decline,
  housing booms, and non-employment,” NBER Working Paper 18949.

Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2012): “Does state
  fiscal relief during recessions increase employment? Evidence from the American
  Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(3),
  118–145.

Clemens, J. (Forthcoming): “Redistribution through Minimum Wage Regulation: An
  Analysis of Program Linkages and Budgetary Spillovers,” in Tax Policy and the Economy,
  Volume 30, ed. by J. Brown. University of Chicago Press.

Clemens, J., and M. Wither (2014a): “Just the Facts: Demographic and Cross-Country
  Dimensions of the Employment Slump,” Discussion paper, University of California at
  San Diego.


                                              31
         (2014b): “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of Effects
  on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers,” NBER Working
  Paper 20724.

Cochran, W. G., and D. B. Rubin (1973): “Controlling bias in observational studies: A
  review,” Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series A, pp. 417–446.

Crump, R. K., V. J. Hotz, G. W. Imbens, and O. A. Mitnik (2006): “Moving the Goal-
  posts: Addressing Limited Overlap in the Estimation of Average Treatment Effects by
  Changing the Estimand,” NBER Technical Working Paper 330, (330).

Currie, J., and B. C. Fallick (1996): “The Minimum Wage and the Employment of Youth
  Evidence from the NLSY,” Journal of Human Resources, pp. 404–428.

DeLong, J. B., and L. H. Summers (2012): “Fiscal Policy in a Depressed Economy,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 233–297.

Dolado, J., F. Kramarz, S. Machin, A. Manning, D. Margolis, C. Teulings, G. Saint-
  Paul, and M. Keen (1996): “The economic impact of minimum wages in Europe,”
  Economic policy, pp. 319–372.

Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010): “Minimum wage effects across state bor-
  ders: Estimates using contiguous counties,” The review of economics and statistics, 92(4),
  945–964.

Even, W. E., and D. A. Macpherson (2010): “The Teen Employment Crisis: The Effects
  of the 2007-2009 Federal Minimum Wage Increases on Teen Employment,” Employment
  Policies Institute, Washington, DC.

Farber, H. S., and R. Valletta (2013): “Extended unemployment insurance and unem-




                                              32
  ployment duration in the Great Recession: The US experience,” FRBSF Working Paper
  2013-09.

Flood, S., M. King, S. Ruggles, and J. R. Warren (2015): “Integrated Public Use Mi-
  crodata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 4.0. [Machine-readable database],”
  University of Minnesota.

Gittings, R. K., and I. M. Schmutte (2014): “Getting Handcuffs on an Octopus: Mini-
  mum Wages, Employment, and Turnover,” Employment, and Turnover (January 30, 2014).

Giuliano, L. (2013): “Minimum wage effects on employment, substitution, and the
  teenage labor supply: evidence from personnel data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(1),
  155–194.

Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2013): “Unemployment
  benefits and unemployment in the great recession: the role of macro effects,” NBER
  Working Paper 19499.

Hall, R. E. (2014): “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the US Economy from the Financial
  Crisis,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, Volume 29. University of Chicago Press.

Hirsch, B. T., B. E. Kaufman, and T. Zelenska (2015): “Minimum wage channels of
  adjustment,” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 54(2), 199–239.

Hoffman, S. D., and C. Ke (2010): “Employment Effects of the 2009 Minimum Wage
  Increase: Evidence from State Comparisons of At-Risk Workers,” Discussion paper.

Hoynes, H. W., and D. W. Schanzenbach (2012): “Work incentives and the food stamp
  program,” Journal of Public Economics, 96(1), 151–162.

Katz, L. F., and A. B. Krueger (1992): “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-
  Food Industry,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, pp. 6–21.

                                            33
Kim, T., and L. J. Taylor (1995): “The employment effect in retail trade of California’s
  1988 minimum wage increase,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 13(2), 175–182.

Meer, J., and J. West (2013): “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics,”
  NBER Working Paper 19262.

           (Forthcoming): “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics,”
  Journal of Human Resources.

Mincer, J., and L. S. Leighton (1980): “Effect of minimum wages on human capital
  formation,” NBER Working Paper 441.

Mulligan, C. B. (2012): “Do welfare policies matter for labor market aggregates? Quan-
  tifying safety net work incentives since 2007,” NBER Working Paper 18088.

        (2014): “The ACA: Some Unpleasant Welfare Arithmetic,” NBER Working Paper
  20020.

Neumark, D., J. I. Salas, and W. Wascher (2014): “Revisiting the Minimum WageEm-
  ployment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?,” Industrial & Labor
  Relations Review, 67(3 suppl), 608–648.

Neumark, D., and W. Wascher (1995): “The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage
  Employment and Enrollment: Evidence from Matched CPS Surveys,” NBER Working
  Paper 5092, (5092).

           (2000): “Minimum wages and employment: A case study of the fast-food in-
  dustry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Comment,” American Economic Review, pp.
  1362–1396.

           (2001): “Minimum Wages and Training Revisited,” Journal of Labor Economics,
  19(3), 563–595.

                                            34
Rosen, S. (1972): “Learning and experience in the labor market,” Journal of Human Re-
  sources, pp. 326–342.

Rothstein, J. (2011): “Unemployment insurance and job search in the Great Recession,”
  NBER Working Paper 17534.

Sabia, J. J., and R. V. Burkhauser (2010): “Minimum wages and poverty: will a $9.50
  Federal minimum wage really help the working poor?,” Southern Economic Journal,
  76(3), 592–623.

Sabia, J. J., R. V. Burkhauser, and B. Hansen (2012): “Are the Effects of Minimum Wage
  Increases Always Small-New Evidence from a Case Study of New York State,” Indus.
  & Lab. Rel. Rev., 65, 350.

Shoag, D., and S. Veuger (2014): “Uncertainty and the Geography of the Great Reces-
  sion,” AEI Economics Working Paper 2013-05.

Sorkin, I. (2015): “Are there long-run effects of the minimum wage?,” Review of economic
  dynamics, 18(2), 306–333.

Wolfers, J. (2006): “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation
  and New Results,” American Economic Review, 96(5), 1802–1820.




                                          35
                                    Figures and Tables




Figure 1: States Bound by the 2008 and 2009 Federal Minimum Wage Increases:
The map differentiates states on the basis of whether they were fully or partially bound by the July 2007,
2008 and 2009 increases in the federal minimum wage. I define states as fully bound if their January 2008
minimum wage, as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), was less than $6.55. Such states were
at least partially bound by the July 2008 increase in the federal minimum and fully bound by the July 2009
increase from $6.55 to $7.25.




                                                   36
                                         Average Effective Minimum Wages
                        $8.00
           Avg. Effective Min. Wage
             $6.00         $7.00
                        $5.00




                                Jan,05   Jan,07         Jan,09         Jan,11         Jan,13

                                         States Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases
                                         States Not Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases


Figure 2: Evolution of the Average Minimum Wage in Bound and Unbound States:
As in the previous figure, states are defined as fully bound if they were reported by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) to have had a minimum wage less than $6.55 in January 2008. Such states were at least
partially bound by the July 2008 increase in the federal minimum and fully bound by the July 2009 increase
from $6.55 to $7.25. Effective monthly minimum wage data were taken from the detailed replication
materials associated with Meer and West (Forthcoming). Within each group of states, the average effective
minimum wage is weighted by state population. The dashed vertical line indicates the May 2007 passage
of the federal minimum wage increases, while the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009
implementation of the final increase from $6.55 to $7.25.




                                                          37
                    Macroeconomic Trends Across Bound and Unbound States
                                            Panel A: BLS Unemployment Rate                                              Panel B: BLS Employment to Pop.




                                     12
                                                                                                                 66




                               9
                                                                                                           63




                          6
                                                                                                     60




                     3
                                                                                                57
                                                                                            BLS Employment to Pop.




                 BLS Unemployment Rate
                0
                                                                                          54
                                          Jan,05      Jan,07   Jan,09   Jan,11   Jan,13                               Jan,05   Jan,07   Jan,09   Jan,11   Jan,13

                                                   Panel C: Housing Price Index                                            Panel D: Per Capita Real GDP




                                                                                                           52    56




38
                                                                                               44    48




                 300 400 500 600
                Housing Price Index
                                                                                          Per Cap. Real GDP (1000s)
                                                                                          40




                             200
                                          Jan,05      Jan,07   Jan,09   Jan,11   Jan,13                               Jan,05   Jan,07   Jan,09   Jan,11   Jan,13




     Figure 3: Macroeconomic Trends in Bound and Unbound States:
     Bound and unbound states are defined as in previous figures. This figure’s panels plot the evolution of macroeconomic indicators over the
     course of the housing boom and bust. All series are weighted by state population so as to reflect the weighting applied in the regression
     analysis. Panel A plots the average monthly unemployment rate, as reported by the BLS. Panel B plots the average monthly employment to
     population ratio, also as reported by the BLS. Panel C plots the average of the quarterly Federal Housing Finance Agency’s all-transactions
     median housing price index. Panel D plots the average of annual real per capita Gross State Product, as reported by the Bureau of Economic
     Analysis (BEA). In each panel, the dashed vertical line indicates the May 2007 passage of the federal minimum wage increases, while the
     solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 implementation of the final increase from $6.55 to $7.25.
                                        Tabulations from the Baseline Matched Sample

                                                                 Panel A
                                                   Employment among Young Dropouts:
                                                States Matched on Size of Housing Decline

                          0.50  0.42
                  Fraction Employed
                  0.34    0.26




                                  Jan,06              Jan,08                Jan,10                Jan,12

                                                    States Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases
                                                    States Not Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases



                                                                 Panel B
                                                   Employment among Young Dropouts:
                                                States Matched on Size of Housing Decline
                                                          (Seasonally Adjusted)
                            0.50
                   Fraction Employed
                   0.34     0.260.42




                                       Jan,06         Jan,08                Jan,10                Jan,12

                                                    States Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases
                                                    States Not Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases


Figure 4: Tabulations from the Baseline Matched Sample: The figure presents the means of employ-
ment among individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education in bound and unbound
states. The means in Panel A are unadjusted while the means in Panel B are adjusted for state-specific
seasonal effects estimated on 2006 samples. The sample of states is restricted in accordance with the cri-
terion that nearest neighbor matches, selected on the size of states’ housing declines between 2006 and
2012, have housing declines that differ no more than $10,000 within a matched pair. The dashed vertical
line indicates the May 2007 passage of the federal minimum wage increases, while the solid vertical lines
indicate the implementation of the July 2007, July 2008, and July 2009 increases in the federal minimum
wage.

                                                                     39
                                                                                              Dynamic Regression Estimates

                                                                     Panel A                                                                                                  Panel B
                                                                  Effects on Employment                                                                               Effects on Employment
                                                        Individuals Ages 16 to 30 w/ < High School                                                                 Estimates across Skill Groups




                             0.04
                                                                                                                                             0.03




                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                  0.0




                     -0.04
                                                                                                                     -0.03
                                                                                                                  Change in Employment Prob.




                 Change in Employment Prob.
                             -0.08
                                                                                                                                 -0.06
                                          Jan-Jun '06        Jan-Jun '08        Jan-Jun '10         Jan-Jun '12                                 Jan-Jun '06       Jan-Jun '08          Jan-Jun '10           Jan-Jun '12

                                                            Employment Changes for Young Dropouts                                                                 Most Bite      Small Bite     Least Bite



                                                                     Panel C                                                                                                  Panel D
                                                                  Effects on Employment                                                                                Effects on Employment
                                                                 9 Group Continuous Bite                                                                              20 Group Continuous Bite




40
                             0.8
                                                                                                                                     0.8




                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                      0.0




                     -0.8
                                                                                                                         -0.8




                 Change in Employment Prob.
                                                                                                                     Change in Employment Prob.




                             -1.6
                                                                                                                                     -1.6




                                          Jan-Jun '06        Jan-Jun '08        Jan-Jun '10         Jan-Jun '12                                     Jan-Jun '06    Jan-Jun '08          Jan-Jun '10          Jan-Jun '12

                                                                 Relative Employment Changes                                                                           Relative Employment Changes


     Figure 5: Dynamic Regression Estimates: The figure reports dynamic estimates of differentially binding minimum wage increases’ effects
     on the employment of low-skilled workers relative to higher skilled workers. Each marker in Panels A and B is an estimate of a coefficient of
     the form β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) correspond with six months intervals and period p = 0 is January through June 2006,
     namely the first half year of the sample. In Panel B, the “Most Bite,” “Small Bite,” and “Least Bite” division of the sample fully partitions the
     population ages 16 to 64, just as in the estimates reported in Table 3. Each marker in Panels C and D is an estimate of a coefficient of the form
     β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) correspond with six months intervals and period p = 0 is January through June 2006, namely
     the first half year of the sample. The dashed vertical line indicates the May 2007 passage of the federal minimum wage increases, while the
     solid vertical lines indicate the implementation of the July 2007, July 2008, and July 2009 increases in the federal minimum wage.
                                                                  Evolution of Low-Skilled Individuals’ Wage Distributions

                                                                    Panel A                                                                                                      Panel B
                                             Employment and Wages (in 2010 Dollars)                                                                           Employment and Wages (Nominal)
                                          Individuals Ages 30 and Under w/ < High School                                                               Individuals Ages 30 and Under w/ < High School




                         16
                                                                                                                                    16




                                 12
                                                                                                                                            12




                         8
                                                                                                                                    8
                                      2010 Minimum Wage                                                                                            2010 Minimum Wage

                                      2006 Minimum Wage                                                                                            2006 Minimum Wage




                  Real Hourly Wage
                 4
                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                           Nominal Hourly Wage




                         0
                                                                                                                                    0
                                      0             .1                .2             .3              .4               .5                           0             .1                .2             .3              .4               .5
                                                         Position in Skill Group's Wage Distribution                                                                  Position in Skill Group's Wage Distribution

                                                   2002                2006               2010                 2014                                             2002                2006               2010                 2014



                                                                    Panel C                                                                                                      Panel D
                                             Employment and Wages (in 2010 Dollars)                                                                           Employment and Wages (Nominal)
                                            Individuals Ages 31 to 45 w/ < High School                                                                    Individuals Ages 31 to 45 w/ < High School




                         30
                                                                                                                                      30




41
                              20
                                                                                                                                            20




                  10
                                                                                                                               10




                 Real Hourly Wage
                                                                                                                             Nominal Hourly Wage




                         0
                                                                                                                                      0




                                      0       .1            .2           .3         .4        .5          .6          .7                           0       .1            .2           .3         .4        .5          .6          .7
                                                         Position in Skill Group's Wage Distribution                                                                  Position in Skill Group's Wage Distribution

                                                   2002                2006               2010                 2014                                             2002                 2006               2010                2014


     Figure 6: Evolution of Low-Skilled Individuals’ Wage Distributions: 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014
     Note: The panels of the figure present wage distributions constructed using data from the NBER’s CPS-MORG files for 2002, 2006, 2010, and
     2014. The samples in Panels A and B consist of individuals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education who reside in states that had
     January 2008 minimum wage rates below $6.55. The samples in Panels C and D consist of individuals ages 31 to 45 with less than a high
     school education who reside in states that had January 2008 minimum wage rates below $6.55. When available, individual-level wages are
     taken to be the reported values of the variable “earnhre” divided by 100. When “earnhre” is missing, individual-level wages are estimated
     as “earnwke/hours.” For Panels A and C, nominal wage rates are converted into constant dollars using the Consumer Price Index with July
     2009 as the base period. Workers were sorted according to their wage rates, with unemployed individuals assigned wage rates of 0. The wage
     rates for each year were then divided into 500 quantiles with application of the CPS’s population weights. The markers indicate all positive
     wage quantiles outside of the top 2 percentiles of each distribution.
                          Table 1: Measure of the Minimum Wage’s Differential Bite across Skill Groups

                                                              (1)                             (2)            (3)
                    Skill Group                         Bite in Bound                 Bite in Unbound Differential Bite
                    Less than High School Ages 16 to 30      0.137                           0.085          0.052
                    High School Ages 16 to 30                0.080                           0.053          0.027
                    Some College Ages 16 to 30               0.057                           0.038          0.019
                    Less than High School Ages 31 to 45      0.061                           0.041          0.020
                    High School Ages 31 to 45                0.030                           0.020          0.010
                    Some College Ages 31 to 45               0.011                           0.007          0.004
                    Less than High School Ages 46 to 64      0.044                           0.028          0.015




42
                    High School Ages 46 to 64                0.019                           0.013          0.006
                    Some College Ages 46 to 64               0.008                           0.005          0.003
     Note: This table describes variation in the 2007-2009 federal minimum wage increase’s potential bite across age-by-education skill groups.
     In all cases, cell means are calculated for the period extending from January 2006 through July 2009, when the final increment of the recent
     federal minimum wage increases went into effect. Values in columns 1 and 2 are means of an indicator set equal to 1 if an individual reports
     a wage between $5.15 and $7.25 per hour. The indicator was set equal to 0 for all observations for which the variable “earnhre” is missing.
     Column 1 restricts the sample to individuals in fully bound states and column 2 to individuals in partially bound states. Column 3 reports
     the difference. All estimates were calculated by the author using the NBER’s extracts of the Current Population Survey’s Merged Outgoing
     Rotation Groups (CPS-MORG).
Table 2: Summary Statistics on the Magnitudes of Declines in the FHFA Median
House Price Index

                                                        (1)              (2)
                                                  Unbound States Bound States
                                                   Median House Price Decline
                                                       (Millions of Dollars)
               Full Sample                            0.0720           0.0247
                                                     (0.0666)         (0.0538)

               Matched within 5K                         0.0297              0.0274
                                                        (0.0403)            (0.0412)

               Matched within 10K                        0.0332              0.0297
                                                        (0.0397)            (0.0429)

               Matched within 20K                        0.0385              0.0272
                                                        (0.0371)            (0.0423)

               Matched within 5 percent                  0.0369              0.0241
                                                        (0.0379)            (0.0394)
               No. of States (Full Sample)                 24                  27
Note: This table reports summary statistics on the magnitudes of declines in states’ all-transactions FHFA
median house prices indices. Changes are calculated as the average in 2006 minus the average in 2012. Row
1 reports the means of these changes for the full samples of fully and partially bound states. Subsequent
rows report means for samples of states that have been restricted based on the quality of nearest neighbor
matches. For row 2 the criterion was that the nearest neighbor match deliver a match for which the
difference in the states’ housing declines was less than $5,000. Row 3 is similar, with a threshold of
$10,000, row 4 with a threshold of $20,000, and row 5 with a threshold of 5 log points.




                                                   43
Table 3: Effects of Binding Minimum Wage Increases across Broad Population Groups

                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)
                                                   Employed        Employed         Employed
                  Bound x Post 1                    -0.037**         -0.011           -0.004
                                                     (0.011)         (0.008)         (0.005)
                  Bound x Post 2                    -0.037**         -0.005           -0.000
                                                     (0.011)         (0.008)         (0.005)
                  Housing Price Index                0.280*         0.185***         0.054**
                                                     (0.107)         (0.035)         (0.020)
                  N                                 580,248        2,098,879        4,621,282
                  Mean of Dep. Var.                    0.38            0.69            0.78
                  Estimation Framework              D-in-D          D-in-D           D-in-D
                  State and Time Effects               Yes             Yes             Yes
                  Degree of Bite                   Most Bite       Small Bite       Least Bite
Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The
table reports estimates of the minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent
variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 are
of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t)
from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the
July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Across the three columns, the samples comprise all
individuals ages 16 to 64 who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey during the relevant
years. The sample in column 1 consists of all individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high
school education. The sample in column 2 includes all groups from Table 1 for which the differential
bite reported in column 3 was between 0.015 and 0.030. The sample in column 3 includes all groups
from Table 1 for which the differential bite reported in column 3 was less than 0.015. The sample extends
from January 2006 through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level
correlation clusters across the estimation errors.




                                                         44
      Table 4: Robustness of Estimated Effects on Individuals Ages 16 to 30 with Less Than a High School Education

                                                            (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)     (5)
                                                     State Min Wage         Employed       Employed        Employed Employed
                     Bound x Post 1                      0.677***            -0.037**       -0.031**        -0.032**  -0.012
                                                          (0.190)             (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.010) (0.015)
                     Bound x Post 2                       0.597**            -0.037**       -0.033**        -0.033**  -0.010
                                                          (0.202)             (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.010) (0.015)
                     Housing Price Index                  1.578*              0.280*         0.146+          0.145+
                                                          (0.727)             (0.107)        (0.085)         (0.086)
                     State Employment Rate                                                   0.617*          0.619*
                                                                                             (0.239)         (0.239)
                     State Personal Income                                                    0.003           0.003
                                                                                             (0.002)         (0.002)
                     Cumulative Stimulus                                                                      -0.004




45
                                                                                                             (0.013)
                     N                                    580,248             580,248        580,248        580,248  580,248
                     Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.38                0.38           0.38             0.38    0.38
                     Estimation Framework                 D-in-D              D-in-D         D-in-D         D-in-D   D-in-D
                     State and Time Effects                 Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes     Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of all
     individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey. The
     sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters
     across the estimation errors.
     Table 5: Robustness of Estimated Effects on Individuals Ages 16 to 30 with Less Than a High School Education:
     Initiate Sample in 2005

                                                            (1)                 (2)             (3)             (4)     (5)
                                                     State Min Wage         Employed       Employed        Employed Employed
                     Bound x Post 1                       0.527**             -0.029*        -0.022*         -0.023*  -0.005
                                                          (0.157)             (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.010) (0.014)
                     Bound x Post 2                       0.446*             -0.030**       -0.024**        -0.024**  -0.004
                                                          (0.171)             (0.010)        (0.008)         (0.008) (0.014)
                     Housing Price Index                  1.673*              0.293**         0.139           0.137
                                                          (0.697)             (0.105)        (0.084)         (0.084)
                     State Employment Rate                                                    0.564*          0.564*
                                                                                             (0.216)         (0.217)
                     State Personal Income                                                    0.004*          0.004*
                                                                                             (0.002)         (0.002)




46
                     Cumulative Stimulus                                                                      -0.007
                                                                                                             (0.015)
                     N                                    670,183             670,183        670,183        670,183  670,183
                     Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.39                0.39           0.39             0.39    0.39
                     Estimation Framework                 D-in-D              D-in-D         D-in-D         D-in-D   D-in-D
                     State and Time Effects                 Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes     Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of all
     individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey. The
     sample extends from January 2005 through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters
     across the estimation errors.
             Table 6: Robustness of Baseline Estimate Using Matches on the Severity of States’ Housing Declines

                                                                            (1)           (2)              (3)      (4)
                                                                       Employed       Employed        Employed Employed
                          Bound x Post 1                                 -0.026         -0.027          -0.031*  -0.038*
                                                                         (0.016)       (0.017)          (0.015)  (0.015)
                          Bound x Post 2                                -0.038**       -0.038*         -0.037** -0.040***
                                                                         (0.013)       (0.014)          (0.013)  (0.010)
                          N                                             284,957        249,188         358,272   322,443
                          Mean of Dep. Var.                                0.39          0.38             0.38     0.38
                          Estimation Framework                          D-in-D         D-in-D          D-in-D    D-in-D
                          State and Time Effects                           Yes           Yes              Yes      Yes




47
                          Housing Decline Match Criterion                  10K            5K              20K   5 percent
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of
     individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey. The
     sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters
     across the estimation errors. Relative to previous tables, the samples are restricted on the basis of matching criteria that are named in their
     respective columns and described in greater detail in the main text.
             Table 7: Robustness of Baseline Estimate Using Matches on the Severity of States’ Housing Declines

                                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)        (4)       (5)
                                                               Employed        Employed       Employed Employed Employed
                  Bound x Post 1                                 -0.032*         -0.026         -0.024*   -0.027**  -0.029**
                                                                 (0.015)         (0.016)        (0.009)    (0.009)   (0.009)
                  Bound x Post 2                                -0.045**        -0.038**       -0.038*** -0.042*** -0.042***
                                                                 (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.009)    (0.010)   (0.010)
                  Housing Price Index                             0.216                                     0.108     0.100
                                                                 (0.127)                                   (0.106)   (0.104)
                  State Employment Rate                                                         1.160**   1.153**   1.146**
                                                                                                (0.318)    (0.327)   (0.334)
                  State Personal Income                                                          0.002      0.001     0.001
                                                                                                (0.003)    (0.002)   (0.002)
                  Cumulative Stimulus                                                                                 -0.009
                                                                                                                     (0.011)




48
                  N                                              284,957        284,957         284,957   284,957   284,957
                  Mean of Dep. Var.                               0.39           0.39             0.39       0.39      0.39
                  Estimation Framework                           D-in-D         D-in-D          D-in-D    D-in-D    D-in-D
                  State and Time Effects                           Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes       Yes
                  Housing Decline Match Criterion                  10K            10K             10K        10K       10K
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of
     individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey. The
     sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters
     across the estimation errors. Relative to previous tables, the samples are restricted on the basis of matching criteria that are named in their
     respective columns and described in greater detail in the main text.
             Table 8: Employment Margins for Individuals Ages 16 to 30 with Less Than a High School Education

                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)                        (5)
                                               Employed       Full Time      Part Time      Hours Last Week          Hours if Employed
               Bound x Post 1                   -0.037**      -0.041***         0.005          -1.835***                 -1.612**
                                                 (0.011)        (0.010)       (0.007)           (0.418)                   (0.475)
               Bound x Post 2                   -0.037**      -0.041***         0.004          -1.773***                  -1.235*
                                                 (0.011)        (0.010)       (0.006)           (0.438)                   (0.462)
               Housing Price Index               0.280*        0.325***        -0.045          13.760**                  10.397**
                                                 (0.107)        (0.074)       (0.042)           (3.948)                   (3.398)
               N                                580,248        580,248        580,248           580,248                   196,815
               Mean of Dep. Var.                   0.38           0.16          0.22             10.25                     27.00




49
               Estimation Framework             D-in-D         D-in-D         D-in-D            D-in-D                    D-in-D
               State and Time Effects              Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes                       Yes
               Degree of Bite                  Most Bite      Most Bite      Most Bite         Most Bite                Most Bite
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of all
     individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey. The
     sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The sample in column 5 is restricted to individuals who reported being employed.
     The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the estimation errors.
     Table 9: Additional Outcomes for Individuals Ages 16 to 30 with Less Than a High School Education: Analysis
     Using the MORG Files

                                                                (1)      (2)      (3)                            (4)
                                                           Employed Hours Hours if Emp.                     Weekly Earn
                             Bound x Post 1                 -0.035** -1.888*** -1.982**                      -15.203**
                                                             (0.013)  (0.473)   (0.626)                        (4.533)
                             Bound x Post 2                  -0.030* -1.647*** -1.491**                      -12.619**
                                                             (0.013)  (0.466)   (0.532)                        (4.611)
                             Housing Price Index              0.248* 12.411**  10.111+                       129.302*
                                                             (0.109)  (4.538)   (5.508)                       (50.411)
                             N                              143,210   143,210   47,006                        143,210
                             Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.37     9.78     26.45                          92.69




50
                             Estimation Framework           D-in-D    D-in-D   D-in-D                         D-in-D
                             State and Time Effects            Yes      Yes       Yes                            Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of
     the minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column.
     More specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period
     beginning in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where
     the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample
     consists of all individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were part of the Current Population Survey’s
     Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups. The sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The sample in column 3 is restricted
     to individuals who reported being employed. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the
     estimation errors.
                          Table 10: Estimated Effects Using Continuous Measure of Minimum Wage “Bite”

                                                                           (1)           (2)           (3)      (4)
                                                                      Employed       Employed        Employed Employed
                           9 Group Bite x Bound x Post 1                -0.83**       -0.79**
                                                                         (0.26)        (0.25)
                           9 Group Bite x Bound x Post 2               -0.83***       -0.79**
                                                                         (0.22)        (0.23)
                           20 Group Bite x Bound x Post 1                                             -0.75***         -0.72**
                                                                                                       (0.21)           (0.21)
                           20 Group Bite x Bound x Post 2                                             -0.72***        -0.69***
                                                                                                       (0.19)           (0.19)
                           N                                            38,556         38,556          85,680          85,680
                           Estimation Framework                        9 Group        9 Group        20 Group        20 Group




51
                           Sample Period                                 06-12          06-12          06-12            06-12
                           Other Macro Controls                           No             Yes            No               Yes
                           Stimulus Control                               No             Yes            No               Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of all
     individuals between ages 16 and 64 who were part of the Current Population Survey’s Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups. In columns 1 and
     3 the set of macroeconomic controls includes a set of skill group indicators interacted with the FHFA housing price index. In columns 2 and 4
     the set of macroeconomic controls additionally includes sets of skill group indicators interacted with the state employment rate, state income
     per capita, and per capita stimulus spending through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. The sample extends from January 2006
     through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the estimation errors.
     Table 11: Robustness of Estimates Using Continuous Measure of Minimum Wage “Bite”: Matching on State
     Housing Decline Using 9 Skill Groups

                                                                            (1)           (2)              (3)     (4)
                                                                       Employed       Employed        Employed Employed
                          9 Group Bite x Bound x Post 1                   -0.46          -0.46          -0.57+   -0.84*
                                                                         (0.32)         (0.31)          (0.30)   (0.30)
                          9 Group Bite x Bound x Post 2                  -0.68*         -0.72*          -0.75*  -0.86***
                                                                         (0.26)         (0.27)          (0.28)   (0.23)
                          N                                              18,144         15,120          24,192   22,680
                          Estimation Framework                          9 Group        9 Group         9 Group  9 Group
                          Sample Period                                   06-12          06-12           06-12    06-12
                          Housing Decline Match Criterion                  10K            5K              20K  5 percent




52
                          Housing Index Control                            No             No              No       No
                          Other Macro Controls                             No             No              No       No
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of
     all individuals between ages 16 and 64 who were part of the Current Population Survey’s Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups. The sample
     extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the
     estimation errors. Relative to Table 10, the samples are restricted on the basis of matching criteria that are named in their respective columns
     and described in greater detail in the main text.
     Table 12: Robustness of Estimates Using Continuous Measure of Minimum Wage “Bite”: Matching on State
     Housing Decline Using 20 Skill Groups

                                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)
                                                                       Employed       Employed        Employed Employed
                          20 Group Bite x Bound x Post 1                 -0.60*         -0.59*         -0.64**   -0.83**
                                                                         (0.28)         (0.26)          (0.23)    (0.24)
                          20 Group Bite x Bound x Post 2                -0.64**        -0.67**         -0.65**  -0.76***
                                                                         (0.21)         (0.22)          (0.21)    (0.20)
                          N                                             40,320         33,600          53,760    50,400
                          Estimation Framework                         20 Group       20 Group        20 Group 20 Group
                          Sample Period                                  06-12          06-12           06-12     06-12
                          Housing Decline Match Criterion                 10K             5K             20K   5 percent




53
                          Housing Index Control                           No             No              No        No
                          Other Macro Controls                            No             No              No        No
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of
     all individuals between ages 16 and 64 who were part of the Current Population Survey’s Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups. The sample
     extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the
     estimation errors. Relative to Table 10, the samples are restricted on the basis of matching criteria that are named in their respective columns
     and described in greater detail in the main text.
                                      Table 13: Estimated Effects Excluding the Least Skilled Group

                                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)      (4)
                                                                      Employed       Employed        Employed Employed
                           9 Group Bite x Bound x Post 1               -0.67+          -0.42
                                                                       (0.38)         (0.36)
                           9 Group Bite x Bound x Post 2                -0.35          -0.13
                                                                       (0.38)         (0.34)
                           20 Group Bite x Bound x Post 1                                              -0.74+          -0.55
                                                                                                       (0.37)          (0.35)
                           20 Group Bite x Bound x Post 2                                               -0.42           -0.26
                                                                                                       (0.30)          (0.29)
                           N                                            34,272         34,272         81,396          81,396




54
                           Estimation Framework                        9 Group        9 Group        20 Group        20 Group
                           Sample Period                                 06-12          06-12           06-12          06-12
                           Other Macro Controls                           No             Yes             No              Yes
                           Stimulus Control                               No             Yes             No              Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Relative to previous tables,
     the samples exclude individuals in skill groups with “bite,” as reported in Table 1, greater than 0.05. The sample extends from January 2006
     through December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the estimation errors.
                                  Appendix Material

A        Comparisons with Prior Research

    This appendix contrasts the current paper’s analysis with the analyses in other re-
cent minimum wage studies. I focus primarily on comparisons with other analyses of
the minimum wage changes implemented during the Great Recession. The empirical
debate over the longer panel of state and federal minimum wage changes, in which
Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010), Neumark, Salas, and Wascher (2014), and Meer and West
(Forthcoming) are prominent entries, is beyond this paper’s scope.
    The current paper’s analysis relates most closely to the analysis in Clemens and
Wither (2014b). My estimation frameworks mirror those in Clemens and Wither (2014b)
as closely as possible. They are the repeated cross sectional analogs of the prior paper’s
analysis of individual level panel data. One purpose of the current paper is thus to
explore whether CPS data cross validate the prior paper’s analysis of SIPP samples from
the same historical episode.
    Several differences between the CPS and SIPP data environments are worth dis-
cussing. The CPS enjoys advantages with regards to data quality and the time frame
over which I am able to construct analysis samples. A first point worth noting is that the
CPS underlies national statistical agencies’ best estimates of the unemployment rate at
both the state and national levels. As noted above, this paper’s analysis samples cover
the full universe of CPS respondents ages 16 to 64. In-sample employment changes thus
map directly into national employment statistics. Second, the 2008 SIPP panel begins
during the summer of 2008, limiting the analysis in Clemens and Wither (2014b) to an
interval spanning the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage.29 By contrast,

  29 A  related point is that Clemens and Wither’s (2014b) approach to identifying affected individuals
relies on observed wage rates, and thus generates samples of individuals who were employed for at

                                                  55
the CPS allows me to initiate samples in the years preceding the May 2007 legislation
behind this period’s minimum wage increases. This makes it possible to investigate the
full transitional dynamics associated with the law’s implementation.
   The SIPP, by contrast, has advantages with respect to the identification of low-skilled
workers and the outcomes it is able to track. Monthly panel data makes it possible
to identify affected workers with greater precision than the demographic and indus-
trial proxies used regularly in the literature. Specifically, the analysis in Clemens and
Wither (2014b) uses 12 months of wage and employment information, extending from
August 2008 through July 2009, to identify workers whose wage rates would be affected
by the July 2009 minimum wage increase. The analysis shows that such individuals
were roughly 3 times as likely to report wage rates between the old and new federal
minimums as were teenagers. With regards to outcomes, the 2008 SIPP panel makes it
possible to track the evolution of an individual’s employment and earnings for 3 years
following the July 2009 minimum wage increases.30
   Addison, Blackburn, and Cotti (2013) aptly describe several recent analyses of this
period’s minimum wage increases as follows:31



least some portion of the year between August 2008 and July 2009. This limits the ability of Clemens and
Wither’s (2014b) primary analysis sample to speak to the effects of minimum wage increases on transitions
into employment. The analysis does, however, include separate estimates of transitions into employment
among samples of individuals who were unemployed each month from August 2008 through July 2009.
  30 Early  analyses of employment-based human capital accumulation highlighted the theoretical possi-
bility that minimum wage increases may reduce opportunities for on-the-job training (Rosen, 1972). In
standard models of general and firm specific human capital, the incidence of firms’ costs for general
human capital training falls on workers through wage offsets. Wage floors may reduce the scope for
these implicit exchanges of compensation for training. Direct analyses of the minimum wage’s effects on
training are rare and arrive at mixed results (Neumark and Wascher, 2001; Mincer and Leighton, 1980;
Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999; Arulampalam, Booth, and Bryan, 2004). Clemens and Wither’s (2014b) ev-
idence on earnings trajectories suggest that dynamics of this sort, coupled with more straightforward
losses in experience accumulation, may have been at work during this historical episode.
  31 I have changed the years associated with Addison, Blackburn, and Cotti’s (2013) references if the
reference has subsequently been published or if I was unable to find the original source cited. As of this
writing, the first three references remain in working paper form, while Hirsch, Kaufman, and Zelenska’s
(2015) analysis of Georgia and Alabama quick-service restaurants has subsequently been published.

                                                   56
      Even and Macpherson (2010) use CPS data from the 2005-2009 period to es-
      timate standard minimum-wage employment equations, and report negative
      minimum wage effects on employment for teenagers during this interval.
      Gittings and Schmutte (2014), using both CPS and Quarterly Workforce In-
      dicators data, find a negative effect on teenage employment for the longer
      sample period 2000-2009. Hoffman and Ke (2010) focus on the final install-
      ment of the latest federal minimum wage increase in 2009. They estimate
      cross-state differenced models of the minimum-wage impact, finding no sig-
      nificant disemployment effects among teenagers but a significantly negative
      effect for workers aged 20 to 24. On the other hand, Hirsch, Kaufman, and
      Zelenska (2015), who investigate establishment-level data for quick-service
      restaurants in Georgia and Alabama, 2007-2009, fail to uncover any evidence
      of a negative employment effect.


The most obvious difference between the current paper and the analyses in the papers
referenced above is their emphasis on employment among teenagers and/or in food
service establishments.32
    Analyzing populations beyond teenagers and food service establishments is impor-
tant for two reasons. First, teenagers are less relevant than low-skilled adults from an
anti-poverty policy perspective.33 They are more likely than low-skilled adults to be


  32 Somewhat  earlier work on particular demographic groups, such as teenagers, includes Card (1992a),
Card (1992b), Neumark and Wascher (1995), and Currie and Fallick (1996). Additional work on teenagers
and/or specific industries, like food service and retail, includes Katz and Krueger (1992), Card and
Krueger (1994), Kim and Taylor (1995), Neumark and Wascher (2000), Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010),
and Giuliano (2013). An exception is Meer and West (Forthcoming), who analyze aggregate employment
growth.
  33 As  emphasized by Burkhauser and Sabia (2007) and Sabia and Burkhauser (2010), it is primarily low-
skilled adults, rather than teenage dependents, who are the intended beneficiaries of anti-poverty efforts.
In the European context, Dolado, Kramarz, Machin, Manning, Margolis, Teulings, Saint-Paul, and Keen
(1996) observed during the mid-1990s that teenagers, at that time, accounted for a relatively small share
of all low-paid workers.

                                                    57
dependents and less likely to have dependents of their own. Additionally, teenage em-
ployment is now significantly less common than it was 30, or even 15, years ago. Between
2003 and the present, the teenage employment rate’s peak was at 37.4 percent in Febru-
ary 2004. In 2012 it averaged 26.4 percent. By contrast, the teenage employment rate
averaged 44 percent over the 1980s and 1990s. Early analyses of teenagers, for example
those of Card (1992a,b), thus involved periods during which teenage employment was
a more prominent phenomenon. In the current labor market, teenage employment is a
less relevant object of analysis.
    Second, labor demand elasticities may vary across both industries and demographic
groups. This would be expected, for example, if the shapes of within-skill-group produc-
tivity distributions vary meaningfully across groups. A similar point applies to analyses
of food service establishments. While it is interesting to observe how such firms adjust,
food service establishments likely face different input substitution and output demand
elasticities than firms in other sectors. Direct analysis of the minimum wage’s effects
across sectors is thus preferable to inferring economy-wide effects using estimates asso-
ciated with food service establishments alone.
    Assessing the minimum wage’s effects on poverty rates, employment opportunities,
and the earnings distribution requires directly analyzing the employment and earn-
ings of low-skilled workers themselves. In contrast with the studies discussed above,
Clemens and Wither (2014b) use panel data to identify a much broader population
of very low-skilled workers. In the CPS’s repeated cross-sectional setting, the present
study’s differences-in-differences analysis focuses on individuals ages 16 to 30 with less
than a high school education.34 Its second empirical approach exploits continuous vari-
ation in the minimum wage’s bite across sets of skill groups that fully partition the


   34 See   Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen (2012) for a recent paper that primarily analyzes low-skilled
adults.

                                                   58
working age population. The current paper and Clemens and Wither (2014b) thus at-
tempt to utilize as much variation in the minimum wage’s bite as possible in the CPS
and SIPP data environments respectively.
   To compare results across potential analysis samples, Table A.1 reports estimates of
equation (3) on a sample restricted to teenagers. The outcomes are the same as those
analyzed in Table 8. I estimate that the differentially binding portion of this period’s
minimum wage increases reduced teenage employment by nearly 2 percentage points.
The point estimates are thus non-trivially smaller than the estimated impact on individ-
uals ages 16 to 30 with less than a high school education. Both the short- and medium-
run estimate are on the margins of statistical significance at the 5 percent level, with
the short-run estimate achieving it and the medium-run estimate failing to do so. In
this particular historical episode, analyses of teenagers thus appear to have less power
to detect a minimum wage change’s employment effects than do analyses of broader
populations with low observable skill levels.
   The current paper and Clemens and Wither (2014b) also differ from recent analyses
in their approach to documenting and accounting for the housing decline’s effect on
low-skilled workers’ employment. The housing crisis is sufficiently well documented
that the need to account for it is readily apparent. The data required to do so are also
readily at hand. As shown in Table 2, partially bound states’ housing declines were
significantly less severe than fully bound states’ housing declines. As also noted above,
estimates from Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2013) make it possible to gauge the
likely bias associated with this heterogeneity in the housing decline’s severity across
states. I thus adopt a baseline specification with several relevant characteristics. First, I
take a straightforward approach to controlling directly for heterogeneity in the housing
declines’ severity. Second, I demonstrate that controlling for additional macroeconomic




                                             59
covariates leaves the baseline estimates little changed.35 Third, I show that the bias
associated with making no attempt to control for heterogeneity in the housing declines’
severity is of the expected sign and magnitude. Fourth, I show that the results are robust
to implementing triple-difference extensions that make more extensive use of variation
in the minimum wage’s relevance across skill groups. Fifth, I show that the results are
robust to accounting for heterogeneity in the housing decline’s severity using a standard
matching procedure.
   Finally, the analyses in this paper and Clemens and Wither (2014b) hew closely to
standard program evaluation methods. This contrasts with what Addison, Blackburn,
and Cotti (2013) describe as the traditional estimation of “standard minimum-wage em-
ployment equations.” It is increasingly recognized that the traditional approach embeds
quite strong assumptions regarding the dynamics with which a minimum wage change
influences employment. It can also obscure dynamics linked to lags between legislation
and implementation. Because lags between legislation and implementation may differ
significantly across natural experiments, this can be particularly problematic for studies
of the longer panel of state and federal minimum wage changes.
   Implementation lags and dynamics at least partially underly observers’ difficulty in
adjudicating the empirical debate over historical minimum wage changes’ effects. The
debate within the literature suggests that analyses of the longer panel of minimum wage
changes are sensitive to a combination of specification choices and sample selection
procedures.36 Given the diversity of natural experiments involved, it seems unlikely
that any one approach to selecting control groups or any one specification of dynamics
would be universally appropriate.

  35 Thepoint estimates decline modestly in the full sample analysis and increase modestly in the analysis
of samples in which states were matched on the size of their housing declines.
  36 Thediscussion of the strengths and weaknesses of various estimation strategies by Dolado, Kramarz,
Machin, Manning, Margolis, Teulings, Saint-Paul, and Keen (1996) is, in many respects, quite prescient
regarding sources of disagreement in the recent literature.

                                                   60
   A key element of the program evaluation approach adopted here is the visual pre-
sentation of results (see Figures 4 and 5) that provide evidence on potentially relevant
dynamics. Potentially relevant dynamics include anticipation effects and the possibility
of differences between short and long run responses. Allowance for anticipation effects
is particularly important in this setting due to the 26 month lag between the relevant
legislation and the implementation of the third and final increase in the federal min-
imum wage. Regarding employment dynamics, simulations by Meer and West (2013)
show why analyses of the longer panel of state minimum wage changes will tend to
have difficulty estimating anything other than relatively short-run effects.
   Sorkin (2015) provides a theoretical basis for expecting the distinction between short-
and long-run effects to be economically meaningful. The considerations Sorkin (2015)
highlights point to two conceptually relevant features of the setting I analyze. A first
point is that my post-legislation analysis window is long by the literature’s standards. It
includes both a 26 month implementation phase and a 40 month post-implementation
period.37 Second, because the analysis involves a period of significant labor market
upheaval, the shifts in production technologies Sorkin (2015) emphasizes may have been
hastened relative to less turbulent historical episodes.
   The empirical approaches in this paper and Clemens and Wither (2014b) are facil-
itated in part by the historical setting. In contrast with the longer panel of state and
federal minimum wage changes, the period analyzed here has three attractive features.
First, there is a relatively clean division of states into those that were fully and partially
bound by this period’s federal minimum wage changes. Second, this division roughly
evenly divides the U.S. population. Third, because states enacted very few minimum
wage changes between July 2009 and December 2012, the analysis period has a less con-


  37 After
         2012, the setting encounter’s the minimum wage literature’s usual problem that the post-policy
change period becomes contaminated with additional state (and municipal) minimum wage changes.

                                                  61
taminated “post” policy change interval than is available to many studies. These features
of the policy space make this a well suited application for relatively straightforward pro-
gram evaluation methods.




                                            62
                                                Table A.1: Employment Margins for Teenagers

                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)                            (5)
                                              Employed        Full Time      Part Time Hours Last Week               Hours if Employed
               Bound x Post 1                  -0.020*         -0.014**        -0.006     -0.815**                        -0.644*
                                                (0.009)         (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.254)                        (0.310)
               Bound x Post 2                  -0.020+         -0.015**        -0.005      -0.790*                         -0.588
                                                (0.011)         (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.317)                        (0.382)
               Housing Price Index             0.211***        0.144***        0.068*     7.786***                       9.197***
                                                (0.056)         (0.036)       (0.032)      (1.819)                        (1.475)
               N                               620,040         620,040        620,040      620,040                        205,785
               Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.37            0.10           0.28         8.53                           23.02




63
               Estimation Framework            D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D       D-in-D                         D-in-D
               State and Time Effects             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes                             Yes
               Samples                        Teenagers       Teenagers      Teenagers   Teenagers                      Teenagers
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of all
     individuals between ages 16 and 19 who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey. The sample extends from January 2006 through
     December 2012. The reported standard error estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the estimation errors.
B      Additional Robustness Tables

Table B.2: Effects of Binding Minimum Wage Increases across Broad Population
Groups

                                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)
                                                              Employed       Employed        Employed
        Bound x Post 1                                         -0.029**        -0.008          -0.004
                                                                (0.009)        (0.007)        (0.005)
        Bound x Post 2                                         -0.028**        -0.002           0.000
                                                                (0.009)        (0.007)        (0.004)
        Housing Price Index                                     0.209*        0.173***        0.066**
                                                                (0.083)        (0.030)        (0.024)
        N                                                      580,248       2,098,879       4,621,282
        Mean of Dep. Var.                                         0.38           0.69           0.78
        Estimation Framework                                   D-in-D         D-in-D          D-in-D
        State and Time Effects                                    Yes            Yes             Yes
        Time Varying Demographic Controls                         Yes            Yes             Yes
        Degree of Bite                                        Most Bite      Small Bite      Least Bite
Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The
table reports estimates of the minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent
variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 are
of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t)
from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the
July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Across the three columns, the samples comprise all
individuals aged 16 to 64 who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey during the relevant
years. The sample in column 1 consists of all individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high
school education. The sample in column 2 includes all groups from Table 1 for which the differential bite
reported in column 3 was between 0.015 and 0.030. The sample in column 3 includes all groups from
Table 1 for which the differential bite reported in column 3 was less than 0.015. The sample extends from
January 2006 through December 2012. The time varying demographic controls include full sets of period
(p(t) as defined in the text) indicators interacted with full sets of indicators for the values taken by the
CPS variables “age,” “educ,” “sex,” and a recoded race/ethnicity variable with separate values for Asian,
Black, White Non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and Other. The reported standard error estimates allow for state
level correlation clusters across the estimation errors.




                                                         64
            Table B.3: Employment Margins for Individuals Ages 16 to 30 with Less Than a High School Education

                                                             (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)                       (5)
                                                        Employed       Full Time      Part Time      Hours Last Week          Hours if Employed
      Bound x Post 1                                     -0.029**      -0.027***        -0.002          -1.300***                 -1.612**
                                                          (0.009)        (0.007)       (0.005)            (0.296)                  (0.475)
      Bound x Post 2                                     -0.028**       -0.024**        -0.004           -1.128**                  -1.235*
                                                          (0.009)        (0.007)       (0.006)            (0.332)                  (0.462)
      Housing Price Index                                 0.209*         0.182**         0.027           8.559**                  10.397**
                                                          (0.083)        (0.055)       (0.034)            (2.919)                  (3.398)
      N                                                  580,248        580,248        580,248           580,248                   196,815
      Mean of Dep. Var.                                     0.38           0.16          0.22              10.25                    27.00
      Estimation Framework                               D-in-D         D-in-D         D-in-D            D-in-D                    D-in-D
      State and Time Effects                                Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes                      Yes




65
      Time Varying Demographic Controls                     Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes                      Yes
      Degree of Bite                                    Most Bite      Most Bite      Most Bite         Most Bite                Most Bite
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of
     all individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey.
     The sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The time varying demographic controls include full sets of period (p(t) as
     defined in the text) indicators interacted with full sets of indicators for the values taken by the CPS variables “age,” “educ,” “sex,” and a
     recoded race/ethnicity variable with separate values for Asian, Black, White Non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and Other. The reported standard error
     estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the estimation errors.
            Table B.4: Robustness of Baseline Estimate Using Matches on the Severity of States’ Housing Declines

                                                                              (1)             (2)            (3)      (4)
                                                                         Employed        Employed       Employed Employed
                        Bound x Post 1                                     -0.029*         -0.031*        -0.028* -0.034***
                                                                           (0.012)         (0.013)        (0.010)  (0.008)
                        Bound x Post 2                                    -0.038**        -0.036**       -0.029** -0.034***
                                                                           (0.011)         (0.012)        (0.010)  (0.007)
                        N                                                 284,957         249,188        358,272   322,443
                        Mean of Dep. Var.                                    0.39            0.38           0.38     0.38
                        Estimation Framework                              D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D    D-in-D
                        State and Time Effects                               Yes             Yes            Yes      Yes
                        Housing Decline Match Criterion                      10K              5K            20K   5 percent




66
                        Time Varying Demographic Controls                    Yes             Yes            Yes      Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of
     all individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey.
     The sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The time varying demographic controls include full sets of period (p(t) as
     defined in the text) indicators interacted with full sets of indicators for the values taken by the CPS variables “age,” “educ,” “sex,” and a
     recoded race/ethnicity variable with separate values for Asian, Black, White Non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and Other. The reported standard error
     estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the estimation errors. Relative to previous tables, the samples are restricted on the
     basis of matching criteria that are named in their respective columns and described in greater detail in the main text.
            Table B.5: Robustness of Baseline Estimate Using Matches on the Severity of States’ Housing Declines

                                                                      (1)            (2)              (3)       (4)      (5)
                                                                 Employed        Employed       Employed Employed Employed
                Bound x Post 1                                     -0.033**        -0.029*        -0.027**  -0.029** -0.031***
                                                                    (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.007)   (0.008)  (0.007)
                Bound x Post 2                                    -0.043***       -0.038**       -0.038*** -0.040*** -0.040***
                                                                    (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.009)   (0.009)  (0.009)
                Housing Price Index                                  0.135                                    0.045    0.032
                                                                    (0.107)                                  (0.082)  (0.079)
                State Employment Rate                                                             0.876**   0.874**   0.862**
                                                                                                   (0.266)   (0.269)  (0.275)
                State Personal Income                                                               0.001     0.001    0.002
                                                                                                   (0.002)   (0.002)  (0.002)
                Cumulative Stimulus                                                                                    -0.016
                                                                                                                      (0.009)
                N                                                  284,957         284,957        284,957   284,957   284,957




67
                Mean of Dep. Var.                                   0.39            0.39             0.39      0.39     0.39
                Estimation Framework                               D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D    D-in-D    D-in-D
                State and Time Effects                               Yes             Yes             Yes       Yes      Yes
                Housing Decline Match Criterion                      10K             10K             10K       10K      10K
                Time Varying Demographic Controls                    Yes             Yes             Yes       Yes      Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (3), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The sample consists of
     all individuals between ages 16 and 30 with less than a high school education who were surveyed in the full Current Population Survey.
     The sample extends from January 2006 through December 2012. The time varying demographic controls include full sets of period (p(t) as
     defined in the text) indicators interacted with full sets of indicators for the values taken by the CPS variables “age,” “educ,” “sex,” and a
     recoded race/ethnicity variable with separate values for Asian, Black, White Non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and Other. The reported standard error
     estimates allow for state level correlation clusters across the estimation errors. Relative to previous tables, the samples are restricted on the
     basis of matching criteria that are named in their respective columns and described in greater detail in the main text.
