                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  EFFECTS OF ACA MEDICAID EXPANSIONS ON HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
                          AND LABOR SUPPLY

                                          Robert Kaestner
                                          Bowen Garrett
                                        Anuj Gangopadhyaya
                                          Caitlyn Fleming

                                        Working Paper 21836
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21836


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Robert Kaestner, Bowen Garrett, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Caitlyn Fleming. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply
Robert Kaestner, Bowen Garrett, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Caitlyn Fleming
NBER Working Paper No. 21836
December 2015, Revised September 2016
JEL No. H42,I13,J22

                                            ABSTRACT

We examined the effect of the expansion of Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act on
health insurance coverage and labor supply of low-educated and low-income adults. We found that
the Medicaid expansions were associated with large (e.g., 50 percent) increases in Medicaid coverage
and corresponding decreases in the proportion uninsured. There was relatively little change in private
insurance coverage, although the expansions tended to decrease such coverage slightly. In terms of
labor supply, estimates indicated that the Medicaid expansions had little effect on work effort despite
the substantial changes in health insurance coverage. Most estimates suggested that the expansions
increased work effort, although not significantly.


Robert Kaestner                                                 Anuj Gangopadhyaya
School of Public Policy & Department of Economics               Department of Economics
University of California, Riverside                             University of Illinois at Chicago
4165 Interdisciplinary South                                    Chicago, IL 60607
900 University Avenue                                           agango2@uic.edu
Riverside, CA 92521
and NBER                                                        Caitlyn Fleming
kaestner.robert@gmail.com                                       Department of Economics
                                                                University of Illinois at Chicago
Bowen Garrett                                                   Chicago, IL 60607
Health Policy Center                                            cflemi7@uic.edu
Urban Institute
2100 M Street NW
Washington, DC 20037
bgarrett@urban.org
1. Introduction

        One of the key features of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was the expansion of Medicaid to

adults with incomes below 138% of the federal poverty level. Low-income adults were largely ineligible

for Medicaid prior to the ACA and this group also had a relatively low rate of health insurance coverage.

Therefore, expanding Medicaid to this group was seen as an important way to reduce the number of

uninsured persons, which was one of the central goals of the ACA.

        While the Medicaid expansions were clearly targeted at expanding health insurance coverage, the

income-based eligibility criterion of the expansion may have unintended effects on work effort. There are

several reasons why the Medicaid expansions may affect work.1 First, some people may reduce work

effort to lower their income and gain Medicaid eligibility. Second, some people may reduce work effort

because Medicaid coverage virtually eliminates out-of-pocket medical expenditures and health insurance

premium contributions, and allows a person to work less to generate the same amount of consumption

(income effect). Third, some people may increase work effort because they can work and earn more than

before the Medicaid expansion and still remain eligible for Medicaid due to the higher Medicaid income

eligibility threshold.2 Finally, the Medicaid expansions may have some, albeit small, positive effect on

aggregate economic activity that could increase employment.

The Congressional Budget Office (2014) estimated that the ACA would reduce total hours worked by 1.7

percent, or 2 million fewer full-time equivalent workers. Of this decline in employment, the CBO (2014)

estimated that the Medicaid expansions of the ACA would be responsible for a small part of the negative

effect on employment.3 To reach their conclusion about the possible effects of Medicaid, the CBO (2014)


1
  A report by the Congressional Budget Office (2014) describes the intuition underlying the causal links between
Medicaid and labor supply, and earlier studies by Blank (1989), Matsudaira and Blank (2013) and Yelowitz (1995)
present simple models that generate similar hypotheses. Also, see Bitler and Karoly (2015), Moffitt (2015) and,
particularly, Mulligan (2013; 2015) for a description of the ACA labor supply incentives and potential behavioral
responses.
2
  Another possibility is that some people will switch jobs from one that provides employer-provided insurance and a
relatively low wage to one that does not provide employer-provided insurance and a relatively higher wage, but that
still allows for Medicaid coverage. The higher wage of the new job would have substitution and income effects that
could change work effort.
3
  See Appendix C of Congressional Budget Office (2014) report, “Labor Market Effects of the Affordable Care Act:
Updated Estimates.” The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2014 to 2024: 117-127. Feb. 2014:


                                                                                                                  3
relied on a synthesis of the evidence from a few, recent case studies of the effect of Medicaid expansions

on labor supply. Perhaps the most important of these studies was Baicker et al. (2013), which examined

the effect of expanding Medicaid to childless adults in Oregon in 2008. The findings from this study are

particularly compelling because of the high degree of internal validity resulting from the experimental

design that was used. Baicker et al. (2013) reported that gaining Medicaid coverage was associated with a

small—1.6 percentage point (3%)—and statistically insignificant decrease in employment and earnings.

Another study reviewed by CBO (2014) was DeLeire et al. (2013), which examined an expansion of

Medicaid to childless adults in Wisconsin in 2009. A quasi-experimental research design (i.e., regression

discontinuity) was used that exploited the capping of enrollment that left eligible people unable to enroll

in Medicaid after a certain date. Results from the study indicated that Medicaid enrollment was associated

with between a 2% to 18% percent decrease in employment. A third study included in the CBO (2014)

review was by Garthwaite et al. (2014). This study examined the rollback of Medicaid eligibility in

Tennessee in 2005. For this analysis, a difference-in-differences research design was used with Tennessee

as the treated state and other Southern states the control states. Results of the analysis were mixed.

Among low-educated, childless adults, the change in Medicaid policy was associated with a 25% increase

in employment, but there was no effect for other educational groups.4

Besides these important pre-ACA studies, there are a couple of studies of the effect of the ACA Medicaid

expansions on labor supply that were produced since the CBO (2014) report.5 Gooptu et al. (2016) used a

sample of low-income (<138% Federal Poverty Level) adults drawn from monthly Current Population


http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/45010-breakout-AppendixC.pdf. Also see Congressional
Budget Office (2015). “How CBO Estimates the Effects of the Affordable Care Act on the Labor Market.” Working
Paper 2015-09. December 2015.
4
  Estimates in Garthwaite et al. (2014) are intention-to-treat estimates and are not directly comparable to estimates
from the Oregon and Wisconsin studies. Garthwaite et al. (2014) estimated that between 63 and 90 out of every 100
childless adults that lost public health insurance coverage found employment. This is a very large implied effect of
Medicaid that differs dramatically from estimates in the Oregon and Wisconsin studies. Estimates in Garthwaite et
al. (2014) also suggest employment responses to changes in income (the value of Medicaid) that are 20 to 60 times
the size of estimates found in most prior studies. See McClelland and Mok (2012):
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/10-25-2012-
Recent_Research_on_Labor_Supply_Elasticities.pdf
5
  There is also a larger literature on the labor supply effects of the ACA as a whole—not specific to Medicaid.
Garrett and Kaestner (2014; 2015) review this literature.


                                                                                                                   4
Surveys between January 2005 and March 2015 to examine the effect of Medicaid expansions on three

outcomes: transitions from employed to unemployed; transitions from full-time to part-time employment;

and job switches (employed in one job to employed in different job).6 A difference-in-differences

research design was used. The authors reported that the ACA Medicaid expansions had no significant

effect on these outcomes. In an unpublished paper, Leung and Mas (2016) used data from the American

Community Survey from 2010 to 2014 and monthly Current Population Surveys from January 2010 to

July 2015 to examine the effect of the ACA Medicaid expansions on employment, hours of work and

wages.7 The research design for the analysis in this study was difference-in-differences. Leung and Mas

(2016) reported that the ACA Medicaid expansions had no significant effect on employment, hours of

work or wages.

As this brief review of the literature has revealed, previous studies of the effect of Medicaid on labor

supply have not produced a consensus conclusion.8 This is an important gap in knowledge because of the

relevance of this issue for both economic theory and public policy. Economic theory predicts that social

programs with income-based eligibility will bring forth behavioral responses with respect to work effort.

Therefore, measuring the existence and magnitude of a behavioral, labor supply response to the large and

recent expansion of Medicaid will provide empirical evidence to assess a fundamental theoretical tenet.

Moreover, two of the recent case studies of the effect of Medicaid on labor supply (OR and WI studies)

were conducted using a sample of persons always eligible for Medicaid and, therefore, do not allow for

one potentially important labor supply response—“jumping on” Medicaid by lowering income to gain

eligibility (Mulligan 2013). For public policy, knowing whether there are unintended consequences

related to work effort associated with Medicaid is an important component of a cost-benefit analysis of




6
  Note that Gooptu et al. (2016) do not exhaust the possible employment transitions because they do not examine
unemployed to employed or part-time to full time. In addition, the study selected the sample based on the income in
the previous (baseline) year, which may be a noisy measure of potential income in the following year.
7
  Leung and Mas (2016) also examined the effect of ACA Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage.
8
  There is also a literature that examined the effect of Medicaid expansions for pregnant women and children in late
1980s and 1990s: Yelowitz (1995); Montgomery and Navin (2000); Ham and Shore-Shepard (2005); Meyer and
Rosenbaum (2001); and Decker et al. (2014). These studies also reported mixed results.


                                                                                                                   5
the effectiveness of Medicaid. If there are large changes in work effort associated with Medicaid, for

example, declines in work along the lines suggested by the Garthwaite et al. (2014), then the net, social

benefit of the Medicaid expansions would be substantially lower than otherwise believed.

In sum, the absence of a consensus from the relatively small prior literature related to whether Medicaid

affects labor supply and the importance of the issue for theory and policy warrants additional study. In

this paper, we examine the effect of the ACA Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and

labor supply. While the original formulation of the ACA Medicaid expansions was that it would be

implemented in all states, a Supreme Court ruling allowed states to opt out of the expansion and

approximately half did so.9 Thus, we exploit the state-variation in expansions resulting from the Supreme

Court ruling to assess the effect of Medicaid on insurance coverage and labor supply. We use two

research designs: difference-in-differences and synthetic control. Data for the analysis are drawn from the

American Community Survey (ACS) from 2010 to 2014, the March Current Population Survey (CPS)

from 2010 to 2015, and monthly CPS data from January 2010 to May 2016.

We study both health insurance coverage and labor supply because insurance coverage is itself an

important outcome of interest, and because changes in labor supply will be partly reflected by changes in

insurance coverage. For example, if people reduce labor supply to become eligible for Medicaid, then we

should observe a decrease in employment; an increase in Medicaid coverage; a reduction in uninsured;

and possibly a reduction in private insurance if the person replaced their private insurance with Medicaid.

Thus, the size of the increase in Medicaid has implications for the magnitude of the potential labor supply

response. Similarly, low-income, working persons may gain Medicaid coverage because of the expanded

income eligibility. For this group the extra income associated with Medicaid may cause them to work

less. Therefore, changes in insurance coverage, particularly Medicaid, provide some evidence of the

extent of treatment and the size of the group that may change labor supply in response to the Medicaid

expansion, although the association is not necessarily one-for-one.



9
    See http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf/11-393c3a2.pdf


                                                                                                            6
Results of our study indicate that, among low-educated and low-income adults, the ACA Medicaid

expansions significantly increased Medicaid coverage by between 23 percent and 54 percent for parents,

and by between 51 percent to 70 percent for childless adults. Notably, these increases in Medicaid

coverage were associated with significant decreases in the proportion uninsured with relatively little

change in private health insurance coverage, although for some groups such as unmarried parents living in

states with prior Medicaid expansions, there was substantial switching from private insurance to Medicaid

with less significant decreases in the proportion uninsured. These substantial changes in insurance

coverage were, in general, associated with few significant changes in labor supply. Estimates of the effect

of Medicaid on labor supply were, in general, small and not statistically significant, and most were

positive. Overall, there was very little evidence that the Medicaid expansions decreased work effort.

2. ACA Medicaid Expansions

        As noted, the Supreme Court decision that allowed states to opt out of the ACA Medicaid

expansions resulted in approximately half of the states not expanding Medicaid in 2014 (see Table 1).

Moreover, among those that did expand, several states had already expanded Medicaid to adults, for

example, parents. Therefore, these states may not have experienced any real change in Medicaid

eligibility for some groups. Finally, several states expanded Medicaid in 2015 or later. In short,

classifying states as to whether they did or did not experience an effective change in policy is not as

simple as assessing whether they expanded Medicaid in 2014 as part of the ACA.

To classify states into those experiencing a change in Medicaid policy (“treated”) and those not

experiencing a change in Medicaid policy (“control”), we reviewed several sources of information.10

Table 1 provides a list of states and how we classified them into treated and control groups as of 2014.




10
  Medicaid eligibility rules were determined using Kaiser Family Foundation’s Annual 50 State Survey of
Eligibility Rules, Enrollment and Renewal Procedures, and Cost-Sharing Practices in Medicaid and CHIP (2009
through 2015), Medicaid.gov demonstrations and waivers database (http://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-
program-information/by-topics/waivers/waivers_faceted.html), Kaiser Family Foundation’s state-specific fact
sheets, healthinsurance.org Medicaid state-specific fact sheets, and individual state Medicaid websites.


                                                                                                              7
For analyses that use data from 2015 and 2016, we made appropriate modifications that we identify

below. As of 2014, states included in the control group are:

States that did not expand Medicaid in 2014 and that had no prior Medicaid expansion between 2010 and

2014: AL, AK, FL, GA, ID, KS, LA, MS, MO, MT, NE, NC, OK, PA, SC, SD, TX, UT, VA, WY (20).

States that did not expand Medicaid in 2014 and that had prior, but limited Medicaid expansions between

2010 and 2014: IN, ME, TN, WI (4).

States that expanded Medicaid in 2014, but that had prior and comprehensive Medicaid expansion similar

to ACA for both parents and childless adults between 2010 and 2014: DE, DC, MA, NY, VT (5).

The control group consists of 29 states. Note that we include IN, ME, TN and WI as control states even

though they had some prior Medicaid expansions between 2010 and 2014. However, the prior Medicaid

expansions in these states were limited (e.g., capped or closed enrollment). One state changed status

between 2010 and 2013; Colorado expanded eligibility to childless adults in 2012, but capped the

program at 10,000. To assess whether including states with prior expansions, either comprehensive as in

MA or limited as in IN, made a difference, we re-estimated all models excluding these states from the

analysis and we report the results below. We note here that dropping these states had little effect on

estimates. As noted, four states expanded Medicaid in 2015 or 2016: PA (1/15), IN (2/15), AK (9/15), and

MT (1/16). Analyses that use 2015 and 2016 data drop these states from the analysis.11

As of 2014, the treated states are the following:

States that expanded Medicaid in 2014 and that had no prior Medicaid expansion: AK, KY, MI, NH, NV,

NM, ND, OH, WV (9).

States that expanded Medicaid in 2014 and that had a prior, but limited, Medicaid expansion for parents

and/or childless adults: AZ, CA, CO, CT, HI, IA, IL, MD, MN, NJ, OR, RI, WA (13).




11
  We dropped these states because we wanted to use a common definition of treatment across the two research
designs. The synthetic control method requires a common pre- and post-period, so these late expanders are dropped
because we used 2014 as the beginning of the post-period. To be consistent, we also dropped these states from the
difference-in-differences analysis.


                                                                                                                    8
We note that Michigan expanded Medicaid in April of 2014 and New Hampshire expanded Medicaid in

August of 2014. We include both in treated group because Michigan expanded for most of the year and

New Hampshire is a small state and the partial year expansion is unlikely to make a difference to

estimates. Re-estimating models without these two states included in treatment group had no material

effect on estimates. Finally, as already mentioned, states that expanded after 2014 (IN, PA, AK, and MT)

are excluded from the analysis when data post 2014 is used.

The fact that some states had prior expansions motivated us to divide the treated states into two groups

depending on whether they had a previous expansion. However, if a state had expanded Medicaid fully

(comprehensively) to both parents and childless adults (DE, DC, MA, NY, VT), which is the equivalent

of the ACA expansion, these states were included in the control group of states. Thus, the second group of

states in the treated category consists of states with a full parental expansion of Medicaid and states with

limited expansions for parents and/or childless adults. On the one hand, it is reasonable to expect that the

effect of the 2014 (ACA) expansion of Medicaid will be smaller in states with previous expansions of

Medicaid, although many of these expansions were quite limited. Most were focused on parents. On the

other hand, if take-up of Medicaid among eligible persons was relatively low, the individual mandate that

required all people to have health insurance and the public outreach (i.e. marketplaces) that became

effective in 2014 may cause those always eligible for Medicaid to obtain it and this would suggest smaller

differences between the two groups of states that expanded Medicaid in 2014. Empirically, we test

whether the effect of Medicaid differed in the two groups of treated states. We also explored whether to

divide the second group of treated states into a finer classification based on the type of previous

expansion, but tests indicated that these two categories were the only empirically relevant groupings.12

3. Empirical Approach

3.a. Data




12
  Specifically, we divided the second group of treated states into those with and without a full Medicaid expansion
to parents. We could not reject the hypothesis that these two groups had similar effects on outcomes.


                                                                                                                      9
        The data used in the analysis come from three sources: the American Community Survey (ACS)

from 2010 to 2014; the March Current Population Survey from 2010 to 2015; and monthly files of the

Current Population Survey (CPS) from January 2010 to May 2016. From each of these datasets, we

selected a sample of non-disabled, adults between the ages of 22 and 64 who have a high school

education or less. We limit the sample to relatively low-educated adults because Medicaid is targeted at

low-income persons and education is strongly related to income. We recognize that selecting a sample on

the basis of income is problematic because Medicaid may affect labor supply and income and therefore,

may lead to biased estimates.

We conduct analyses using all persons with a high school education or less and analyses stratified by

marital status (married, not married), whether there is a child in the family and age.13 We stratify the

sample by marital status because it is associated with income; unmarried persons have lower incomes and

may be more likely to be affected by the Medicaid expansions than married persons. We also conducted

analyses for samples divided by whether or not there are children under the age of 18 in the household.

Most prior Medicaid expansions were targeted toward low-income parents, so this group may be less

affected by the ACA Medicaid expansions, and there may be differences in the effect of Medicaid by

whether children are present because of differences in household income and preferences. Stratification

by age is motivated by the same considerations with respect to income and also because age is correlated

with health, which is an important determinant of health insurance coverage.

Data on earnings from the 2013 American Community Survey show that the low-educated sample we

selected is quite disadvantaged. For example, unmarried parents in our sample have mean earnings of

approximately $17,000 and unmarried, childless adults have mean earnings of approximately $18,000.

However, as a sensitivity analysis, we also select a sample of persons with incomes less than 300% of the

federal poverty limit. We chose 300% because we wanted to limit the selection bias associated with

selecting the sample using income while simultaneously selecting a group that was likely affected by the


13
  Further stratification by marital status and education was not empirically meaningful—we could not reject the
equality of estimates by education group within marital status category.


                                                                                                                  10
Medicaid expansions. Because the monthly CPS files do not report income accurately, we do not use the

low-income sample in analyses that use these data. Descriptive information in Table 2 reveals that the

low-educated and low-income samples are quite similar with respect to the health insurance coverage and

labor supply. We discuss this further below.

The ACS collects information on approximately three million people each year covering over 92% of the

U.S. population in each year. The survey is conducted on a monthly basis throughout the year and

combined into an annual file. The ACS collects information on health insurance coverage at the time of

interview, employment at the time of interview, usual hours of work in last year (one year prior to

survey), and demographic characteristics. Because the ACS is conducted on a monthly basis, we focus on

the health insurance and current employment variables. Information on usual hours of work, which refers

to the past year, will span the pre-expansion period, so we do not use this outcome.

The Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey, i.e., the “March CPS”

conducted in March of each year (supplemented with data from February and April since 2002) collects

similar information to the ACS including health insurance. The survey is of the civilian, non-institutional

population of the United States. We use the March CPS only for its information on health insurance

because it is available for March 2015 whereas the ACS data are through 2014 and, as noted, the ACS is

conducted continuously throughout the year. One disadvantage of the March CPS is that there was a

change in the health insurance question in 2014 (Turner and Boudreaux 2014; Pascale 2015). The

redesigned survey was intended to address the problem related to the recall period (current v. past year)

that affected past CPS surveys.

The monthly CPS files are similar to the March CPS files except they do not collect information on many

social and economic indicators. However, the labor supply variables are available and refer to the survey

week. Therefore, we can use the hours of work information in the monthly CPS files. In addition, the

monthly CPS data are available through May 2016.

To summarize, the dependent variables and data sources for our analyses are the following:




                                                                                                            11
Health Insurance: Medicaid, private insurance, and uninsured. The information on health insurance is

from the ACS and March CPS.14 The ACS and CPS allow people to report more than one health

insurance category and approximately 2% to 3% report having Medicaid and another type of insurance.

Labor Supply: employed at time of interview, usual hours worked per week; and worked 30 or more

hours per week (full time). The employed at time of interview information is from the ACS and monthly

CPS. The usual hours per week and part-time status are from the monthly CPS.

         The key independent variables for the analysis are the treatment group indicators listed in the

previous section and Table 1. We estimate regression models using alternate definitions of Medicaid

expansion states: one model defines treatment states as all those that expanded in 2014 regardless of

whether they had a prior expansion, and the second model separates treatment states into two depending

whether they had a prior expansion. For the second model, we test whether the coefficients on the

treatment states indicators differ. Other independent variables included in the regression include dummy

variables for each year of age; dummy variables for race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic

black, non-Hispanic other, and Hispanic), dummy variables for marital status (married, never married,

and other), dummy variables for education (high school degree and less than high school degree), dummy

variables for number of children (0, 1, 2, and 3 or more), and dummy variables for family size (1, 2, 3, 4

and 5 or more).

         Descriptive statistics of the variables used in the analysis are presented in Table 2.15 These

statistics are based on data from 2010, the baseline period. The left panel presents means for the samples

selected using education. In general, the low-educated samples drawn from the ACS and CPS are quite

similar. Approximately one-third are uninsured; 55 percent to 60 percent are covered by private

insurance; 11 percent are covered by Medicaid; two-thirds are employed at the time of interview; and


14
   We do not divide private health insurance into employer-sponsored and non-group because of well-known
problems of data quality that make the distinction between types of private insurance particularly problematic (Call
et al. 2012; Claxton et al. 2014; Pascale 2016). Our focus is also on labor supply and changes in Medicaid and
uninsured are most relevant outcomes related to labor supply. However, estimates for models that divide the
privately insured into those with and without employer sponsored insurance are available from the authors.
15
   These are unweighted estimates.


                                                                                                                  12
approximately 60 percent work full-time (>30 hours). The low-educated sample drawn from the March

CPS is slightly younger, less likely to be white, and more likely to have a child under age 18 in the

household than the ACS sample, although none of the differences are that marked. The right panel of

Table 2 presents means for the samples selected using income. Here too the ACS and CPS samples are

very similar, and notably, not too different from the low-educated samples, which confirms that selecting

the sample using education is an effective way to identify a group likely affected by the Medicaid

expansions. The low-income samples are slightly more likely to be uninsured (e.g., 36 percent) and

slightly less likely to work (full time) than the low-educated samples. However, differences are not

substantial.

3.b. Difference-in-differences Research Design

        The ACA Medicaid expansions provide state by year variation in Medicaid eligibility that can be

used to obtain estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on health insurance coverage and labor

supply. The expansions represent a source of plausibly exogenous variation in Medicaid eligibility,

although clearly states chose whether to expand or not and, therefore, the exogeneity of the expansions

needs to be assessed. Accordingly, we use a difference-in-differences (DiD) research design to obtain

estimates of the effect of the expansions on health insurance and labor supply. The DiD design is a

straightforward approach that is intended to mimic the pre- and post-test with comparison group design of

a true experiment.

        We have already described the classification of states into treatment and control groups. Given

this classification, DiD estimates can be obtained using the following regression model:

HEALTHINS ijt   0   j   t   (TREAT j * Y 2014 t )  X ijt   eijt

Equation (1) indicates that the health insurance coverage, for example, Medicaid, of person “i” in state “j”

and year “t” depends on state fixed effects (  j ), year fixed effects (  t ), an indicator of whether the state

is in treated group and the year is 2014 ( TREAT j * Y 2014t ), and demographic characteristics ( X ijt ) such

as age that were previously described. In equation (1), the dependent variable is health insurance, but



                                                                                                                13
analogous models will be estimated using labor supply measures. In addition, for data that extend to 2015

or 2016, the interaction between the treated indicator and post-expansion period will include the

additional years.

        We also estimate a version of equation (1) that allows there to be two treatment groups: states that

expanded Medicaid in 2014 and had no prior expansions and states that expanded Medicaid in 2014, but

had some form of prior expansion. The model that allows for effects to differ by treatment group type is:

HEALTHINS ijt   0   j   t  1 (TREAT _ NOPRIOR j * Y 2014 t ) 
               2 (TREAT _ PRIOR j * Y 2014 t )  X ijt   eijt

In equation (2), there are two treatment indicators and two coefficients measuring the effect of Medicaid

expansions in the different types of treatment states. We test whether 1   2 to assess whether the prior

expansion of Medicaid resulted in different effects of the 2014 expansion.

        The key assumption underlying the validity of the DiD approach is the parallel trends

assumption—that in the absence of the ACA Medicaid expansions changes in health insurance and labor

supply would be the same in treated and control states. To assess the likely validity of this assumption, we

estimate a model, which we refer to as an event history specification, allowing for a complete set of

interactions between the indicator of treatment status and years:

                                     2014
HEALTHINS ijt   0   j   t              k (TREAT j * YEAR t )  X ijt   eijt
                                    k  2011

The only difference between equations (1) and (3) is that the effect of treatment is allowed to differ for

every year instead of just 2014 (2015 and 2016 too when relevant). The parallel trends assumption

implies that the coefficients on the interaction terms between treatment and year ( k ) would be zero in

years prior to 2014. We test this hypothesis and report results below, but note here that the evidence from

this analysis generally supports the validity of the research design.

3.b. Synthetic Control

        A second approach to obtaining estimates of the effect of the Medicaid expansions on labor

supply is the synthetic control approach proposed by Abadie et al. (2010). This approach uses a matching


                                                                                                             14
procedure to create a synthetic comparison (control) group that is a weighted average of states that did not

expand Medicaid. While technically not a DiD approach, the Abadie et al. (2010) approach is similar

because the estimate of the effect of Medicaid is obtained by taking the difference in means between

treated states and a weighted average of non-treated states. However, only the post-expansion difference

is used to calculate the estimate because the approach assumes that pre-expansion differences between

treated and non-treated states are zero. Indeed, the central feature of the Abadie et al. (2010) method is to

select a comparison group in such a way as to minimize—reduce toward zero—the pre-expansion

differences in means between treated states and the synthetic comparison group.

The key to the Abadie et al. (2010) approach is selecting the weights that are used to construct the

synthetic comparison group, or counterfactual outcome. Abadie et al. (2010) suggest choosing weights

that minimize differences between the pre-treatment mean outcome and covariates of treated and

untreated observations.16 The unit of observation in this approach is the state. The argument underlying

this approach is that if the pre-treatment means of the treated and control states are equal, then the post-

treatment difference is likely to represent a valid estimate of the policy. An advantage of the synthetic

control approach is that the closeness of the match between the treated and control states can be assessed

easily, for example, graphically, and the weight for each potential comparison state is provided.

There are a variety of ways to select weights that are used to construct the synthetic comparison group,

for example, by minimizing the difference between each pre-period value of the dependent variable and

covariates of treated and untreated states. Alternatives include using the average of pre-period outcomes

to match on instead of each pre-period outcome, or to match on the average and only the last (first) pre-

period outcome. We chose to match states using each pre-period value of the dependent variable and a

select number of covariates (state means of age, proportion in race/ethnic categories and proportion with

less than high school degree), but we also report estimates from an alternative approach that uses only the

average value of pre-2014 dependent variable, the 2013 value and each pre-2014 value of select



16
     See Abadie et al. (2010) for details.


                                                                                                               15
covariates.17 Only states with positive weights are used to construct the synthetic control group. Notably,

for our preferred method of matching, almost all (e.g., 25) potential control states had positive weights.

For the alternative method, the number of states with positive weights was less fluctuating between 5 and

13 depending on the outcome and data set. Despite this difference, estimates from the two approaches

were very similar.18

Once the weights are selected and the synthetic comparison group constructed, the estimate of the effect

of the Medicaid expansion is derived by taking the difference between the mean outcome in the treated

states (treated as one unit) and the mean outcome in the synthetic comparison group, which is just a

weighted average of outcomes in the non-expanding states. Inferences for this estimate are derived from

permutation tests (randomization inference) that consist of re-doing the analysis 1000 times, but each time

using a randomly selected group of treatment states. After generating these 1000 “random” estimates, the

p-value of the estimate of the effect of Medicaid expansion on labor supply is the fraction of “random”

estimates that are larger in absolute value than the actual estimate for the true treated states.

4. Results

4.a. Estimates of the Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Using American

Community Survey 2010 to 2014

         We begin the discussion of results with the effect of the Medicaid expansions on health insurance

coverage, which is classified into three categories: Medicaid, uninsured, and private. Table 3 presents

difference-in-differences estimates, which are derived from data from the ACS. The table is organized as

follows. There are two panels that present results for parents (children under 18 in family)—the top

panel—and childless adults (no children under 18 in family)—the bottom panel. Within each panel,

estimates from two samples are shown: the low-educated sample and the low-income (<300 percent of


17
   See Kaul et al. (2015) for an analysis of the potential consequences of different approaches. We also used a third
approach—matching on pre-2014 averages of dependent variable and select covariates. Estimates from this third
approach were in all but a few cases similar to those from the other two approaches. Overall, the method of
matching made little difference.
18
   For analyses that dropped states with prior expansions or because of late expansion dates, the number of potential
control states was considerably less as was the number of state with positive weights.


                                                                                                                   16
federal poverty) sample. For each of the three health insurance outcomes—Medicaid, uninsured and

private—estimates from two model specifications are presented in separate rows (top and bottom row). In

one model (top row), we combine all states that expanded Medicaid in 2014 into one treatment group. In

the second model (bottom row), we allow the effect of the Medicaid expansions to differ depending on

whether the state had a prior expansion of some type. In addition, for the low-educated sample, we

present estimates for each outcome and each sample (parents and childless adults) for observations further

stratified by marital status.

Estimates in the top panel (parents) and top row of Table 3 indicate that the ACA Medicaid expansions

were associated with an increase in Medicaid coverage, a decrease in the proportion uninsured, and a

decrease in private insurance coverage. Estimates related to Medicaid and uninsured are always

statistically significant. For the full (“All”) low-educated sample of parents, the 2014 Medicaid

expansions increased Medicaid coverage by 4 percentage points, or 24 percent of the 2010 mean of the

proportion of uninsured. The expansion of Medicaid was associated with a 2.7 percentage point decline in

uninsured and a 1.1 percentage point decline in private insurance. The decline in private insurance

suggests some amount of crowd out of private for public insurance. For the sample of parents as a whole,

approximately 25% of the increase in Medicaid may have come from private insurance. Estimates for the

low-income sample are very similar to those for the low-educated sample, although slightly larger. The

Medicaid expansion of 2014 was associated with a 4.6 percentage point (24 percent) increase in

Medicaid; a 2.7 percentage point decrease in uninsured; and a 1.6 percentage point decrease in private

insurance. These estimates suggest a slightly higher rate of crowd out (35 percent) of private for public

insurance than in the low-educated sample.

Estimates in the bottom row of the top panel reveal that, among married parents, the effect of the 2014

Medicaid expansions did not differ significantly, or meaningfully, by whether a state had a prior Medicaid

expansion. However, for not married parents, the effect of the 2014 expansion was noticeably, if not

statistically, different by whether the state had a prior Medicaid expansion, which were mainly targeted at

parents. Among the low-educated and unmarried group, the Medicaid expansion was associated with a


                                                                                                            17
larger increase in Medicaid (5.6 percentage points v. 3.5 percentage points) and larger decrease in

uninsured (4.9 percentage points v. 1.5 percentage points) in states that had no prior expansion than in

states with a prior expansion. The substitution of private for public coverage appears to have occurred

mostly among the not married, parent sample in states that had previously expanded Medicaid; for this

group of parents, the 2014 Medicaid expansion was associated with a 3.5 percentage increase in Medicaid

and a 2.4 percentage point decrease in private insurance suggesting a crowd out rate of 69 percent.

Estimates in the bottom row of the top panel pertaining to the low-income sample also suggest that the

effect of the 2014 expansion was larger in states that had no prior expansion, and that crowd out of private

insurance was slightly greater in the prior expansion states.

In the bottom panel of Table 3, estimates of the effect of the 2014 expansions on childless adults are

presented. Here too estimates indicate that the 2014 expansions were associated with an increase in

Medicaid coverage (53 percent) and decrease in uninsured (11 percent), but in this case, there is little

change in private insurance. However, there are substantial differences by marital status within the low-

educated sample with effect sizes larger in absolute value for the not married group. Among the low-

educated, married childless adults, the 2014 Medicaid expansions were associated with a 2.4 percentage

point (63 percent) increase in Medicaid coverage and a 2.2 percentage point (11 percent) decrease in

uninsured. For the not married group of childless adults, the 2014 expansion is associated with a 5.2

percentage point (48 percent) increase in Medicaid and a 4.4 percentage point (10 percent) decrease in

uninsured. As estimates in the bottom row on the bottom panel indicate, the effect of the 2014 expansions

on health insurance coverage of childless adults did not differ significantly by whether the state had a

prior expansion, which is consistent with the fact that most prior expansions were targeted at parents.

Estimates for the low-income sample are similar, but again, slightly larger than the corresponding

estimates for the low-educated sample. Among low-income, childless adults, the 2014 Medicaid

expansions were associated with a 6.3 percentage point (66 percent) increase in Medicaid; a 4.8

percentage point (12 percent) decrease in uninsured; and a 1.3 percentage point decrease in private




                                                                                                           18
insurance. As with the low-educated sample, there is little evidence that the effect of the expansion

differed by whether a state had a prior expansion.

As previously noted, the validity of the difference-in-differences estimates in Table 3 depends on the

parallel trends assumption that in the absence of the Medicaid expansions changes in health insurance

coverage would be the same in treated and control states. To assess the likely validity of this assumption,

we re-estimated the models that produced the estimates in Table 3, but allowed the treatment indicator to

differ by every year instead of just pre- and post-2014. We refer to estimates from these analyses as event

history estimates. The parallel trends assumption implies that all pre-2014 interactions between the

treatment indicator and the year dummy variables are zero.

Appendix Table 1 presents the event history estimates. While estimates are not all independent, there are

72 different estimates in Appendix Table 1 that are relevant—pertaining to coefficients on the interaction

between treatment indicator and pre-2014 dummy variables. Only 7 of the 72 estimates are statistically

different from zero. Even when estimates are different from zero, they are much smaller than the

estimates associated with the 2014 interaction. Overall, the event history estimates support the validity of

the DiD approach. Given this finding, it is reasonable to interpret the estimates in Table 3 as causal effects

of the 2014 Medicaid expansions.

We also obtained estimates of the effect of the Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage using a

synthetic control approach. While not a difference-in-differences approach, the synthetic control approach

is similar. In this case, the control states are chosen on the basis of a statistical, matching procedure

instead of simply using all non-expansion states as controls, as in the difference-in-differences design.

Figures 1 through 12 provide graphical evidence of the validity of the synthetic control approach. In all

figures, the pre-2014 trend in each measure of health insurance is very similar—almost identical—

between the treated states and synthetic control group of states.

In Table 4, we present estimates obtained using the synthetic control approach. For comparison, we also

show the analogous difference-in-differences estimates from Table 3 in Table 4. Note that p-values for

the synthetic control estimates are provided in brackets in Table 4 because the randomization inference


                                                                                                            19
approach produces only p-values. Overall, synthetic control estimates are quite similar to difference-in-

differences estimates. The only difference of note is that estimates from the synthetic control approach

suggest less crowd out of private insurance. Despite this small difference, the similarity of the synthetic

control and difference-in-differences estimates bolsters the case for interpreting the estimates as causal.19

We also conducted analyses for samples stratified by age, which is a demographic factor related to

income, and therefore likely eligibility, and other determinants of health insurance coverage such as

health that could cause a different behavioral response. We report these results in Appendix Table 2 using

the low-educated sample.20 Estimates of the effect of the 2014 Medicaid expansions on health insurance

coverage do not vary significantly or meaningfully by age. The expansions had a slightly larger effect on

Medicaid coverage and the proportion uninsured among younger (ages 22 to 44), low-educated adults

than older (ages 45 to 64), low-educated adults. The one notable difference by age is that there is more

evidence that the Medicaid expansions resulted in a substantial amount of crowding out of private for

public insurance among unmarried, parents between the ages of 45 and 64. For this group, the Medicaid

expansions had virtually no effect on the proportion uninsured—the increase in Medicaid coverage was

almost fully (84 percent) offset by a decrease in private coverage.

Finally, using the low-educated sample, we re-estimated all models dropping the nine control states that

had prior expansions (DE, DC, MA, NY, VT, IN, ME, TN and WI) and the two treatment states that

expanded late (NH and MI). We report both difference-in-differences and synthetic control estimates in

Appendix Table 3 along with corresponding estimates from Tables 3 and 4 for comparison.21 Estimates in

Appendix Table 3 are quite similar quantitatively to the corresponding estimates in Tables 3 and 4, and




19
   We also estimated synthetic control models using a different approach to select weights for constructing the
control group. Specifically, we used the average value of health insurance between 2010 and 2013 and the 2013
value instead of each individual value. Estimates from this alternative (not reported) were virtually identical to those
reported in Table 4.
20
   Estimates by age are available upon request for the low-income sample. These are very similar to those reported
for low-educated sample, which is unsurprising given the similarity of estimates between the two samples in Table 3
and 4.
21
   Appendix Figures A1 through A6 show that the synthetic control approach of Appendix Table 3 is valid as
illustrated by the closeness of the pre-2014 trends in outcomes between the treated and synthetic control groups.


                                                                                                                     20
there are virtually no qualitative differences between estimates in Appendix Table 3 and estimates in

Tables 3 and 4.

4.b. Estimates of the Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Using March

Current Population Survey 2010 to 2015

In addition to using the ACS, we obtained estimates of the effect of the 2014 Medicaid expansions on

health insurance coverage using the March CPS from 2010 to 2015. One possible advantage of the March

CPS is that it reports data as of March 2015 whereas the ACS collects information throughout the year

and the last year is 2014. Thus, there is a longer post-expansion period in the March CPS than the ACS.

The disadvantage of the March CPS is the change in the survey design related to health insurance in 2014.

We do not take a position on which is the preferred data source because it is unclear whether one if

preferable to the other. To present the evidence in an easily digestible form and one that facilitates

comparing estimates from the ACS and March CPS estimates, we calculated the effect of the 2014

Medicaid expansions as the percentage change in health insurance coverage from the 2010 baseline.

These results are reported in Table 5 and the full set of underlying estimates obtained using the March

CPS are reported in Appendix Table 4.

Overall, estimates of the effect of Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage from the March CPS

are largely consistent with corresponding estimates obtained using the ACS, as the results in Table 5

illustrate. The main difference is that the estimates from the CPS indicate larger increases in Medicaid

and larger decreases in uninsured. For example, among low-educated, parents, the 2014 Medicaid

expansion was associated with a 6.5 percentage point (43 percent) increase in Medicaid in the CPS. The

analogous estimates from the ACS were 4.0 percentage points (24 percent). For uninsured, CPS estimates

indicate a 4.0 percentage point (13 percent) decrease where ACS estimates indicated 2.7 percentage point

(9 percent) decrease. Estimates from the CPS also show that results are similar whether a low-educated or

low-income sample is used. As with the ACS, estimates of the effect of the Medicaid expansions on

Medicaid coverage and uninsured tend to be larger for the low-income sample than from the low-

educated sample.


                                                                                                           21
We also conducted a similar set of analyses using the March CPS as we did for the ACS: event history

analysis assessing validity of the difference-in-differences research design; an analysis that used the

synthetic control approach; and an analysis that stratified by age. With respect to the event history

analysis (see Appendix Table 5), only 3 of 72 estimates associated with the interaction between the

treatment indicator and pre-2014 dummy variables were significant. This provides considerable evidence

that the DiD design is valid and results are plausibly interpreted as causal. Appendix Table 6 and

Appendix Figures 7 through 18 present synthetic control estimates of the effect of Medicaid on health

insurance using the March CPS. As was the case for the ACS, there is strong consistency between the

DiD and synthetic control estimates further bolstering the case that our estimates be interpreted as causal.

Appendix Figures 7 through 12 also illustrate the close match between the treated and synthetic control

states and the likely validity of the synthetic control approach. Finally, Appendix Table 7 shows estimates

from samples stratified by age. Given the smaller sample sizes of the March CPS than the ACS, these

estimates are less precisely estimated. However, as with the ACS, estimates indicate that the expansions

had a slightly larger effect on Medicaid coverage and the proportion uninsured among younger (ages 22

to 44), low-educated adults than older (ages 45 to 64), low-educated adults. Finally, we re-estimated all

models dropping the nine states with prior expansions and the two late expanding states. Estimates from

this analysis are presented in Appendix Table 8 and are quite similar to those from analyses that include

all states.

4.c. Summary of Estimates of the Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance

In summary, estimates in Tables 3 through 5 and Appendix Tables 1 through 8 indicate that the 2014

Medicaid expansions significantly increased Medicaid coverage and decreased the proportion of

uninsured among low-educated/low-income persons. Table 5 presents a summary of results. The largest

effect sizes were found childless adults. For this group, which was arguably the target group of the

Medicaid expansions, the proportion of adults enrolled in Medicaid increased by approximately 51

percent to 70 percent depending on the sample and data source. Correspondingly, the proportion of low-

educated/low-income, childless adults who were uninsured decreased by approximately 9 percent to 14


                                                                                                          22
percent depending on the sample and data source. For low-educated/low-income parents, the increase in

Medicaid resulting from the ACA expansions were approximately half the size as for childless adults, but

the decrease in the proportion uninsured was approximately the same (in relative terms). There was

limited, and not always consistent evidence of a modest amount of crowding out of private for public

insurance coverage. The largest amount of crowd out was found for unmarried, parents in states that had

prior Medicaid expansions. Finally, our estimates are consistent with other recent papers that have

examined the effect of the Medicaid expansions on health insurance using different data sources, samples

and methods (Courtemanche et al. 2016; Frean et al. 2016; Wherry and Miller 2016).

4.d. Estimates of the Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply—American Community

Survey 2010 to 2014

As documented above, the ACA Medicaid expansions had a significant impact on health insurance

coverage, which raises the possibility that people altered their labor supply to take advantage of the new

Medicaid benefit. We assess this hypothesis first using data from the ACS and then using data from

monthly CPS surveys.

Table 6 presents estimates of the effect of the 2014 Medicaid expansion on whether a person is employed

at the time of the interview using data from the ACS. The table is organized in a similar way as previous

tables, although we present both difference-in-differences (labeled DD) and synthetic control (labeled SC)

estimates in the same table. The top panel of Table 6 shows estimates for parents and the bottom panel

shows estimates for childless adults. Within each of these two groups, we show estimates from a sample

of low-educated (HS or less) adults and from a sample of low-income (<300 percent of FPL) adults. We

also present estimates from a sample stratified by marital status for the low-educated group.

Estimates in Table 6 are remarkably consistent. Almost all (28 out of 32) are small, for example, less than

0.5 percentage points (<1 percent of baseline mean). All but two estimates are statistically insignificant.

Most estimates are positive. Overall, estimates in Table 6 suggest that, on average, the Medicaid

expansions had virtually no effect on employment as of 2014. If anything, it appears that the Medicaid

expansions are associated with an increase in employment, although, as noted, only one estimate (of 32)


                                                                                                          23
is statistically significant. Further, if we use standard errors derived from the difference-in-difference

analyses as a reference, for example, a value of 0.003, in most cases, we can reject effect sizes less than

approximately -0.005. Thus, estimates rule out decreases in employment of 1 percent or more.

Estimates in Table 6 are somewhat larger in relative terms based on the proportion of the sample that

experienced a change in Medicaid, or uninsured. Against this benchmark, which is at best suggestive of

the size of the potentially treated group and do not include those affected who did not have to switch

coverage to benefit22, estimates in Table 6 can rule out decreases in employment for those who changed

coverage of approximately 10 percent to 15 percent (e.g., -0.005/0.05) or greater. We reiterate, however,

that most estimates are positive suggesting an increase in employment.

We also assess the validity of the difference-in-differences estimates in Table 6 using the event history

approach described earlier. Estimates from this analysis are in Appendix Table 9 and provide substantial

support for the validity of the difference-in-differences analysis—only 2 of the 24 interactions between

treatment and pre-2014 year indicators are statistically significant. Similarly, Appendix Figures 19

through 24 show that there is a close match between the pre-2014 trends in employment between the

treated and synthetic control groups of states, which provides support for the validity of this approach.23

Moreover, there is substantial agreement between estimates obtained from the two approaches. Finally, in

Appendix Table 10, we report DD and SC estimates of the effect of Medicaid expansions on labor supply

omitting the nine states with prior expansions and two states with late expansions. Results from these

analyses are very similar to those reported in Table 6.

4.e. Estimates of the Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply—Monthly Current

Population Survey January 2010 to May 2016

The final set of results is for the effect of Medicaid on labor supply using monthly CPS files. These data

extend through May 2016, which is nearly 2.5 years after the initial implementation, and allow for the


22
   This includes those on Medicaid prior to expansion who were potentially able to increase labor supply and still
remain eligible for Medicaid.
23
   Synthetic control estimates that use the alternative approach to constructing weights that uses the 2010 to 2013
average value of the dependent variable and the 2013 value are very similar to those reported in Table 6.


                                                                                                                      24
analysis of more measures of labor supply, specifically, usual hours worked per week and whether a

person worked full-time, defined here using a threshold indicating greater than 30 hours per week. For

these data, we do not use a sample of low-income persons because income is not well measured in these

data. We also omit all states that expanded in 2015/2016 (i.e., AK, MT, IN and PA).

Table 7 presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of Medicaid on labor supply using the

monthly CPS. The table is divided into two panels depending on whether we are analyzing parents (top

panel) or childless adults (bottom panel). Within each panel, we show estimates for three outcomes

(employment, usual hours of work, and >30 hours per work) for the full sample, and for samples stratified

by marital status.

Estimates in the top panel of Table 7, which pertain to parents, are not statistically significant. Estimates

related to married parents are small, negative and not statistically significant. Among unmarried parents,

estimates are positive, relatively small (e.g., 2% of mean) and not statistically significant. In addition,

there is no evidence that the effect of Medicaid expansions on labor supply of low-educated parents

differed by whether a state had a prior expansion.

For the childless adult sample (bottom panel of Table 7), estimates indicate that the Medicaid expansions

were associated with an increase in employment and the probability of working more than 30 hours per

week. While estimates are only statistically significant for the sample of married, childless adults, the

magnitudes of the estimates are very similar for the unmarried sample. Similarly, estimates are very

similar for states with and without a prior expansion. In terms of magnitudes, estimates indicate that the

Medicaid expansions were associated with a 1.2 percentage point (1.8 percent) increase in the probability

of employment and a 1.0 percentage point (1.7 percent) increase in probability of being employed full-

time among childless adults.

Evidence in Appendix Table 11, however, raises a note of caution. In this table, we report estimates from

the event history specification assessing the validity of the difference-in-differences approach underlying

the estimates in Table 7. In this case, and particularly for the sample of unmarried parents and childless

adults, we observe a substantial number of significant coefficients on the interactions between the


                                                                                                              25
treatment indicator and the pre-2014, year dummy variables. The significant estimates in Appendix Table

11 are of similar magnitude to the significant estimates in Table 7. Given this evidence, we conclude that

the small, significant estimates in Table 7 pertaining to the childless adult sample may not be reliable.

Synthetic control estimates, which are presented in Table 8, reinforce the last conclusion. For the childless

adult sample, synthetic control estimates of the effect of Medicaid expansions on labor supply are in

almost all cases quite small and not statistically significant. In addition, as Figures 13 through 18 suggest,

there is a close match (identical) between the treated and synthetic comparison group in the pre-ACA

period, which bolsters the credibility of the synthetic control estimates. Therefore, we believe it is

reasonable to give greater weight to the synthetic control estimates than the DiD estimates, and this leads

us to conclude that the Medicaid expansions had virtually no effect on labor supply of childless adults.

Synthetic control estimates in Table 8 for the parent sample (top panel) are small and consistent with the

DiD estimates of Table 7 suggesting that for this sample the Medicaid expansions had no significant

effect on labor supply.

4.f. Summary of Estimates of the Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply

        The large majority of estimates of the effect of Medicaid expansions on labor supply shown in

Tables 6 through 8 were small (e.g., one percent in relative terms) and statistically insignificant. Most

estimates were positive. Moreover, in the few cases when estimates were statistically significant,

estimates remained small and corresponding estimates obtained using different methods and/or samples

were at odds with these significant estimates. Given this evidence, it appears that the Medicaid

expansions did not have a significant effect on labor supply in the two years subsequent to its

implementation. Moreover, the small and relatively precise estimates rule out all but the smallest

negative effects of the Medicaid expansions on labor supply.

5. Conclusions

        The Affordable Care Act (ACA) became law in 2010 when the unemployment rate in the U.S.

was just under 10% and at a 30-year high, and the economy was just coming out of the Great Recession.

With this backdrop, it is understandable that the potential work disincentives of the ACA garnered


                                                                                                            26
considerable public attention. Specifically, the expansion of Medicaid income eligibility thresholds and

the formation of the health insurance marketplaces that provided income-based subsidies created

incentives for people to alter their labor supply. Moreover, most of the incentives generated by the ACA

were likely to reduce work effort.

        In this paper, we examined whether the expansions in Medicaid affected labor supply of low-

educated (a high school education or less) and low-income persons, which are groups likely to be affected

by the expansions. We first measured the effect of the Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage

to assess the extent of the “treatment” engendered by the expansions. Estimates indicate that the Medicaid

expansions increased the proportion of the sample covered by Medicaid and decreased the proportion

uninsured by a similar, but slightly lower amount because of some switching between private insurance

and Medicaid. There was some variation in effects by demographic groups with larger changes in

Medicaid coverage and the proportion uninsured observed for unmarried, childless adults.

Specifically, for samples of parents, estimates indicated that the Medicaid expansions:

increased Medicaid coverage by between 23 percent and 54 percent depending on the data source, time

period examined and whether the state had a prior Medicaid expansion;

decreased the proportion uninsured by between 8 percent and 13 percent depending on the data source,

time period examined and whether the state had a prior Medicaid expansion;

and decreased private health insurance coverage by between 0 percent and 5 percent.

For samples of childless adults, estimates indicated that the Medicaid expansions:

increased Medicaid coverage by between 54 percent and 70 percent depending on the data source, time

period examined and whether the state had a prior Medicaid expansion;

decreased the proportion uninsured by between 9 percent and 15 percent depending on the data source,

time period examined and whether the state had a prior Medicaid expansion;

and decreased private health insurance coverage by between 1 percent and 5 percent.

Estimates of the effect of Medicaid on labor supply were, in general, small and not statistically

significant. In fact, most estimates of the effect of the Medicaid expansions on labor supply were positive.


                                                                                                           27
Overall, there was very little evidence that the Medicaid expansions decreased work effort. Moreover,

confidence intervals associated with estimates rule out modest to large decreases in employment and

hours of work in response to the Medicaid expansions. The absence of much of a labor supply response to

the expansion of Medicaid is consistent with the broader literature on the income effect of labor supply,

which found small elasticities of labor supply with respect to income (McClelland and Mok 2012).

Overall, the Medicaid expansions have significantly expanded health insurance coverage and reduced the

proportion of people uninsured without significant unintended consequences related to work effort.




                                                                                                            28
References

Abadie, A., Diamond, A., & Hainmueller, J. (2010, June). Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative
Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program. Journal of the American
Statistical Association , 493-505.

Baicker, K., Finkelstein, A. N., Song, J., & Taubman, J. (2013). The Impact of Medicaid on Labor Market
Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. American
Economic Review , 104 (5), 322-328.

Bitler, M. P. and Karoly, L. A. (2015), Intended And Unintended Effects Of The War On Poverty: What
Research Tells Us And Implications For Policy. J. Pol. Anal. Manage., 34: 639–696

Blank, R. (1989). The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC Participation. Journal of Human
Resources , 24 (1), 54-87.

Call, K. T., Davern, M. E., Klerman, J. A., & Lynch, V. (2012). Comparing Errors in Medicaid Reporting
across Surveys: Evidence to Date. Health Services Research , 48 (2), 652-664.

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2015). Medicaid.gov. Retrieved from Demonstrations &
Waivers: http://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-program-information/by-
topics/waivers/waivers_faceted.html

Gary Claxton, Larry Levitt, Anthony Damico, Matthew Rae. 2014. "How Many People have Non-group
health Insurance? https://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/8534-how-many-people-
have-nongroup-health-insurance.pdf

Congressional Budget Office. (2014). Updated Estimates of the Effects of the Insurance Coverage
Provisions of the Affordable Care Act, April 2014. Washington D.C.: Congress of the United States.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and Daniela Zapata.
2016.“Impacts of the Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion
and Non-Expansion States.” Working Paper 22182. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Dague, L., DeLeire, T., & Leininger, L. (2014). The Effect of Public Insurance Coverage for Childless
Adults on Labor Supply. NBER Working Paper Series , No. 20111.

Dave, D., Decker, S. L., Kaestner, R., & Simon, K. I. (2015). The Effect of Medicaid Expansions in the
Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of Pregnant Women. American Journal of Health
Economics , 1 (2), 165-193.

Davern, M., Klerman, J. A., Baugh, D. K., Call, K. T., & Greenberg, G. D. (2009). An Examination of the
Medicaid Undercount in the Current Population Survey: Preliminary Results from Record Linking.
Health Services Research , 44 (3), 965-987.

Frean, Molly, Jonathan Gruber, and Benjamin D. Sommers. 2016. “Premium Subsidies, The Mandate,
and Medicaid Expansion: Coverage Effects of the Affordable Care Act.” Working Paper 22213.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                                                                         29
Garrett, B., & Kaestner. R. 2014. The Best Evidence Suggests the Effects of the ACA on Employment
Will Be Small. Urban Institute Brief.

Garrett, B., & Kaestner, R. 2015. Recent Evidence on the ACA and Employment: Has the ACA been a
Job Killer? Urban Institute Research Report.

Garthwaite, C., Gross, T., & Notowidigdo, M. J. (2014). Public Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and
Employment Lock. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 129 (2), 653-696.

Gooptu, A, Moriya, A .S., Simon K. I., & Sommers, B. D. (2016). Medicaid Expansion Did Not Result In
Significant Employment Changes Or Job Reductions In 2014. Health Affairs 35(1): 111-118.

Ham, J. C., & Shore-Sheppard, L. D. (2005). Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare Participation.
Industrial and Labor Relations Review , 58 (3), 452-470.

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2009). Findings of a 50 State Survey of Eligibility Rules, Enrollment and
Renewal Procedures and Cost-Sharing Practices in Medicaid and CHIP for Children and Parents during
2009. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2011). Holding Steady, Looking Ahead: Annual Findings of a 50-State
Survey of Eligibility Rules, Enrollment and Renewal Procedures, and Cost Sharing Practices in Medicaid
and CHIP, 2010-2011. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2012). Performing Under Pressure: Annual Findings of a 50-State Survey of
Eligibility, Enrollment, Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2011-2012. The
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2013). Getting into Gear for 2014: Findings from a 50-State Survey of
Eligibility, Renewal, and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP, 2012-2013. The Henry J. Kaiser
Family Foundation.

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2015). Findings from a 50-State Survey of Eligibility, Enrollment, Renewal,
and Cost-Sharing Policies in Medicaid and CHIP as of January 2015. The Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation.

Kaul, A., Klobner, S., Pfeifer, G., & Schieler, M. (2015, May 27). Synthetic Control Methods: Never Use
all Pre-Intervention Outcomes as Economic Predictors. Retrieved from http://www.oekonometrie.uni-
saarland.de/papers/SCM_Predictors.pdf

Leung, P. & Mas, A. 2016. Employment Effects of the ACA Medicaid Expansions. Retrieved from
https://www.princeton.edu/~amas/papers/aca_010416.pdf

Matsudaira, J. D. and Blank, R. M. (2014), The Impact of Earnings Disregards on the Behavior of Low-
Income Families. J. Pol. Anal. Manage., 33: 7–35

McClelland, R., & Mok, S. (2012, October). A Review of Recent Reserach on Labor Supply Elasticities.
Congressional Budget Office Working Paper 2012-12, Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office,
2012. http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/10-25-2012-



                                                                                                     30
Meyer, B. D., & Rosenbaum, D. T. (2001). Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor Supply
of Single Mothers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 116 (3), 1063-1114.

Meyer, B. D., & Rosenbaum, D. T. (2001, August). Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 1063-1114.

Moffitt, R. (2015), The U.S. Safety Net And Work Incentives: The Great Recession And Beyond. J. Pol.
Anal. Manage., 34: 458–466

Montgomery, E., & Navin, J. C. (2000). Cross-State Variation in Medicaid Programs and Female Labor
Supply. Economic Inquiry , 38 (3), 402-418.

Mulligan, C. (2013). Is the Affordable Care Act Different from Romneycare? A Labor Economics
Perspective. NBER Working Paper No. 19366.

Mulligan, C. B. (2015), The New Employment And Income Taxes. J. Pol. Anal. Manage., 34: 466–473.

Pascale, J. (2016). Modernizing a Major Federal Government Survey: A Review of the Redesign of the
Current Population Survey Health Insurance Questions. Journal of Official Statistics, 32(2).

Turner J., & Boudreaux M. 2014. Issue Brief #39: An Introduction to Redesigned Health Insurance
Coverage Questions in the 2014 Current Population Survey's Annual Social and Economic Supplement.
State Health Access Data Assistance Center (SHADAC), University of Minnesota. Retrieved from
http://www.shadac.org/publications/cpsbrief.

Pascale, J., Boudreaux, M., & King, R. (2015, April 19). Understanding the New Current Population
Survey Health Insurance Questions. Health Services Research.

Wachino, V., Artiga, S., & Rudowitz, R. (2014, May 5). How is the ACA Impacting Medicaid
Enrollment? Retrieved from Kaiser Family Foundation: http://kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/how-is-the-
aca-impacting-medicaid-enrollment/

Wherry, L and S. Miller. 2016. Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects of the Affordable
Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-Experimental Study. Annals of Internal Medicine 164(12):795-
803

Yelowitz, A. S. (1995). The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Particpation. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics , 110 (4).




                                                                                                       31
              Table 1. Classification of States into Treatment and Control Groups as of 2014

                                             Control Groups
          No Expansion in 2014                           No Expansion in 2014              Expansion in 2014
           No Prior Expansion                         Prior Limited Expansions for      Prior Full Expansions for
                                                        Parents and/or Childless       Parents and Childless Adults
                                                                  Adults
 Alabama                         Nebraska                        Indiana                       Delaware
  Alaska                      North Carolina                      Maine                     Washington, D.C.
  Florida                       Oklahoma                       Tennessee                     Massachusetts
 Georgia                       Pennsylvania                    Wisconsin                      New York
   Idaho                      South Carolina                                                   Vermont
  Kansas                       South Dakota
Louisiana                         Texas
Mississippi                        Utah
 Missouri                        Virginia
 Montana                        Wyoming

                                            Treatment Groups
                     Expansion 2014                                                  Expansion 2014
                    No Prior Expansion                                         Prior Expansions for Parents
                                                                                 and/or Childless Adults
                       Arkansas                                                          Arizona
                       Kentucky                                                         California
                       Michigan                                                        Connecticut
                        Nevada                                                          Colorado
                     New Hampshire                                                       Hawaii
                      New Mexico                                                         Illinois
                      North Dakota                                                        Iowa
                          Ohio                                                          Maryland
                      West Virginia                                                     Minnesota
                                                                                       New Jersey
                                                                                         Oregon
                                                                                      Rhode Island
                                                                                       Washington




                                                                                                                  32
                           Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for 2010 from American Community Survey and
                                                      Current Population Survey

                                                                 Low-educated Sample                      Low-income Sample
                                                                     (HS or less)                             (<300% FPL)
                                                             ACS      Monthly     March                     ACS       March
                                                                        CPS         CPS                                CPS
              Medicaid                                       0.11       N/A         0.11                    0.14       0.13
              Uninsured                                      0.30       N/A         0.32                    0.34       0.36
              Private Insured                                0.60       N/A         0.56                    0.52       0.49
              - Non-Group Private Insurance                  0.08       N/A         0.05                    0.10       0.08
              - Employer-Sponsored Insurance                 0.52       N/A         0.51                    0.43       0.42
              Employed at Time of Survey                     0.69       0.67        0.69                    0.65       0.64
              Usual Hours Worked per Week                    27.3       26.3        27.3                    24.3       24.3
                                                            (20.5)     (20.6)      (20.2)                  (20.3)     (20.3)
              Full-Time                                      0.61       0.60        0.62                    0.54       0.55

              Age                                            43.9            43.2           41.8           40.7            39.3
                                                            (12.0)         (12.02)         (11.6)         (12.2)          (11.5)
              Male                                           0.52            0.51           0.51           0.46            0.45
              Non-Hispanic White                             0.62            0.62           0.52           0.59            0.51
              Non-Hispanic Black                             0.11            0.12           0.12           0.13            0.14
              Hispanic                                       0.21            0.21           0.27           0.21            0.26
              Other Race                                     0.06            0.06           0.07           0.08            0.08
              Married                                        0.60            0.58           0.60           0.49            0.51
              Divorced or Separated                          0.16            0.15           0.14           0.19            0.17
              Never Married                                  0.22            0.24           0.23           0.30            0.30
              Widowed                                        0.02            0.02           0.02           0.02            0.21
              Foreign Born                                   0.22            0.20           0.26           0.26            0.26
              U.S. Citizenship                               0.86            0.86           0.82           0.86            0.82
              High School Educated                           0.73            0.76           0.73           0.33            0.36
              Has Children under age 18                      0.35            0.37           0.46           0.43            0.53
              Number of Children                             0.92            0.71           0.90           1.08            1.11
                                                            (1.22)          (1.12)         (1.20)         (1.33)          (1.31)
              Family Size                                    3.09            3.32           3.14           3.07            3.15
                                                            (1.80)          (1.75)         (1.70)         (1.92)          (1.82)
              Observations                                 529,509         321,171         39,386        601,629          42,884
Notes: All data are from the 2010 American Community Survey, Current Population Survey March Supplement, and Current Population Survey
monthly files. The sample in columns 1-3 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. The sample in the
columns 4-5 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. Standard deviations for
continuous variables are presented in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                               33
                                       Table 3. Difference-in-differences Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
                                                                       American Community Survey 2010-2014

                                                                                      Low-educated Sample                                                                Low-income Sample
                                                                                          (HS or less)                                                                     (<300% FPL)
                                                    Medicaid                               Uninsured                                     Private                   Medicaid Uninsured Private
     Panel A: Parents                     All       Married Unmarried               All    Married Unmarried                  All      Married Unmarried             All          All      All
     Expand in 2014                     0.040**     0.039**  0.041**             -0.027** -0.027**     -0.024**             -0.011      -0.009   -0.019**          0.046**     -0.027** -0.016**
                                        (0.008)     (0.009)  (0.009)             (0.011)   (0.012)     (0.011)             (0.007)     (0.008)   (0.006)           (0.009)     (0.010)  (0.007)

     Expand in 2014,                    0.045**      0.040**       0.056**       -0.029**      -0.023       -0.049**        -0.011       -0.012       -0.008         0.051**       -0.033**       -0.014
     no prior policy                    (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.018)       (0.013)      (0.012)       (0.019)        (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.011)         (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.009)
     Expand in 2014,                    0.039**      0.039**       0.035**        -0.026       -0.029        -0.015         -0.011       -0.007      -0.024**        0.044**        -0.024       -0.017**
     any prior policy                   (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.010)       (0.014)      (0.015)       (0.012)        (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.006)         (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.008)
     p-value for test of
     difference between                  0.712        0.953         0.283         0.845        0.733         0.103          0.972        0.549         0.153         <0.001         0.032         0.083
     treatment effects
     Observations                       857486       655254        202232        857486       655254        202232         857486      655254         202232        1257844       1257844        1257844
     Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010           0.168        0.129         0.303         0.288        0.269         0.355          0.560       0.620          0.355         0.190         0.281          0.550

     Panel B: Childless Adults
     Expand in 2014                     0.039**      0.024**       0.052**       -0.034**      -0.022       -0.044**        -0.003       -0.001        -0.007        0.063**       -0.048**       -0.013
                                        (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.007)        (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.006)        (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.007)

     Expand in 2014,                    0.035**      0.019**       0.052**       -0.028**      -0.012       -0.046**        -0.006       -0.006        -0.005        0.057**       -0.044**       -0.009
     no prior policy                    (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.008)        (0.012)       (0.009)       (0.009)
     Expand in 2014,                    0.040**      0.026**       0.052**       -0.037**      -0.026       -0.043**        -0.002       0.001         -0.007        0.066**       -0.050**       -0.014
     any prior policy                   (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.009)       (0.012)      (0.014)       (0.009)        (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.006)        (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.008)
     p-value for test of
     difference between                  0.637        0.488         0.992         0.484        0.328         0.853          0.536        0.334         0.683         <0.001        <0.001         0.207
     treatment effects
     Observations                      1718309       855016        863293        1718309      855016        863293        1718309      855016         863293        1766166       1766166        1766166
     Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010          0.073         0.038         0.108         0.305        0.191         0.421         0.614        0.763          0.462         0.095         0.386          0.506

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey. Estimates above dashed lines report coefficients on the interaction term between an indicator for whether a state expanded
Medicaid and an indicator for whether the year is 2014. Estimates below dashed lines report coefficients on these interaction terms but distinguish between states that had no prior Medicaid policy and
those that had any prior policy (except for those that had ACA-like Medicaid expansions prior to 2014). The p-value is for F-tests measuring whether Medicaid expansion effects are statistically
different between states that had prior policies and those that did not. The sample in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. The sample in
columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race,
education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. All standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5
percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                             34
                                         Table 4. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
                                                                     American Community Survey 2010-2014

                                                                                  Low-educated Sample                                                            Low-income Sample
                                                                                      (HS or less)                                                                 (<300% FPL)
                                                  Medicaid                             Uninsured                                   Private                 Medicaid Uninsured Private
    Panel A: Parents                     All      Married Unmarried             All    Married Unmarried                All      Married Unmarried           All          All       All
    Indicator of Expand in 2014        0.046**    0.034**  0.067**           -0.035** -0.032**     -0.038**           -0.006      -0.007    -0.013         0.044**     -0.035**   -0.011
    [p-value]                         [<0.001]    [0.003]  [0.004]           [0.004]   [0.003]     [0.021]           [0.417]     [0.367]   [0.235]         [0.003]     [0.007]   [0.123]

    Difference-in-differences         0.040**      0.039**      0.041**      -0.027**     -0.027**     -0.024**       -0.011      -0.009      -0.019**       0.046**      -0.027**     -0.016**
    Estimates (From Table 3)          (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.006)        (0.009)       (0.010)      (0.007)
    Observations                      857486       655254       202232       857486       655254       202232        857486      655254       202232        1257844       1257844      1257844
    Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010          0.168        0.129        0.303        0.288        0.269        0.355          0.560      0.620        0.355          0.190         0.281        0.550

    Panel B: Childless Adults
    Indicator of Expand in 2014       0.044**      0.021**      0.062**      -0.040**     -0.028**    -0.057**        0.002       0.003         -0.002       0.062**      -0.054**       -0.006
    [p-value]                         [0.001]      [0.006]     [<0.001]      [<0.001]     [0.034]     [<0.001]       [0.771]     [0.681]       [0.750]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [0.547]

    Difference-in-differences          0.039**     0.024**      0.052**      -0.034**      -0.022      -0.044**       -0.003      -0.001       -0.007        0.063**      -0.048**       -0.013
    Estimates (From Table 3)           (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.009)     (0.011)      (0.007)       (0.006)     (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.007)
    Observations                      1718309      855016       863293       1718309      855016       863293       1718309      855016       863293        1766166       1766166      1766166
    Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010           0.073       0.038        0.108         0.305        0.191       0.421          0.614      0.763        0.462          0.095         0.386        0.506

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey. Estimates report the difference in the dependent variables in 2014 between treatment states and the synthetic control
group. The sample in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. The sample in columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages
22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained through randomization inference. All standard errors of differences-
in-differences estimates (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                  35
                                    Table 5. Difference-in-differences Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
                           Relative Effects (Percentage Change from 2010) for American Community Survey and March Current Population Survey

                                                                     Low-educated Sample                                                     Low-income Sample
                                                                         (HS or less)                                                           (<300% FPL)
                                                     Medicaid             Uninsured                  Private               Medicaid               Uninsured                Private
         Panel A: Parents                         ACS       CPS        ACS        CPS            ACS        CPS         ACS       CPS          ACS        CPS          ACS        CPS
         Indicator of Expand in 2014              24**      43**        -9**      -13**           -2          -2        24**      40**         -10**     -12**         -3**         -4
         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                0.17      0.15        0.29      0.31           0.56        0.54       0.19      0.17         0.28       0.31         0.55        0.52

         Expand in 2014, no prior policy          28**        54**       -10**       -13**        -2          -6        29**        53**        -12**      -13**         -2        -5**
         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                0.16        0.14       0.29        0.30        0.57        0.56       0.17        0.15        0.28       0.31         0.56       0.54

         Expand in 2014, any prior policy         23**        39**        -9         -13          -2          0         23**        35**         -8         -11         -3**        -3
         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                0.17        0.16       0.30        0.32        0.55        0.53       0.19        0.18        0.29        0.32        0.54       0.52

         Observations                           857486       94079      857486      94079      857486       94079     1257844      123788     1257844     123788     1257844      123788

         Panel B: Childless Adults
         Indicator of Expand in 2014              53**        63**       -11**       -12**        -1          1         66**        70**        -13**      -14**         -2         0
         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                0.07        0.07       0.31        0.34        0.61        0.58       0.10        0.09        0.39       0.42         0.51       0.46

         Expand in 2014, no prior policy          51**        56**       -9**        -11**        -1          1         62**        76**        -12**      -15**         -2         1
         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                0.07        0.07       0.30        0.33        0.62        0.58       0.09        0.09        0.38       0.41         0.52       0.47

         Expand in 2014, any prior policy         54**        64**       -12**       -13**        0           1         67**        65**        -13**      -14**         -3         0
         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                0.07        0.07       0.31        0.34        0.61        0.57       0.10        0.10        0.39       0.42         0.50       0.46

         Observations                           1718309     114117     1718309      114117     1718309     114117     1766166      114727     1766166     114727     1766166      114727

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey and years 2010-2015 of the March CPS. Each value is the effect of the 2014 Medicaid expansion on the outcome
expressed in percentage terms (estimate divided by 2010 mean). The sample in columns 1-6 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. The sample in
columns 7-12 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. Estimates used to construct relative effects for ACS are in Table 3 and
estimates for March CPS are in Appendix Table 4. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                36
                           Table 6. Difference-in-differences and Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply
                                                                    American Community Survey 2010-2014

                                                                                                     Low-educated Sample                                         Low-income Sample
                                                                                                          (HS or less)                                              (<300% FPL)
                                                                                                     Employed at Time of                                         Employed at Time of
                                                                                                             Survey                                                     Survey
                     Panel A: Parents                                              All                      Married                      Unmarried                 All          All
                                                                           DD               SC          DD           SC               DD           SC              DD           SC
                     Indicator of Expand in 2014                          0.005           -0.003       0.003       0.013**           0.011       -0.005           0.004       -0.007
                                                                         (0.004)         [0.679]      (0.003)      [0.015]          (0.007)     [0.713]          (0.003)     [0.066]

                     Expand in 2014, no prior policy                      0.002                        0.001                         0.003                        0.002
                                                                         (0.005)                      (0.005)                       (0.009)                      (0.005)
                     Expand in 2014, any prior policy                     0.006                        0.003                         0.014                       0.005**
                                                                         (0.004)                      (0.004)                       (0.007)                      (0.002)
                     p-value for test of difference between
                                                                          0.507                        0.731                         0.288                        0.128
                     treatment effects
                     Observations                                        857486          857486       655254         655254         202232         202232        1257844       1257844
                     Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                            0.715           0.715        0.726          0.726          0.676          0.676         0.693         0.693

                     Panel B: Childless Adults
                     Indicator of Expand in 2014                          0.003           -0.002       0.003          -0.008         0.002          0.003         0.003         -0.0004
                                                                         (0.003)         [0.580]      (0.003)        [0.067]        (0.004)        [0.605]       (0.003)        [0.915]

                     Expand in 2014, no prior policy                      0.002                       0.0005                         0.004                        0.004
                                                                         (0.006)                      (0.006)                       (0.006)                      (0.004)
                     Expand in 2014, any prior policy                     0.003                        0.004                         0.002                        0.003
                                                                         (0.003)                      (0.003)                       (0.004)                      (0.003)
                     p-value for test of difference between
                                                                          0.910                        0.525                         0.685                        0.462
                     treatment effects
                     Observations                                       1718309          1718309      855016         855016         863293         863293        1766166       1766166
                     Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                           0.677            0.677        0.688          0.688          0.667          0.667         0.610         0.610

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey.. Estimates above dashed lines report the coefficient on the interaction term between an indicator for whether a state
expands Medicaid and an indicator for whether the year is 2014. Estimates below dashed lines report coefficients on these interaction terms but distinguish between states that had no prior Medicaid
policy and those that had any prior policy (except for those that had ACA-level Medicaid expansions prior to 2014). The p-value is for F-tests measuring whether Medicaid expansion effects are
statistically different between states that had prior policies and those that did not. The sample used in columns 1-6 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or
less. The sample used in columns 7-8 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for
state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained
through randomization inference. All standard errors of differences-in-differences estimates (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                             37
                                         Table 7. Difference-in-differences Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply
                                                                 Monthly Current Population Survey 2010-(May) 2016

                                                                                                               High School or Less
                                                                Employed at Time of Survey              Usual Hours Worked per Week                          Full-Time
                      Panel A: Parents                           All   Married Unmarried                   All     Married Unmarried               All       Married Unmarried
                      Indicator of Expand in 2014               0.001    -0.004      0.015               -0.039      -0.202     0.388             0.001       -0.003    0.012
                                                               (0.005)  (0.005)     (0.008)             (0.222)     (0.234)    (0.356)           (0.005)     (0.006)   (0.009)

                      Expand in 2014,                           0.002        -0.004        0.016         -0.029       -0.227       0.388          -0.002      -0.007        0.008
                      no prior policy                          (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.431)      (0.502)      (0.514)        (0.010)     (0.011)       (0.014)
                      Expand in 2014,                          0.0002        -0.004        0.014         -0.043       -0.190       0.388           0.003      -0.001        0.013
                      any prior policy                         (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.200)      (0.208)      (0.370)        (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.009)
                      p-value for test of difference
                                                                0.817        0.980         0.873         0.974        0.941        >0.999         0.648       0.600         0.697
                      between treatment effects
                      Observations                             640572       459425        181147        640572      459425        181147         640572      459425        181147
                      Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                 0.685        0.706         0.627         27.1        28.3          23.9           0.615       0.639         0.548

                      Panel B: Childless Adults
                      Indicator of Expand in 2014              0.012**      0.014**        0.012         0.426        0.446        0.459          0.010      0.012**        0.009
                                                               (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.239)      (0.267)      (0.302)        (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.007)

                      Expand in 2014,                           0.012        0.017         0.007         0.378        0.585        0.215          0.007       0.012         0.003
                      no prior policy                          (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.377)      (0.352)      (0.478)        (0.008)     (0.007)       (0.011)
                      Expand in 2014,                          0.013**       0.012         0.014         0.455        0.358        0.596         0.012**      0.012         0.013
                      any prior policy                         (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.237)      (0.292)      (0.318)        (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.008)
                      p-value for test of difference
                                                                0.901        0.557         0.560         0.835        0.514        0.453          0.576       0.955         0.439
                      between treatment effects
                      Observations                             1141994      549419        592575       1141994      549419        592575        1141994      549419        592575
                      Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                 0.652        0.669         0.636         25.8        26.7          24.9          0.587        0.605         0.569

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2016 (May) of the Current Population Survey monthly files. Analysis excludes Alaska, Indiana, Montana and Pennsylvania due to expansions after 2014. Sample is
limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-
born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. The p-value is for F-tests measuring whether Medicaid expansion effects are statistically different between states that had prior
policies and those that did not. All standard errors (parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                         38
                                             Table 8. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply
                                                                 Monthly Current Population Survey 2014-(May) 2016

                                                                                                           Low-educated Sample
                                                                                                               (HS or less)
                                                               Employed at Time of Survey             Usual Hours Worked per Week                          Full-Time
                         Panel A: Parents                       All   Married Unmarried                  All    Married Unmarried                 All      Married Unmarried
                         Indicator of Expand in 2014          -0.009    -0.011      0.002              -0.121    -0.359      -0.301             -0.002      -0.004    -0.011
                         [p-value]                           [0.285]   [0.206]     [0.885]            [0.728]   [0.335]     [0.621]            [0.853]     [0.618]   [0.489]

                         Difference-in-differences            0.001        -0.004        0.015         -0.039       -0.202       0.388          0.001       -0.003        0.012
                         Estimates (From Table 7)            (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.222)      (0.234)      (0.356)        (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.009)
                         Observations                        640572       459425        181147        640572       459425       181147         640572      459425        181147
                         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010            0.686        0.713         0.650          27.1         28.3         23.9          0.616       0.640         0.549

                         Panel B: Childless Adults
                         Indicator of Expand in 2014         0.0005        0.001         -0.007        0.282        -0.412        0.081         0.002        -0.002        0.001
                         [p-value]                           [0.963]      [0.924]       [0.562]       [0.547]      [0.404]       [0.886]       [0.859]      [0.856]       [0.940]

                         Difference-in-differences           0.012**      0.014**        0.012         0.426        0.446        0.459          0.010      0.012**        0.009
                         Estimates (From Table 7)            (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.239)      (0.267)      (0.302)        (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.007)
                         Observations                       1141994       549419        592575       1141994       549419       592575        1141994      549419        592575
                         Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010            0.652        0.675         0.648          25.8         26.7         24.9          0.587       0.605         0.569

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2016 (May) of the Current Population Survey monthly files. Analysis excludes Alaska, Indiana, Montana and Pennsylvania due to expansions after 2014. The sample
is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-
born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained through randomization inference. All standard errors of
differences-in-differences estimates (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                          39
                                       Appendix Table 1. Event History Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
                                                                     American Community Survey 2010-2014

                                                                                      Low-educated Sample                                                                  Low-income Sample
                                                                                          (HS or less)                                                                       (<300% FPL)
                                                   Medicaid                                Uninsured                                      Private                   Medicaid Uninsured     Private
 Panel A: Parents                        All       Married Unmarried               All     Married Unmarried                  All       Married     Unmarried          All          All       All
 Expand x Year 2014                   0.040**      0.041**  0.035**             -0.026** -0.030**       -0.013              -0.011       -0.007      -0.024**        0.048**     -0.027**   -0.017
                                      (0.010)      (0.011)  (0.010)             (0.012)    (0.014)     (0.012)             (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.008)        (0.010)      (0.012)   (0.009)
 Expand x Year 2013                   -0.0001       0.003    -0.013              0.004     -0.0002     0.020**              -0.002       -0.001       -0.005          0.004        0.001    -0.003
                                      (0.006)      (0.006)  (0.007)             (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.009)             (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.007)        (0.006)      (0.005)   (0.004)
 Expand x Year 2012                     0.001       0.002    -0.002              -0.002     -0.005      0.010               0.001         0.005       -0.010          0.001       -0.001    0.001
                                      (0.005)      (0.005)  (0.009)             (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.008)             (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.006)        (0.005)      (0.004)   (0.003)
 Expand x Year 2011                    -0.001       0.002    -0.012             -0.0001     -0.004      0.014              0.0001         0.002       -0.005          0.001       -0.001    -0.001
                                      (0.004)      (0.004)  (0.007)             (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.008)             (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.005)        (0.004)      (0.003)   (0.003)
 p-value test of joint
                                        0.870        0.948         0.037          0.374        0.391         0.136          0.765        0.275         0.493          0.779          0.868          0.634
 significance of pre-trend
 Observations                          857486       655254        202232         857486       655254        202232         857486       655254        202232         1257844        1257844       1257844
 Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010              0.168        0.129         0.303          0.288        0.269         0.355          0.560        0.620         0.355          0.190          0.281         0.550

 Panel B: Childless Adults
 Expand x Year 2014                    0.039**      0.024**       0.052**       -0.037**       -0.022       -0.050**        -0.001       -0.001        -0.001         0.064**       -0.054**        -0.008
                                       (0.008)      (0.007)       (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.012)       (0.008)        (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.006)         (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.008)
 Expand x Year 2013                      0.002        0.001        0.001         -0.004         0.002        -0.008         0.001        -0.004        0.006            0.004        -0.006         0.002
                                       (0.003)      (0.002)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.003)
 Expand x Year 2012                     -0.001       -0.001        -0.002        -0.004        -0.002        -0.004         0.004         0.002        0.006           -0.001        -0.006        0.008**
                                       (0.003)      (0.002)       (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.005)        (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
 Expand x Year 2011                      0.001      0.0005         0.001        -0.006**      -0.0001       -0.011**       0.005**      -0.0001       0.011**           0.002       -0.009**       0.008**
                                       (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
 p-value test of joint
                                        0.303        0.420         0.566          0.156        0.505         0.035          0.060        0.212         0.010          0.092          0.007          0.001
 significance of pre-trend
 Observations                         1718309       855016        863293        1718309       855016        863293        1718309       855016        863293         1766166        1766166       1766166
 Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010             0.073         0.038         0.108         0.305         0.191         0.421         0.614         0.763         0.462          0.095          0.386         0.506

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey.. Estimates report the coefficient on the interaction term between an indicator for whether a state expands Medicaid and
year indicators. A p-value reports results from F-tests of joint significance from pre-2014 Medicaid expansion interaction terms. Sample used in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between
ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Sample used in columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level.
Regressions are adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. All standard errors
(in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
                            Appendix Table 2. Difference-in-differences Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance By Age
                                                                    American Community Survey 2010-2014

                                                                                                          Low-educated Sample
                                                                                                              (HS or less)
                                                                 Medicaid                                      Uninsured                                            Private
              Panel A: Parents                       All         Married         Unmarried            All       Married    Unmarried                   All          Married        Unmarried
              Age 22 to 44
              Expand in 2014                      0.044**          0.044**         0.041**         -0.030**        -0.031**         -0.028**         -0.011           -0.009         -0.016**
                                                  (0.008)          (0.008)         (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.012)          (0.011)         (0.007)          (0.009)         (0.006)

              Observations                        625684           461899          163785          625684           461899          163785          625684           461899          163785
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010            0.186            0.141           0.324           0.315            0.297           0.367           0.518            0.582           0.325

              Age 45 to 64
              Expand in 2014                      0.030**          0.029**         0.037**          -0.018           -0.020          -0.008          -0.012           -0.008         -0.031**
                                                  (0.010)          (0.011)         (0.010)         (0.014)          (0.015)         (0.013)         (0.008)          (0.009)         (0.012)

              Observations                        231802           193355           38447          231802           193355           38447          231802           193355           38447
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010            0.118            0.099           0.215           0.214            0.197           0.306           0.680            0.717           0.487

              Panel B: Childless Adults
              Age 22 to 44
              Expand in 2014                      0.047**          0.036**         0.050**         -0.042**        -0.026**         -0.045**         -0.004           -0.009          -0.004
                                                  (0.007)          (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.010)          (0.007)         (0.005)          (0.007)         (0.006)

              Observations                        594085           133989          460096          594085           133989          460096          594085           133989          460096
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010            0.092            0.052           0.104           0.472            0.346           0.511           0.438            0.603           0.386

              Age 45 to 64
              Expand in 2014                      0.034**          0.022**         0.054**         -0.028**          -0.021         -0.041**         -0.004           0.001           -0.012
                                                  (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.010)          (0.011)         (0.008)         (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.006)

              Observations                        1124224          721027          403197          1124224          721027          403197          1124224          721027          403197
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010            0.062            0.035           0.113           0.214            0.159           0.315           0.710            0.795           0.552

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey. Estimates above dashed lines report the coefficient the interaction term between an indicator for whether a state expands
Medicaid and an indicator for whether the year is 2014. Sample is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for
state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. All standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**)
indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                           41
                                        Appendix Table 3. Comparison of Health Insurance Estimates With and Without Eleven States
                               (Nine Prior Full Expansion or Limited Expansion Control States: DE, DC, MA, NY, VT, IN, ME, TN and WI, and
                                                             Two Late Expansion Treatment States: MI and NH)
                                                                       American Community Survey

                                                                                 Low-educated Sample                                                             Low-income Sample
                                                                                     (HS or less)                                                                  (<300% FPL)
                                                Medicaid                              Uninsured                                   Private                  Medicaid Uninsured    Private
    Panel A: Parents                  All       Married Unmarried              All    Married Unmarried               All       Married Unmarried            All          All      All
    Difference-in-differences       0.043**     0.043**  0.039**             -0.020    -0.020      -0.019          -0.021**     -0.019**  -0.025**         0.049**      -0.020  -0.026**
    Estimates                       (0.008)     (0.008)  (0.009)            (0.011)   (0.013)     (0.011)          (0.006)      (0.007)   (0.006)          (0.009)     (0.011)   (0.006)

    Difference-in-differences       0.040**      0.039**      0.041**      -0.027**     -0.027**     -0.024**        -0.011      -0.009      -0.019**       0.046**      -0.027**      -0.016**
    Estimates (From Table 3)        (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.011)        (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.006)        (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.007)

    Synthetic Control                0.029        0.025        0.044       -0.040**     -0.031**       -0.020        -0.014      -0.007        -0.021        0.027       -0.062**      -0.021**
    [p-value]                       [0.073]      [0.085]      [0.079]      [0.002]      [0.023]       [0.247]       [0.068]     [0.407]       [0.085]       [0.097]      [<0.001]      [0.009]

    Synthetic Control               0.046**     0.034**       0.067**      -0.035**     -0.032**     -0.038**        -0.006      -0.007       -0.013        0.044**      -0.035**        -0.011
    [p-value] (From Table 4)       [<0.001]     [0.003]       [0.004]      [0.004]      [0.003]      [0.021]        [0.417]     [0.367]      [0.235]        [0.003]       [0.007]       [0.123]
    Observations                    703283      537870        165413       703283       537870       165413         703283      537870       165413        1035622       1035622       1035622
    Mean of DV. In 2010              0.153       0.116         0.279        0.312        0.292        0.380           0.550       0.608       0.352          0.172         0.302          0.545

    Panel B: Childless Adults
    Difference-in-differences       0.046**      0.030**      0.060**      -0.034**      -0.019      -0.045**      -0.011**      -0.009      -0.014**       0.075**      -0.049**      -0.023**
    Estimates                       (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.010)      (0.012)      (0.008)       (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.004)        (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.006)

    Difference-in-differences       0.039**      0.024**      0.052**      -0.034**      -0.022      -0.044**        -0.003      -0.001        -0.007       0.063**      -0.048**        -0.013
    Estimates (From Table 3)        (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.007)        (0.006)     (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.007)

    Synthetic Control               0.042**      0.034**      0.065**      -0.041**     -0.028**     -0.060**        -0.006     -0.0002        -0.007       0.076**      -0.055**        -0.013
    [p-value]                       [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.001]      [<0.001]     [0.057]      [<0.001]       [0.325]     [0.966]       [0.316]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.127]

    Synthetic Control               0.044**     0.021**       0.062**      -0.040**     -0.028**     -0.057**        0.002       0.003        -0.002        0.062**      -0.054**        -0.006
    [p-value] (From Table 4)        [0.001]     [0.006]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]     [0.034]      [<0.001]       [0.771]     [0.681]      [0.750]       [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.547]
    Observations                   1375638      679664        695974       1375638      679664        695974       1375638      679664       695974        1435514       1435514       1435514
    Mean of DV. In 2010              0.064       0.033         0.096        0.323        0.205         0.441         0.603       0.752        0.453          0.082        0.403           0.500

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey. Estimates report the difference in dependent variables in 2014 between treatment states and the synthetic control group.
Sample used in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Sample used in columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-
64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained through randomization inference. (**) indicates significance at the 5
percent level.



                                                                                                                                                                                                  42
                                 Appendix Table 4. Difference-in-differences Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
                                                                   March Current Population Survey 2010-2015

                                                                                          Low-educated Sample                                                              Low-income Sample
                                                                                              (HS or less)                                                                    (<300% FPL)
                                                          Medicaid                             Uninsured                                    Private                   Medicaid Uninsured Private
    Panel A: Parents                           All       Married Unmarried              All    Married Unmarried                 All      Married Unmarried             All         All       All
    Expand in 2014                           0.065**     0.075**   0.043**           -0.040** -0.038**     -0.050**            -0.011      -0.021    0.013            0.068**    -0.037**   -0.019
                                             (0.015)     (0.017)   (0.020)           (0.017) (0.018)       (0.024)            (0.013)     (0.015)   (0.019)           (0.014)    (0.017)   (0.012)

    Expand in 2014,                          0.074**     0.074**        0.074        -0.039**    -0.034**        -0.053        -0.031     -0.040**       -0.011         0.82**       -0.040**      -0.028**
    no prior policy                          (0.021)     (0.021)       (0.037)       (0.017)     (0.014)        (0.044)       (0.017)     (0.018)       (0.029)        (0.020)       (0.017)       (0.010)
    Expand in 2014,                          0.061**     0.075**        0.028         -0.041      -0.039        -0.049**       -0.002      -0.013        0.025          0.62**       -0.036**       -0.015
    any prior policy                         (0.018)     (0.021)       (0.019)       (0.022)     (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.014)     (0.016)       (0.018)        (0.018)       (0.021)       (0.014)
    p-value for test of difference
                                              0.603       0.962         0.219         0.945        0.794         0.913         0.148       0.178         0.250          0.385          0.866         0.389
    between treatment effects
    Observations                              94079       68065         26014         94079        68065         26014        94079        68065         26014         123788         123788        123788
    Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                 0.150       0.118         0.239         0.310        0.272         0.416        0.545        0.617         0.343          0.170          0.311         0.524

    Panel B: Childless Adults
    Expand in 2014                           0.045**     0.040**       0.049**       -0.041**      -0.033       -0.048**       0.006       0.007         0.004         0.065**       -0.060**        0.002
                                             (0.008)     (0.013)       (0.009)       (0.015)      (0.021)       (0.014)       (0.012)     (0.017)       (0.012)        (0.009)       (0.015)        (0.011)

    Expand in 2014,                          0.039**      0.026        0.051**       -0.035**      -0.019       -0.053**       0.005       0.007         0.004         0.069**       -0.061**        0.004
    no prior policy                          (0.011)     (0.013)       (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.019)       (0.018)       (0.018)     (0.023)       (0.011)        (0.013)       (0.019)        (0.011)
    Expand in 2014,                          0.048**     0.046**       0.048**       -0.044**      -0.041       -0.045**       0.006       0.007         0.004         0.063**       -0.059**        0.001
    any prior policy                         (0.009)     (0.014)       (0.009)       (0.020)      (0.026)       (0.018)       (0.016)     (0.020)       (0.015)        (0.012)       (0.020)        (0.014)
    p-value for test of difference
                                              0.516       0.163         0.851         0.713        0.459         0.738         0.957       0.990         0.972          0.716          0.965         0.824
    between treatment effects
    Observations                             114117       55253         58864        114117        55253         58864        114117       55253         58864         114727         114727        114727
    Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                 0.071       0.058         0.084         0.337        0.217         0.451         0.575       0.712         0.445          0.094          0.422         0.460

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2015 of the March Current Population Survey. Estimates above dashed lines report the coefficient on the interaction term between an indicator for whether a state
expands Medicaid and an indicator for whether the year is 2014. Estimates below dashed lines also report coefficients on these interaction terms but distinguish between states that had no prior
Medicaid policy and those that had any prior policy (except for those that had ACA-level Medicaid expansions prior to 2014). A p-value reports results from F-tests measuring whether Medicaid
expansion effects are statistically different between states that had prior policies and those that did not. Sample used in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high
school degree or less. Sample used in columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. Regressions are adjusted using
indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. All standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on
state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                              43
                                      Appendix Table 5. Event History Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
                                                                 March Current Population Survey 2010-2015

                                                                                       Low-educated Sample                                                          Low-income Sample
                                                                                           (HS or less)                                                                (<300% FPL)
                                                        Medicaid                            Uninsured                                 Private                  Medicaid Uninsured Private
    Panel A: Parents                         All       Married Unmarried             All    Married Unmarried               All     Married Unmarried            All          All     All
    Expand x Survey Year 2015              0.073**     0.088**    0.038           -0.043** -0.037       -0.066**          -0.015     -0.030    0.029           0.078**    -0.044**  -0.018
                                           (0.018)     (0.019)   (0.023)          (0.021) (0.023)       (0.025)          (0.016)    (0.019)   (0.022)          (0.018)     (0.019) (0.014)
    Expand x Survey Year 2014              0.030**      0.029     0.026            -0.007    -.003       -0.020           -0.013     -0.014    0.001           0.038**      -0.015  -0.003
                                           (0.014)     (0.017)   (0.017)          (0.018) (0.023)       (0.022)          (0.013)    (0.016)   (0.024)          (0.014)     (0.015) (0.013)
    Expand x Survey Year 2013               0.010       0.020     -0.016           -0.019   -0.014       -0.037            0.007     -0.003   0.040**           0.010       -0.018   0.009
                                           (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.021)          (0.015) (0.014)       (0.025)          (0.011)    (0.013)   (0.019)          (0.012)     (0.011) (0.011)
    Expand x Survey Year 2012               0.012       0.020     -0.011            0.007    0.009       0.0004           -0.018     -0.022   0.0002            0.011       -0.003  -0.007
                                           (0.009)     (0.010)   (0.019)          (0.010) (0.011)       (0.019)          (0.010)    (0.012)   (0.020)          (0.010)     (0.008) (0.010)
    Expand x Survey Year 2011              -0.0003      0.004     -0.016            0.002    0.011       -0.025            0.002     -0.008    0.035            0.003       -0.003   0.003
                                           (0.008)     (0.009)   (0.015)          (0.009) (0.012)       (0.017)          (0.010)    (0.013)   (0.021)          (0.009)     (0.010) (0.011)
    p-value test of joint significance
                                            0.284       0.267        0.086         0.266       0.068        0.339         0.132      0.394         0.115         0.059         0.519        0.539
    of pre-2014 interactions
    Observations                            94079       68065        26014         94079       68065        26014        94079       68065        26014         123788        123788       123788
    Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010               0.150       0.118        0.239         0.310       0.272        0.416        0.545       0.617        0.343          0.170         0.311        0.524

    Panel B: Childless Adults
    Expand x Survey Year 2015              0.045**     0.035**      0.054**       -0.043**     -0.025      -0.060**        0.007     0.002         0.012        0.067**       -0.070**      0.008
                                           (0.011)     (0.014)      (0.012)       (0.015)      (.021)      (0.014)       (0.013)    (0.019)       (0.013)       (0.011)       (0.018)      (0.014)
    Expand x Survey Year 2014               0.004       -0.003       0.011         -0.009      0.003        -0.023         0.006     -0.007        0.022         0.007         -0.019       0.012
                                           (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.014)       (0.010)     (0.015)      (0.013)       (0.011)    (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.010)       (0.015)      (0.014)
    Expand x Survey Year 2013               0.002       -0.007       0.009          0.008      0.015       0.00003        -0.005     -0.005        -0.004        0.001         -0.001       0.001
                                           (0.008)     (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.011)     (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.010)    (0.013)       (0.014)       (0.008)       (0.014)      (0.012)
    Expand x Survey Year 2012               -0.006      -0.010       -0.004         0.009      0.025        -0.007        -0.012     -0.023       -0.0002        -0.002        -0.008       0.002
                                           (0.006)     (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.012)     (0.013)      (0.016)       (0.011)    (0.012)       (0.016)       (0.007)       (0.013)      (0.001)
    Expand x Survey Year 2011               0.004       -0.001       0.008         -0.019      -0.004      -0.034**        0.018     0.009         0.029         0.005        -0.024**      0.017
                                           (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.014)       (0.010)    (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.006)       (0.011)      (0.011)
    p-value test of joint significance
                                            0.190       0.838        0.111         0.098       0.298        0.026         0.050      0.139         0.038         0.754         0.082        0.335
    of pre-2014 interactions
    Observations                           114117       55253        58864        114117       55253        58864        114117      55253        58864         114727        114727       114727
    Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010               0.071       0.058        0.084         0.337       0.217        0.451         0.575      0.712        0.445          0.094         0.422        0.460

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2015 of the March Current Population Survey. A p-value reports results from F-tests measuring whether Medicaid expansion effects are statistically different from 0
in pre-expansion periods. Sample used in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Sample used in columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled
adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-
born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. All standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     44
                                   Appendix Table 6. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance
                                                                March Current Population Survey 2010-2015

                                                                                   Low-educated Sample                                                        Low-income Sample
                                                                                       (HS or less)                                                              (<300% FPL)
                                                    Medicaid                            Uninsured                                Private                 Medicaid Uninsured Private
      Panel A: Parents                    All      Married Unmarried             All    Married Unmarried             All      Married Unmarried           All         All      All
      Indicator of Expand in 2014       0.061**    0.068**    0.049           -0.052** -0.049        -0.045          0.003      -0.017    0.030           0.043     -0.041**  -0.011
      [p-value]                         [0.010]    [0.009]   [0.082]          [0.031] [0.072]       [0.145]         [0.891]    [0.442]   [0.209]         [0.065]     [0.032] [0.525]

      Difference-in-differences         0.065**     0.075**      0.043**      -0.040**   -0.038**      -0.050**      -0.011     -0.021        0.013        0.068**      -0.037**      -0.019
      Estimates (From A. Table 4)       (0.015)     (0.017)      (0.020)      (0.017)    (0.018)       (0.024)      (0.013)    (0.015)       (0.019)       (0.014)      (0.017)      (0.012)

      Observations                       94079      68065        26014         94079      68065         26014       94079       68065        26014        123788        123788       123788
      Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010          0.150      0.118        0.239         0.310      0.272         0.416       0.545       0.617        0.343         0.170         0.311        0.524

      Panel B: Childless Adults
      Indicator of Expand in 2014       0.043**     0.046**      0.042**      -0.032**     -0.031      -0.051**      0.020      0.002         0.016        0.067**      -0.047**      0.008
      [p-value]                         [0.003]     [0.035]      [0.010]      [0.043]     [0.074]      [0.007]      [0.202]    [0.915]       [0.290]      [<0.001]      [0.012]      [0.595]

      Difference-in-differences         0.045**     0.040**      0.049**      -0.041**     -0.033      -0.048**      0.006      0.007         0.004        0.065**      -0.060**      0.002
      Estimates (From A. Table 4)       (0.008)     (0.013)      (0.009)      (0.015)     (0.021)      (0.014)      (0.012)    (0.017)       (0.012)       (0.009)      (0.015)      (0.011)

      Observations                      114117      55253        58864        114117      55253         58864       114117      55253        58864        114117        114117       114117
      Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010          0.071      0.058        0.084         0.337      0.217         0.451        0.575      0.712        0.445         0.094         0.422        0.460

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2015 of the March Current Population Survey. Estimates report the difference in dependent variables in survey year 2015 between treatment states and the synthetic
control group. Sample used in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Sample used in columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled adults
between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained through randomization inference. All standard errors
of differences-in-differences estimates (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                45
                            Appendix Table 7. Difference-in-differences Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance By Age
                                                                  March Current Population Survey 2010-2015

                                                                                                           Low-educated Sample
                                                                                                               (HS or less)
                                                                  Medicaid                                      Uninsured                                              Private
              Panel A: Parents                       All          Married         Unmarried            All       Married    Unmarried                    All           Married       Unmarried
              Age 22 to 44
              Expand in 2014                       0.069**          0.081**         0.046**         -0.045**         -0.041**        -0.057**          -0.011           -0.024           0.018
                                                   (0.016)          (0.017)         (0.021)         (0.017)          (0.017)         (0.025)          (0.013)          (0.014)          (0.018)

              Observations                          70818           49563            21255           70818            49563           21255            70818            49563           21255
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010             0.166           0.130            0.258           0.334            0.260           0.429            0.506            0.582           0.316

              Age 45 to 64
              Expand in 2014                       0.056**          0.060**          0.036            -0.030          -0.032           -0.023          -0.011           -0.012           -0.007
                                                   (0.016)          (0.019)         (0.032)          (0.023)         (0.026)          (0.031)         (0.025)          (0.025)          (0.043)

              Observations                          23261           18502            4759            23261            18502            4759            23261            18502           4759
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010             0.101           0.087            0.156           0.236            0.206            0.357           0.664            0.716           0.461

              Panel B: Childless Adults
              Age 22 to 44
              Expand in 2014                       0.048**          0.054**         0.045**         -0.046**          -0.040         -0.046**          -0.002           -0.015         -0.0004
                                                   (0.011)          (0.017)         (0.012)         (0.015)          (0.024)         (0.017)          (0.013)          (0.022)         (0.015)

              Observations                          45489           11214            34275           45489            11214           34275            45489            11214           34275
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010             0.080           0.072            0.082           0.480            0.349           0.525            0.431            0.577           0.380

              Age 45 to 64
              Expand in 2014                       0.042**          0.035**         0.055**         -0.036**          -0.030         -0.049**          0.011            0.012            0.008
                                                   (0.011)          (0.014)         (0.012)         (0.018)          (0.023)         (0.017)          (0.017)          (0.019)          (0.020)

              Observations                          68628           44039            24589           68628            44039           24589            68628            44039           24589
              Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010             0.065           0.054            0.086           0.239            0.181           0.345            0.675            0.749           0.539

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2015 of the March Current Population Survey. Estimates above dashed lines report the coefficient on the interaction term between an indicator for whether state
expands Medicaid and an indicator for whether the survey year is 2015. Sample is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Regressions are adjusted using
indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. All standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on
state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                              46
                                        Appendix Table 8. Comparison of Health Insurance Estimates With and Without Eleven States
                               (Nine Prior Full Expansion or Limited Expansion Control States: DE, DC, MA, NY, VT, IN, ME, TN and WI, and
                                                             Two Late Expansion Treatment States: MI and NH)
                                                                     March Current Population Survey

                                                                                    Low-educated Sample                                                         Low-income Sample
                                                                                        (HS or less)                                                               (<300% FPL)
                                                   Medicaid                              Uninsured                                Private                  Medicaid Uninsured Private
    Panel A: Parents                     All       Married Unmarried              All    Married Unmarried              All     Married Unmarried            All          All      All
    Difference-in-differences          0.054**     0.067**   0.027              -0.032    -0.027      -0.048          -0.010     -0.027    0.027           0.064**      -0.027   -0.024
    Estimates                          (0.016)     (0.018)  (0.023)            (0.020) (0.020)       (0.029)         (0.015)    (0.016)   (0.020)          (0.015)     (0.018)  (0.013)

    Difference-in-differences          0.065**      0.075**      0.043**      -0.040**    -0.038**      -0.050**      -0.011      -0.021       0.013        0.068**       -0.037**      -0.019
    Estimates (From A. Table 4)        (0.015)      (0.017)      (0.020)      (0.017)     (0.018)       (0.024)      (0.013)     (0.015)      (0.019)       (0.014)       (0.017)      (0.012)

    Synthetic Control                  0.083**      0.117**       0.057         -0.040    -0.073**     -0.149**       -0.016      -0.003       0.062         0.104**       -0.028       -0.042
    [p-value]                          [0.005]      [0.001]      [0.099]       [0.247]    [0.039]      [<0.001]      [0.539]     [0.899]      [0.073]       [<0.001]      [0.238]      [0.069]

    Synthetic Control                  0.061**      0.068**       0.049       -0.052**      -0.049       -0.045       0.003       -0.017       0.030         0.043        -0.041**      -0.011
    [p-value] (From A. Table 6)        [0.010]      [0.009]      [0.082]      [0.031]      [0.072]      [0.145]      [0.891]     [0.442]      [0.209]       [0.065]       [0.032]      [0.525]
    Observations                        73739        53599        20140        73739        53599        20140        73739       53599        20140         97741         97741        97741
    Mean of DV. In 2010                 0.130        0.103        0.206        0.340         0.300       0.453        0.532       0.601        0.338         0.145         0.338        0.520

    Panel B: Childless Adults
    Difference-in-differences          0.052**      0.049**      0.054**      -0.037**      -0.030      -0.042**      -0.001      -0.001       -0.002       0.069**       -0.059**      0.001
    Estimates                          (0.007)      (0.012)      (0.008)      (0.017)      (0.024)      (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.019)      (0.014)       (0.009)       (0.016)      (0.012)

    Difference-in-differences          0.045**      0.040**      0.049**      -0.041**      -0.033      -0.048**      0.006       0.007        0.004        0.065**       -0.060**      0.002
    Estimates (From A. Table 4)        (0.008)      (0.013)      (0.009)      (0.015)      (0.021)      (0.014)      (0.012)     (0.017)      (0.012)       (0.009)       (0.015)      (0.011)

    Synthetic Control                   0.061**     0.075**      0.072**      -0.056**    -0.057**      -0.053**      -0.006      0.002        0.005        0.078**        -0.051       -0.004
    [p-value]                          [<0.001]     [0.005]     [<0.001]      [0.002]     [0.008]       [0.045]      [0.701]     [0.898]      [0.808]       [0.001]       [0.059]      [0.805]

    Synthetic Control                  0.043**      0.046**      0.042**      -0.032**      -0.031      -0.051**      0.020       0.002        0.016         0.067**      -0.047**      0.008
    [p-value] (From A. Table 6)        [0.003]      [0.035]      [0.010]      [0.043]      [0.074]      [0.007]      [0.202]     [0.915]      [0.290]       [<0.001]      [0.012]      [0.595]
    Observations                        86576        42179        44397        86576        42179        44397        86576       42179        44397         88459         88459        88459
    Mean of DV. In 2010                 0.062        0.054        0.068        0.359         0.234       0.479        0.562       0.698        0.431          0.079        0.443        0.453

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2015 of the March Current Population Survey. Estimates report the difference in the dependent variables in survey year 2015 between treatment states and the
synthetic control group. Sample used in columns 1-9 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Sample used in columns 10-12 is limited to non-disabled
adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained through randomization inference. (**) indicates
significance at the 5 percent level.



                                                                                                                                                                                                 47
                                          Appendix Table 9. Event History Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply
                                                                      American Community Survey 2010-2014

                                                                                              Low-educated Sample                                       Low-income Sample
                                                                                                  (HS or less)                                            (<300% FPL)
                                                                                              Employed at Time of                                       Employed at Time of
                                                                                                    Survey                                                    Survey
                             Panel A: Parents                                All                    Married                      Unmarried                      All
                             Expand x Year 2014                            0.007                     0.005                         0.016                       0.007
                                                                          (0.005)                   (0.004)                       (0.010)                     (0.004)
                             Expand x Year 2013                            0.006                     0.006                         0.008                       0.006
                                                                          (0.003)                   (0.003)                       (0.008)                     (0.003)
                             Expand x Year 2012                            0.004                     0.004                         0.009                       0.005
                                                                          (0.003)                   (0.003)                       (0.007)                     (0.003)
                             Expand x Year 2011                            -0.001                    -0.002                        0.005                       0.001
                                                                          (0.003)                   (0.003)                       (0.007)                     (0.003)
                             p-value test of joint
                                                                           0.157                        0.153                       0.664                        0.086
                             significance of pre-trend
                             Observations                                 857486                       655254                      202232                      1257844
                             Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                     0.715                        0.726                       0.676                       0.693

                             Panel B: Childless Adults
                             Expand x Year 2014                            0.006                        0.007                       0.005                        0.007
                                                                          (0.004)                      (0.004)                     (0.006)                      (0.004)
                             Expand x Year 2013                           0.007**                      0.008**                      0.007                        0.006
                                                                          (0.004)                      (0.004)                     (0.005)                      (0.003)
                             Expand x Year 2012                            0.004                       0.008**                      0.001                        0.005
                                                                          (0.003)                      (0.003)                     (0.005)                      (0.003)
                             Expand x Year 2011                            0.002                        0.001                       0.004                        0.002
                                                                          (0.002)                      (0.003)                     (0.003)                      (0.002)
                             p-value test of joint
                                                                           0.214                        0.002                       0.245                        0.251
                             significance of pre-trend
                             Observations                                 1718309                      855016                      863293                      1766166
                             Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                     0.677                        0.688                       0.667                       0.610

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey. Estimates report the coefficient on the interaction term between an indicator for whether state expands Medicaid and year
indicators. A p-value reports results from F-tests of joint significance from pre-2014 Medicaid expansion interaction terms. Sample used in columns 1-3 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages
22-64 with a high school degree or less. Sample used in column 4 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. Regressions are
adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. All standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                           48
                                         Appendix Table 10. Comparison of Labor Supply Estimates With and Without Eleven States
                               (Nine Prior Full Expansion or Limited Expansion Control States: DE, DC, MA, NY, VT, IN, ME, TN and WI, and
                                                             Two Late Expansion Treatment States: MI and NH)
                                                                       American Community Survey

                                                                                               Low-educated Sample                                    Low-income Sample
                                                                                                   (HS or less)                                          (<300% FPL)
                                                                                                  Employed at                                             Employed at
                                                                                                 Time of Survey                                         Time of Survey
                      Panel A: Parents                                        All                    Married                    Unmarried                     All
                      Difference-in-differences                              0.005                    0.002                       0.014                      0.005
                      Estimates                                             (0.004)                  (0.004)                     (0.008)                    (0.003)

                      Difference-in-differences                              0.005                      0.003                      0.011                      0.004
                      Estimates (From Table 6)                              (0.004)                    (0.003)                    (0.007)                    (0.003)


                      Synthetic Control: Expand in 2014                      0.003                      -0.001                     0.001                     0.008**
                      [p-value]                                             [0.532]                    [0.786]                    [0.957]                    [0.049]

                      Synthetic Control: Expand in 2014                      -0.003                    0.013**                     -0.005                      -0.007
                      [p-value] (From Table 6)                              [0.679]                    [0.015]                    [0.713]                     [0.066]
                      Observations                                          703283                     537870                     165413                     1035622
                      Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                              0.713                      0.723                      0.677                       0.692

                      Panel B: Childless Adults
                      Difference-in-differences                              0.001                      0.002                      -0.001                     0.002
                      Estimates                                             (0.003)                    (0.003)                    (0.004)                    (0.003)

                      Difference-in-differences                              0.003                      0.003                      0.002                      0.003
                      Estimates (From Table 6)                              (0.003)                    (0.003)                    (0.004)                    (0.003)


                      Synthetic Control: Expand in 2014                      -0.003                     -0.007                     -0.004                     -0.008
                      [p-value]                                             [0.470]                    [0.165]                    [0.384]                    [0.082]

                      Synthetic Control: Expand in 2014                      -0.002                     -0.008                     0.003                     -0.0004
                      [p-value] (From Table 6)                              [0.580]                    [0.067]                    [0.605]                     [0.915]
                      Observations                                         1375638                     679664                     695974                     1435514
                      Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                              0.676                      0.686                      0.667                       0.612

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2014 of the American Community Survey. Estimates report the difference in dependent variables in 2014 between treatment states and the synthetic control group.
Sample used in columns 1-3 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Sample used in column 4 is limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with


                                                                                                                                                                                                 49
family income below 300% of Federal Poverty Level. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained through randomization inference. All standard errors of differences-in-
differences estimates (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                        Appendix Table 11. Event History Estimates of Effect of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Labor Supply
                                                              Monthly Current Population Survey 2010-(May) 2016

                                                                                                                          Low-educated Sample
                                                                                                                              (HS or less)
                                                                             Employed at Time of Survey              Usual Hours Worked per Week                          Full-Time
       Panel A: Parents                                                       All   Married Unmarried                  All     Married Unmarried                All       Married      Unmarried
       Expand x Year 2016                                                   -0.010    -0.013      -0.002             -0.270     -0.446      0.174             -0.006       -0.012        0.008
                                                                           (0.009)   (0.009)     (0.016)            (0.418)    (0.441)     (0.656)           (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.017)
       Expand x Year 2015                                                   0.004     -0.005     0.029**             0.103      -0.338     1.267**             0.008       -0.002       0.034**
                                                                           (0.007)   (0.008)     (0.013)            (0.342)    (0.368)     (0.580)           (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.014)
       Expand x Year 2014                                                   0.006     -0.006     0.042**             0.189      -0.260     1.414**             0.006       -0.007       0.042**
                                                                           (0.006)   (0.008)     (0.012)            (0.288)    (0.322)     (0.489)           (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.011)
       Expand x Year 2013                                                   0.006     0.001       0.021              0.256      -0.013      1.013              0.009       0.002        0.028**
                                                                           (0.007)   (0.009)     (0.011)            (0.320)    (0.371)     (0.510)           (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.013)
       Expand x Year 2012                                                   0.007     0.001       0.023              0.469      0.101      1.389**             0.012       0.001        0.040**
                                                                           (0.008)   (0.009)     (0.013)            (0.381)    (0.412)     (0.566)           (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.014)
       Expand x Year 2011                                                   -0.001    -0.008      0.018              0.051      -0.325     0.982**             0.001       -0.010       0.027**
                                                                           (0.006)   (0.007)     (0.011)            (0.292)    (0.317)     (0.431)           (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.011)
       p-value test of joint significance of pre-2014 interactions          0.425     0.300       0.247              0.239      0.232       0.091              0.130       0.144         0.052
       Observations                                                        640572    459425      181147             640572     459425      181147            640572       459425        181147
       Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                                            0.685     0.706       0.627               27.1       28.3        23.9              0.615       0.639         0.548

       Panel B: Childless Adults
       Expand x Year 2016                                                   0.010        0.006         0.016         0.311        0.169         0.529           0.010       0.006         0.015
                                                                           (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.396)      (0.484)       (0.503)        (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.012)
       Expand x Year 2015                                                   0.011        0.012         0.014         0.295        0.239         0.504           0.009       0.008         0.014
                                                                           (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.011)       (0.350)      (0.381)       (0.454)        (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.011)
       Expand x Year 2014                                                   0.002        -0.010        0.016         -0.025       -0.401        0.469           0.001       -0.007        0.012
                                                                           (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.309)      (0.358)       (0.427)        (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.010)
       Expand x Year 2013                                                   -0.007     -0.017**        0.007         -0.360     -0.707**        0.134          -0.004       -0.014        0.008
                                                                           (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.009)       (0.254)      (0.337)       (0.370)        (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.009)
       Expand x Year 2012                                                 -0.012**     -0.024**        0.002       -0.509**     -0.892**        -0.042         -0.008     -0.019**        0.005
                                                                           (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.252)      (0.323)       (0.364)        (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.009)
       Expand x Year 2011                                                   -0.007     -0.018**        0.005         -0.363     -0.734**        0.033          -0.007     -0.017**        0.004
                                                                           (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.191)      (0.254)       (0.301)        (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.007)
       p-value test of joint significance of pre-2014 interactions          0.182        0.001         0.766         0.204        0.028         0.939           0.422       0.017         0.828
       Observations                                                       1141994       549419        592575       1141994       549419        592575        1141994       549419        592575
       Mean of Dep. Var. in 2010                                            0.652        0.669         0.636          25.8         26.7          24.9           0.587       0.605         0.569

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2016 (May) of the Current Population Survey monthly files. A p-value reports results from F-tests measuring whether Medicaid expansion effects are statistically
different from 0 in pre-expansion periods. Analysis excludes Alaska, Indiana, Montana and Pennsylvania due to expansions after 2014. Sample limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with
a high school degree or less. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-born status, citizenship status, number of children and
family size. All standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.

                                                                                                                                                                                                       51
52
                                          Appendix Table 12. Comparison of Health Insurance Estimates With and Without Eleven States
                                 (Nine Prior Full Expansion or Limited Expansion Control States: DE, DC, MA, NY, VT, IN, ME, TN and WI, and
                                                               Two Late Expansion Treatment States: MI and NH)
                                                                       Monthly Current Population Survey

                                                                                                          Low-educated Sample
                                                                                                              (HS or less)
                                                                         Medicaid                              Uninsured                                  Private
                           Panel A: Parents                   All       Married Unmarried               All    Married Unmarried               All      Married Unmarried
                           Difference-in-differences         0.001       -0.005   0.020**             -0.018   -0.227       0.562             0.002      -0.002    0.014
                           Estimates                        (0.004)     (0.005)   (0.008)            (0.213) (0.225)       (0.359)           (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.009)

                           Difference-in-differences         0.001        -0.004        0.015         -0.039      -0.202        0.388         0.001       -0.003        0.012
                           Estimates (From Table 7)         (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.222)     (0.234)       (0.356)       (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.009)

                           Synthetic Control                -0.0003       -0.013        0.011         0.245     -0.626**        -0.238        -0.004      -0.009        -0.014
                           [p-value]                        [0.958]      [0.078]       [0.505]       [0.459]    [0.048]        [0.763]       [0.694]     [0.299]       [0.436]

                           Synthetic Control                 -0.009       -0.011        0.002        -0.121       -0.359        -0.301       -0.002       -0.004        -0.011
                           [p-value] (From Table 8)         [0.285]      [0.206]       [0.885]      [0.728]      [0.335]       [0.621]      [0.853]      [0.618]       [0.489]
                           Observations                     527338       381446        145892       527338       381446        145892       527338       381446        145892
                           Mean of DV. In 2010               0.693        0.709         0.653         27.7         28.8          25.0         0.628       0.649         0.573

                           Panel B: Childless Adults
                           Difference-in-differences        0.013**       0.012         0.014         0.413       0.379         0.486         0.011       0.012         0.011
                           Estimates                        (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.259)     (0.279)       (0.330)       (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.008)

                           Difference-in-differences        0.012**      0.014**        0.012         0.426       0.446         0.459         0.010      0.012**        0.009
                           Estimates (From Table 7)         (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.239)     (0.267)       (0.302)       (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.007)

                           Synthetic Control                 0.002        -0.001        -0.013        0.072      -1.01**        0.023         0.001       0.010         -0.002
                           [p-value]                        [0.861]      [0.942]       [0.280]       [0.882]     [0.030]       [0.957]       [0.932]     [0.298]       [0.814]

                           Synthetic Control                0.0005        0.001         -0.007       0.282        -0.412        0.081        0.002        -0.002        0.001
                           [p-value] (From Table 8)         [0.963]      [0.924]       [0.562]      [0.547]      [0.404]       [0.886]      [0.859]      [0.856]       [0.940]
                           Observations                     901679       435294        466385       901679       435294        466385       901679       435294        466385
                           Mean of DV. In 2010               0.661        0.673         0.650         26.3         27.2          25.6        0.597        0.613         0.583

Notes: Data are from years 2010-2016 of the (May) Current Population Survey monthly files. Analysis excludes Alaska, Indiana, Montana and Pennsylvania due to expansions after 2014. Sample
limited to non-disabled adults between ages 22-64 with a high school degree or less. Regressions are adjusted using indicators for state, year, age, sex, race, education levels, marital status, foreign-
born status, citizenship status, number of children and family size. P-values of synthetic control estimates [in brackets] are obtained through randomization inference. All standard errors of
differences-in-differences estimates (in parentheses) are clustered on state. (**) indicates significance at the 5 percent level.



                                                                                                                                                                                                             53
           Figure 1. Medicaid, Low-educated Parents                  Figure 4. Medicaid, Low-educated Childless
                             (ACS)                                                     Adults
     0.3                                                                                (ACS)
                                                                  0.15
    0.25
%                                                                  0.1
     0.2                                                      %
                                                                  0.05
    0.15                                                            0
               2010       2011   2012       2013       2014                 2010       2011   2012       2013       2014

                      Treated      Synthetic Control                               Treated      Synthetic Control


       Figure 2. Uninsured, Low-educated Parents                    Figure 5. Uninsured, Low-educated Childless
                         (ACS)                                                      Adults (ACS)
     0.3                                                          0.35

    0.25                                                           0.3
%                                                             %
     0.2                                                          0.25

    0.15                                                           0.2
               2010       2011   2012       2013       2014                 2010       2011   2012       2013       2014

                      Treated      Synthetic Control                               Treated      Synthetic Control


            Figure 3. Private Insured, Low-educated                      Figure 6. Private Insured, Low-educated
                             Parents                                               Childless Adults (ACS)
                               (ACS)                              0.65
     0.6
                                                                   0.6
    0.55                                                      %
%                                                                 0.55
     0.5
    0.45                                                           0.5
               2010       2011   2012       2013       2014                 2010       2011   2012       2013       2014

                      Treated      Synthetic Control                               Treated      Synthetic Control
           Figure 7. Medicaid, Low-income Parents                  Figure 10. Medicaid, Low-income Childless
                            (ACS)                                                Adults (ACS)
     0.3                                                         0.2

    0.25                                                        0.15
%                                                           %
     0.2                                                         0.1

    0.15                                                        0.05
              2010       2011   2012      2013       2014                2010       2011    2012      2013       2014

                     Treated     Synthetic Control                              Treated      Synthetic Control


           Figure 8. Uninsured, Low-income Parents                 Figure 11. Uninsured, Low-income Childless
                             (ACS)                                                Adults (ACS)
     0.3                                                         0.4

    0.25                                                        0.35
%                                                           %
     0.2                                                         0.3

    0.15                                                        0.25
              2010       2011   2012      2013       2014                2010       2011    2012      2013       2014

                     Treated     Synthetic Control                              Treated      Synthetic Control


      Figure 9. Private Insured, Low-income Parents                    Figure 12. Private Insured, Low-income
                           (ACS)                                                Childless Adults (ACS)
     0.6                                                         0.6

    0.55                                                        0.55
%                                                           %
     0.5                                                         0.5

    0.45                                                        0.45
              2010       2011   2012      2013       2014                2010       2011    2012      2013       2014

                     Treated     Synthetic Control                              Treated      Synthetic Control
     Figure 13. Employed, Low-educated Parents                          Figure 16. Employed, Low-educated Childless
                   (Monthly CPS)                                                    Adults (Monthly CPS)
  0.75                                                                0.7


% 0.7                                                              % 0.65


  0.65                                                                0.6
           2010     2011      2012    2013   2014    2015   2016               2010    2011      2012    2013   2014    2015   2016

                    Treated            Synthetic Control                               Treated            Synthetic Control


         Figure 14. Usual Hours Worked per Week,                          Figure 17. Usual Hours Worked per Week,
           Low-educated Parents (Monthly CPS)                           Low-educated Childless Adults (Monthly CPS)
    28.5                                                                 27
     28                                                                 26.5
    27.5                                                                 26
Hrs. 27                                                            Hrs.
    26.5                                                                25.5
     26                                                                  25
    25.5                                                                24.5
             2010    2011      2012   2013    2014   2015   2016                2010    2011      2012   2013    2014   2015   2016

                    Treated            Synthetic Control                               Treated            Synthetic Control


     Figure 15. Full-Time, Low-educated Parents                         Figure 18. Full-Time, Low-educated Childless
                     (Monthly CPS)                                                  Adults (Monthly CPS)
  0.65                                                               0.65


% 0.6                                                              % 0.6


  0.55                                                               0.55
           2010     2011      2012    2013   2014    2015   2016               2010    2011      2012    2013   2014    2015   2016

                    Treated            Synthetic Control                               Treated            Synthetic Control
       Figure A1. Medicaid, Low-educated Parents                   Figure A4. Medicaid, Low-educated Childless
                (ACS, Excluding 11 States)                               Adults (ACS, Excluding 11 States)
     0.3                                                         0.15

    0.25                                                          0.1
%                                                            %
     0.2                                                         0.05

    0.15                                                           0
              2010       2011    2012      2013       2014                  2010       2011    2012       2013        2014

                     Treated      Synthetic Control                                Treated       Synthetic Control


      Figure A2. Uninsured, Low-educated Parents                   Figure A5. Uninsured, Low-educated Childless
               (ACS, Excluding 11 States)                                 Adults (ACS, Excluding 11 States)
     0.3                                                         0.35

    0.25                                                          0.3
%                                                            %
     0.2                                                         0.25

    0.15                                                          0.2
              2010       2011    2012      2013       2014                  2010       2011    2012       2013        2014

                     Treated      Synthetic Control                                Treated       Synthetic Control


           Figure A3. Private Insured, Low-educated                     Figure A6. Private Insured, Low-educated
               Parents (ACS, Excluding 11 States)                       Childless Adults (ACS, Excluding 11 States)
     0.6                                                         0.65

    0.55                                                          0.6
%                                                            %
     0.5                                                         0.55

    0.45                                                          0.5
              2010       2011    2012      2013       2014                  2010       2011    2012       2013        2014

                     Treated      Synthetic Control                                Treated       Synthetic Control
       Figure A7. Medicaid, Low-educated Parents                       Figure A10. Medicaid, Low-educated Childless
                      (March CPS)                                                   Adults (March CPS)
     0.3                                                             0.15

    0.25                                                              0.1
%                                                                %
     0.2                                                             0.05

    0.15                                                               0
              2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015                 2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015

                     Treated          Synthetic Control                               Treated          Synthetic Control


      Figure A8. Uninsured, Low-educated Parents                              Figure A11. Uninsured, Low-educated
                      (March CPS)                                                 Childless Adults (March CPS)
    0.35                                                             0.35
     0.3
                                                                      0.3
% 0.25                                                           %
                                                                     0.25
     0.2
    0.15                                                              0.2
              2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015                 2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015

                     Treated          Synthetic Control                               Treated          Synthetic Control


           Figure A9. Private Insured, Low-educated                         Figure A12. Private Insured, Low-educated
                      Parents (March CPS)                                          Childless Adults (March CPS)
     0.6                                                             0.65

    0.55                                                              0.6
%                                                                %
     0.5                                                             0.55

    0.45                                                              0.5
              2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015                 2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015

                     Treated          Synthetic Control                               Treated          Synthetic Control
       Figure A13. Medicaid, Low-income Parents                        Figure A16. Medicaid, Low-income Childless
                     (March CPS)                                                   Adults (March CPS)
    0.35                                                             0.2
     0.3
                                                                    0.15
% 0.25                                                          %
                                                                     0.1
     0.2
    0.15                                                            0.05
             2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015                2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015

                    Treated          Synthetic Control                              Treated          Synthetic Control


       Figure A14. Uninsured, Low-income Parents                      Figure A17. Uninsured, Low-income Childless
                      (March CPS)                                                  Adults (March CPS)
    0.35                                                          0.45
     0.3                                                           0.4
                                                                  0.35
% 0.25                                                          %
                                                                   0.3
     0.2                                                          0.25
    0.15                                                           0.2
             2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015                2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015

                    Treated          Synthetic Control                              Treated          Synthetic Control


           Figure A15. Private Insured, Low-income                         Figure A18. Private Insured, Low-income
                     Parents (March CPS)                                         Childless Adults (March CPS)
     0.6                                                             0.6
                                                                    0.55
    0.55
%                                                               % 0.5
     0.5
                                                                    0.45
    0.45                                                             0.4
             2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015                2010    2011     2012     2013      2014    2015

                    Treated          Synthetic Control                              Treated          Synthetic Control
    Figure A19. Employed, Low-educated Parents              Figure A20. Employed, Low-educated Childless
                       (ACS)                                                Adults (ACS)
  0.75                                                     0.75

                                                            0.7
% 0.7                                                  %
                                                           0.65

  0.65                                                      0.6
         2010       2011   2012      2013       2014              2010       2011   2012      2013       2014

                Treated     Synthetic Control                            Treated     Synthetic Control


     Figure A21. Employed, Low-income Parents                Figure A22. Employed, Low-income Childless
                       (ACS)                                                Adults (ACS)
  0.75                                                     0.65


% 0.7                                                  % 0.6


  0.65                                                     0.55
         2010       2011   2012      2013       2014              2010       2011   2012      2013       2014

                Treated     Synthetic Control                            Treated     Synthetic Control


    Figure A23. Employed, Low-educated Parents              Figure A24. Employed, Low-educated Childless
             (ACS, Excluding 11 States)                            Adults (ACS, Excluding 11 States)
  0.75                                                     0.75

                                                            0.7
% 0.7                                                  %
                                                           0.65

  0.65                                                      0.6
         2010       2011   2012      2013       2014              2010       2011   2012      2013       2014

                Treated     Synthetic Control                            Treated     Synthetic Control
