NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MIGRANTS, ANCESTORS, AND INVESTMENTS
Konrad B. Burchardi
Thomas Chaney
Tarek A. Hassan
Working Paper 21847
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21847

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016, Revised May 2017

We are grateful to Lorenzo Casaburi, Joshua Gottlieb, Richard Hornbeck, Nathan Nunn, Emir
Kamenica, Jacopo Ponticelli, Nancy Qian, and David Strömberg for helpful discussions. We also
thank seminar participants at the Barcelona GSE, Boston University, Boston College, CEPR
ERWIT, University of Chicago, Columbia University, Oxford, Georgetown, Harvard, IFN
(Stockholm), Imperial, the University of Maryland, MIT, NBER EEG and Culture & Institutions
program meetings, Paris School of Economics, Princeton, Singapore Management University,
National University of Singapore, Toulouse, UPF, and the University of Zürich for their
comments. Chaney is grateful for financial support from ERC grant N 337272–FiNet. Hassan is
grateful for financial support from the IGM and the Fama-Miller Center at the University of
Chicago. Markus Schwedeler and Philip Xu provided excellent research assistance. All mistakes
remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Konrad B. Burchardi, Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A. Hassan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Migrants, Ancestors, and Investments
Konrad B. Burchardi, Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A. Hassan
NBER Working Paper No. 21847
January 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. F21,G15,J61,L14,N3,O11
ABSTRACT
We use 130 years of data on historical migrations to the United States to show a causal effect of
the ancestry composition of US counties on foreign direct investment (FDI) sent and received by
local firms. To isolate the causal effect of ancestry on FDI, we build a simple reduced-form
model of migrations: Migrations from a foreign country to a US county at a given time depend on
(i) a push factor, causing emigration from that foreign country to the entire United States, and (ii)
a pull factor, causing immigration from all origins into that US county. The interaction between
time-series variation in origin-specific push factors and destination-specific pull factors generates
quasi-random variation in the allocation of migrants across US counties. We find that a doubling
of the number of residents with ancestry from a given foreign country relative to the mean
increases by 4 percentage points the probability that at least one local firm engages in FDI with
that country. We present evidence this effect is primarily driven by a reduction in information
frictions, and not by better contract enforcement, taste similarities, or a convergence in factor
endowments.
Konrad B. Burchardi
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm
Sweden
konrad.burchardi@iies.su.se
Thomas Chaney
Sciences Po
thomas.chaney@gmail.com

Tarek A. Hassan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
tarek.hassan@chicagobooth.edu

Over the past decades, international migrations have reached unprecedented levels, 1 shaping
an increasingly ethnically diverse and socially connected world. The economic consequences
of these migrations are at the heart of fierce political debates on immigration policy, yet our
understanding of the economic effects of migrations remains incomplete. At the same time,
foreign direct investment (FDI) undertaken by multinational firms has become a defining feature
of international production. 2 Local policymakers see attracting and retaining FDI as a major
goal, and technology transfers through FDI are both a conduit for technological progress abroad
and a source of revenue for US firms. 3 Migrations and FDI create two parallel global networks,
one of ethnic connections, one of parent-subsidiary linkages. How do these two networks affect
each other? In this paper, we estimate the long-term effect of immigration on the patterns of FDI
sent and received by US firms, and shed light on the mechanism behind this effect. We show
that immigration and FDI are intimately related: The ethnic diversity created by migrations
reaching back more than a century has a large positive causal effect on the propensity of US
firms to engage in FDI with the historical migrants’ countries of origin; and this effect appears
to transmit itself primarily through a reduction of information frictions.
Evaluating the causal impact of migrations on FDI requires a rigorous identification strategy, as unobserved factors may simultaneously affect migrations, ancestry, and FDI, creating a
spurious correlation between them. We construct a set of instrumental variables (IV) for the
present-day ancestry composition of US counties, best explained by the examples of migrations
from Germany and Italy. German migrations peaked at the end of the nineteenth century when
the Midwest was booming and attracting large numbers of migrants. We observe a large population with German ancestry in the Midwest today. Italian migrations peaked a few decades
later, at the beginning of the twentieth century when the West was attracting large numbers of
migrants. We observe a large population with Italian ancestry in the West. We use this interaction of time-series variation in the relative attractiveness of different destinations within the
United States (e.g. end of nineteenth century Midwest versus early twentieth century West) with
the staggered arrival of migrants from different origins (e.g. end of nineteenth century Germany
versus early twentieth century Italy) to instrument for the present-day distribution of ancestries.
This formal IV strategy is essential. For instance, while the effect of ancestry on FDI is positive
in both ordinary least squares (OLS) and IV specifications, its effect on international trade drops
The number of international migrants worldwide reached 232 million in 2013, an all time high (UN Population
Facts No. 2013/2).
2
In 2009, 55% of all US exports emanated from US multinationals that operated subsidiaries abroad. These
firms employ 23 million Americans, while US subsidiaries of foreign firms employ another 5 million. Source: Office
of the United States Trade Representative, Fact Sheet on International Investment.
3
See McGrattan and Prescott (2010) and Holmes et al. (2015).
1

1

and becomes insignificant when we instrument for ancestry, suggesting that unobservable factors
indeed confound simple OLS estimates of these effects.
Our paper makes three main contributions: (i) historical migrations and the ethnic diversity
they created have a quantitatively large causal effect on FDI; (ii) this ethnic determinant of FDI
operates mainly through a long-lasting (and causal) effect of common ancestry on the flow of
information between the origin and the destination; and (iii) we propose a general method for
instrumenting the composition of ancestry and for measuring the flow of information between
foreign countries across US metro areas.
Before describing the related literature, we summarize our main empirical results.
We find that, for an average US county, doubling the number of individuals with ancestry
from a given origin country increases by 4 percentage points the probability that at least one firm
from this US county engages in FDI with that origin country, and increases by 7% the number
of local jobs at subsidiaries of firms headquartered in that origin country. These effects persist
over generations: Even the earliest migrations in the nineteenth century for which we have data
significantly affect the patterns of FDI today.
To arrive at those findings on the causal impact of foreign ancestry on the patterns of FDI,
we follow an IV strategy. We motivate our approach using a simple reduced-form dynamic model
of migrations. Migrations from a given origin country o to a given US destination county d in
period t depend on the total number of migrants arriving in the United States from o (a push
factor), the relative economic attractiveness of d to migrants arriving in t (a pull factor), and
the size of the pre-existing local population of ancestry o in d at t, allowing for the fact that
migrants tend to prefer settling near others of their own ethnicity (a recursive factor). Solving
the model shows that the number of residents in d today who are descendants of migrants from
o is a function of simple and higher-order interactions of the sequence of pull and push factors.
To construct valid instruments from this sequence of interactions, we isolate variation in the
pull and push factors that is plausibly independent of any unobservables that may make a given
destination within the US differentially more attractive for both settlement and FDI from a
given origin country. To that end, we measure the pull factor from country o to county d as
the fraction of migrants coming from anywhere in the world who settle in d at time t, excluding
migrants from the same continent as o. The pull from o towards d thus depends only on the
destination choices of migrants arriving at the same time from other continents. Similarly, we
measure the push factor as the total number of migrants arriving in the United States from o at
time t, excluding migrants from o who settled in the same region as d. We then instrument for
2

the present-day number of residents in county d with ancestry from country o using the full set
of simple and higher-order interactions of these pull and push factors. Using the entire series of
interactions going back to 1880 maximizes the statistical power of our IV strategy.
A major advantage of this approach is that it yields a specific instrument for migrations from
each origin to each destination at each point in time, uniquely allowing us to guard against a wide
range of potentially confounding factors, corroborate our approach in various ways, and probe the
mechanism linking ancestry to FDI. Most immediately, it enables us to simultaneously control for
both origin and destination fixed effects, thus controlling for all origin- and destination-specific
factors, such as differences in size, market access, and productivity.
In addition, we conduct a number of falsification exercises and robustness checks. For example, we obtain quantitatively very similar effects of ancestry on FDI when we combine our
IV strategy with a natural experiment surrounding the rise and fall of communism. Making use
of the periods of economic isolation between the United States and communist countries, these
specifications (similar to a difference-in-difference) measure how cross sectional variations in ancestry driven only by the inflow of defectors from communist countries explain changes in FDI,
from zero in 1989 to its current level in 2014. Similarly, our results remain largely unchanged
when we confine our set of instruments only to migrations pre or post World War II or apply it
only to subsets of countries.
The flexibility of this set of instruments also delivers the statistical power to isolate specific
channels linking ancestry to FDI: Theory suggests that common ancestry may have a positive
impact on FDI because it (i) induces similarities in tastes for consumption, (ii) causes a convergence in factor endowments, facilitating horizontal FDI, (iii) provides social collateral for
contract enforcement, substituting for poor institutions, or (iv) reduces information frictions.
We find no evidence in support of the first three channels: Common ancestry does not affect FDI
in the final goods sector more than in the intermediate goods sector, does not appear to cause
a convergence the sectoral distribution of employment, and has a significantly weaker impact on
FDI for countries with weak institutions.
To provide a direct test for the remaining hypothesis that common ancestry affects FDI by
reducing information frictions, we construct a novel measure of information demand about foreign
countries using data from Google internet searches. Our index reflects variation across US metro
areas in the relative frequency of search terms containing the names of each countries’ most
prominent politicians, actors, athletes, and musicians. We find a large causal effect of common
ancestry on this index: Residents of US metro areas that received relatively more migration from
a given origin country in the past systematically acquire more information about the politics,
3

culture, and language of that country. This fact fully accounts for the effect of ancestry on FDI,
in the sense that controlling for our index of information demand drives out the significance of
common ancestry in predicting FDI.
Further exploring the mechanism linking ancestry to FDI, we find additional evidence consistent with the view that information is transmitted internationally through networks created
by common ancestry (Arkolakis, 2010; Chaney, 2014). Consistent with these models, we find
that the effect of ancestry on FDI is highly concave (as all the relevant information is gradually
exhausted), weaker if many people from the same or neighboring origins live in the surrounding
area (as relevant information is more likely to have already percolated), and stronger for destinations that are more ethnically diverse (indicative of a hub-effect, where for example Poland
and Venezuela do not communicate directly but through a hub in New York). Also consistent
with this view, the effect of ancestry is stronger for more distant and ethnically diverse countries
(where information is plausibly harder to acquire); and stronger for FDI than trade flows, where
information frictions are arguably less severe than for foreign investments.
We also find that the effects of ancestry on FDI and information flow continue to operate long
after migration from the origin country ceases, suggesting that immigrants pass traits to their
descendants that facilitate economic exchange with their origin countries, such as social ties to
family and friends or knowledge of the origin country’s language and culture. As one example of
such a trait, we show a positive effect of ancestry on the use of the origin country’s language by
US-born individuals.
To illustrate the quantitative implications of our results, we conduct two thought experiments.
In the first, we calculate the effect of Chinese exclusion – the effective ban on Chinese immigration
between 1882 and 1965. Absent this ban, we predict the fraction of counties in the Northeast
with FDI links to China would have increased substantially (e.g. doubled in New York state).
In the second, we calculate the effect of a hypothetical “L.A. gold rush” – an early population
growth in Los Angeles before 1880 similar to the experience of San Francisco. We predict there
would have been 60,000 more individuals with German and Irish ancestry in Los Angeles, and
FDI between Los Angeles and Germany and Ireland would have increased by around 60%. The
effect of ancestry on FDI is thus large and economically important.
Finally, we note one important limitation to our analysis: Our results rely purely on variation
in the composition of FDI within the United States, not between countries. Although we believe
that, in light of our results, the ethnic diversity of the United States likely also raises FDI for
the country as a whole, we cannot exclude the possibility that increases in FDI in one state are
partially or fully offset by decreases in others.
4

Existing literature. A large literature shows that measures of affinity between regions, such
as common ancestry, social ties, trust, and telephone volume, correlate strongly with aggregate
economic outcomes, such as foreign direct investment (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2009;
Leblang, 2010), international asset flows (Portes and Rey, 2005), and trade flows (Gould, 1994;
Rauch and Trindade, 2002).4 How much of this association should be interpreted as causal,
however, remains an open question because these measures of affinity are likely to be nonrandom.
Three recent papers make attempts at identifying a causal impact of migrations on FDI and
trade. Javorcik et al. (2011) use the cost of acquiring a passport and the existing stock of migrants
from different countries in the United States to instrument for the impact of migrations between
foreign countries and the United States on FDI. However, these instruments are most likely
correlated with both migrations to the United States and FDI flows (e.g. a passport facilitates
migration to the U.S., but it also facilitates traveling to the U.S. to set up a subsidiary, and
traveling back and forth between a parent firm and its subsidiary), and thus likely violate the
exclusion restriction. Cohen et al. (2015) use the location of Japanese internment camps during
World War II, and Parsons and Vezina (2016) the placement of Vietnamese refugees after the
Vietnam War to identify a causal effect of concentrations of descendants of these migrants on
contemporary trade flows between locations within the United States and Japan and Vietnam,
respectively. While the exclusion restriction for the instruments in those two papers is plausible,
instrumenting for migrations from only one country makes it impossible to control for destination
fixed effects, that is, unobserved characteristics making a US state both a large recipient of
migrants and a large importer and exporter. 5
Burchardi and Hassan (2013) use variation in wartime destruction across West German regions in 1945, a time when millions of refugees were arriving from East Germany, as an instrument
for the share of the population with social ties to the East, and show evidence of a causal effect
of these social ties on changes in GDP growth rates and FDI in East Germany after the fall of
the Berlin Wall.6 Other papers studying the effect of historical shocks on economic interactions
across borders include Redding and Sturm (2008), Juhász (2014), and Steinwender (2014).
We contribute to this literature in several ways. First, we identify a causal effect of ancestry
on FDI in a setting with a high degree of external validity directly relevant for assessing, for
Also see Head and Ries (1998), Combes, Lafourcade, and Mayer (2005), Garmendia, Llano, Minondo, and
Requena (2012), and Aleksynska and Peri (2014) for the relationship between common ancestry and trade and
Bhattacharya and Groznik (2008) for its relationship with FDI.
5
Similarly, focusing on migrations and FDI flows to the United States as a whole, Javorcik et al. cannot control
for an origin country fixed effect, making it likely that unobserved characteristics make a country both a larger
sender of migrants, and a large sender of FDI flows.
6
See Fuchs-Schündeln and Hassan (2015) and Chaney (2016) for surveys of this literature.
4

5

example, the long-term effects of immigration policy. Second, because our identification strategy
can be applied to all origin countries and destination US counties, we are able to guard against a
wide range of possible confounding factors and to relate to the previous literature by employing
a gravity equation with both destination and origin fixed effects. Third, we show that ancestry
affects FDI most likely due to its effects on information flow.
Our paper also contributes to the debate on the costs and benefits of immigration. Much of
the existing literature has focused on the effects of migration on local labor markets, mostly in
the short run.7 A more recent literature focuses on the effect of cultural, ethnic, and birthplace
diversity on economic development and growth. 8 Most closely related are Nunn, Qian, and
Sequeira (2015) who study the effect of immigration from all origins during the Age of Mass
Migration on present-day outcomes. Fulford, Petkov, and Schiantarelli (2015) study the effect of
historical ancestry composition of US counties on local economic growth. We add to this literature
by examining the effect of migration on the pattern of international economic exchanges and
local employment. Our results show a long-term effect of migration on the absolute advantage
in conducting FDI of different regions that may explain part of the association between diversity
and long-term growth found in other studies.
Our approach to identification is related to Card (2001) who instruments immigration flows
from origin o to destination d with the interaction of the total immigration from o to the United
States (the push factor) and the spatial distribution of previous migrants from o in the United
States (the recursive factor). This strategy has been widely used in the literature to instrument
for changes in labour supply caused by immigration. However, it is not appropriate in our
context, where unobserved and persistent origin-destination specific characteristics (such as the
local climate) may drive both the spatial distribution of previous migrants and FDI. Our approach
instead combines a push-pull model similar to that of Card (2001) with a two-dimensional version
of the leave-out approach of Bartik (1991) and Katz and Murphy (1992), and uses multiple
subsequent waves of historical migrations going back to the 19th century to instrument for the
current stock of ancestry. This hybrid approach can easily be replicated for other countries, other
time periods, or variables other than migrations where cumulated flows matter, without the need
for a rare or even unique historical accident.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 1 introduces our data. Section
See for example Card (1990), Card and Di Nardo (2000), Friedberg (2001), Borjas (2003), and Cortes (2008).
Borjas (1994) provides an early survey.
8
See Ottaviano and Peri (2006), Putterman and Weil (2010), Peri (2012), Ashraf and Galor (2013), Ager
and Brückner (2013), Alesina, Harnoss, and Rapoport (2015a), and Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou
(2015b).
7

6

2 gives a brief overview of the history of migration to the United States. Section 3 identifies
the causal effect of ancestry composition on FDI at the extensive margin, discusses various
challenges to our identifying assumption, illustrates the quantitative implications of our findings
using two thought experiments, and conducts a range of robustness checks and falsification
exercises. Section 4 examines the mechanism underlying the effect of ancestry on FDI.

1

Data

We collect data on migrations and ancestry, on foreign direct investment and trade, and on
origin and destination characteristics. Below is a description of our data, along with their source.
Further details on the construction of all data are given in Appendix A.
Migrations and Ancestry. Our migration and ancestry data are constructed from the
individual files of the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) samples of the 1880,
1900, 1910, 1920, 1930, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 waves of the US census, and the 2006-2010
five-year sample of the American Community Survey. We weigh observations using the personal
weights provided by these data sources. Appendix Table 1 summarizes specific samples and
weights used. We cannot use data from the 1940, 1950 and 1960 censuses, because these did not
collect information on the year of immigration. The original 1890 census files were lost in a fire.
Throughout the paper, we use t − 1 and t to denote two consecutive census waves, o for

the foreign country of origin, and d for the US destination county. We construct the number of

t
, by counting the number of respondents
migrants from origin o to destination d at time t, Io,d

who live in d, were born in o, and emigrated to the United States between t − 1 and t. The
exception to this rule is 1880 census (the first in our sample), which also did not record the year of

1880
instead measures the number of residents who were either born
immigration. The variable Io,d

in o or whose parents were born in o, thus covering the two generations of immigrants arriving
prior to 1880.9 Since 1980, respondents have also been asked about their primary ancestry in
both the US Census and the American Community Survey, with the option to provide multiple
t
answers. Ancestryo,d
corresponds to the number of individuals residing in d at time t who report

o as first ancestry. Note that this measure captures self-reported (recalled) ancestry, which may
potentially be more relevant for economic exchange than genetic (factual) ancestry. 10
The respondents’ residence is recorded at the level of historic counties, and at the level of
historic county groups or PUMAs from 1970 onwards. Whenever necessary we use contempoIf the own birthplace is in the United States, imprecisely specific (e.g., a continent), or missing, we instead
use the parents’ birthplace, assigning equal weights to each parent’ birthplace.
10
See Duncan and Trejo (2016) for recent evidence on recalled versus factual ancestry in CPS data.
9

7

raneous population weights to transition data from the historic county group or PUMA level
to the historic county, and then use area weights to transition data from the historic county
level to the 1990 US county level. 11 The respondents’ stated ancestry (birthplace) often, but not
always, directly corresponds to foreign countries in their 1990 borders (for example, “Spanish”
and “Denmark”). However, in other cases no direct mapping exists (for example, “Basque” or
“Lapland”). For these cases, we construct transition matrices that map data from the answer
level to the 1990 foreign country level, using approximate population weights where possible and
approximate area weights otherwise. In the few cases when answers are imprecisely specific or
such a mapping cannot be constructed (for example, “European” or “born at sea”), we omit the
data. Appendix Tables 2 and 3 report summary statistics on these data transitions, including
the share of affected respondents and Appendix A.1 provides a detailed description of the data
transformation. The resulting dyadic dataset covers 3,141 US counties, 195 foreign countries,
and 10 census waves.
Foreign Direct Investment. Our data on FDI is from the US file of the 2014 edition of
the Bureau van Dijk ORBIS data set. 12 For each US firm, the database lists the location of its
(operational) headquarters, the addresses of its foreign parent entities, and the addresses of its
partially or fully owned international subsidiaries and branches. In our main specification, we
treat all equity stakes of any size as constituting a parent-subsidiary link. 13 Altogether, we have
information on 36,108 US firms that have at least one foreign parent or subsidiary. Collectively,
these firms have 102,618 foreign parents and 176,332 foreign subsidiaries in 142 countries (in their
1990 borders).14 We then aggregate this information to the county level. Our main outcome
variable, FDI Dummy, is 1 if at least one firm within a given destination county has at least
one parent or subsidiary in the origin country. The variable FDI dummy therefore captures
both outward FDI (US firms with foreign subsidiaries) and inward FDI (foreign firms with US
subsidiaries). For each destination county, we also count the total number of FDI linkages (the
total number of foreign parents and subsidiaries of all firms within the county), and the total
number of unique parents and subsidiaries in both the origin and the destination. We also count
the total number of employees working at firms with a foreign parent in a given destination ( #
We also aggregate our data to the PUMA level and show that our results are robust.
In robustness checks we show that our results do not change when we instead use data from the 2007 file.
13
Appendix Table 11 shows that our results are almost completely unchanged when we restrict ourselves to
links with an ownership stake larger than 5%, 25% or 50%.
14
Although Bureau van Dijk cross checks the data on international subsidiaries and branches using both US
and foreign data sources, we cannot exclude the possibility that coverage may be better for some countries than
for others. However, all of our specifications control for country fixed effects such that any such variation in
coverage at the country level would not affect our results.
11
12

8

of Employees at Subsidiaries in Destination ).15 The ORBIS database also gives the 2007 NAICS
code of the sector of the US firm, allowing us to disaggregate these data by 2-digit sector. 16
See Appendix A.2 for details. The resulting dataset covers the same 3,141 US counties and 195
foreign countries as above, yielding 612,495 origin-destination pairs.
Other Data. To streamline the exposition, we discuss our measure of information demand
in section 4.2. In addition, we use data on aggregate trade flows between US states and foreign
countries for the year 2012 from the US Census Bureau. 17 We construct bilateral distances and
absolute latitude differences between US counties and foreign countries, and collect information
on a number of characteristics for countries, counties, and sectors. See Appendix A.3 for details.
Summary Statistics. Panel A of Table 1 gives summary statistics on our sample of 3,141
× 195 origin-destination pairs. 18 Column 1 shows means and standard deviations for all observations. Columns 3-4 show the same statistics for the subsamples of origin-destination pairs

containing only observations with non-zero ancestry, and ancestry in the bottom and top quintile, respectively. The table shows that a lot of the variation both in ancestry and FDI is at
the extensive margin. Only 1.8% of origin-destination pairs have an FDI link. Conditional on
the US county having any population with origins in the foreign country, 3.1% have an FDI
link. The larger this population, the larger the probability of finding an FDI link, with 12.8%
of the origin-destination pairs in the top quintile having an FDI link. Similarly, about half of
the origin-destination pairs have ancestry of zero: most destinations in the United States do not
have populations with ancestry from all 195 origin countries. The mean number of individuals
with ancestry from a given origin is 316, but is highly skewed, with a mean in the top quintile of
2,852 individuals. Compared to this stock of ancestry, the flow of immigrants between 1990 and
2000 is relatively small, with 23 on average across the sample. The summary statistics also show
that the number of first-generation immigrants (foreign born) measured in the 2010 American
Communities Survey appears somewhat understated (69 on average). This fact is known in the
literature and appears to affect only the measurement of immigration flows but not the stock
When information on the number of employees is missing (which is the case for 95% and 58% of subsidiaries
in the destination and origin, respectively), we assume the subsidiary employs one person.
16
Appendix Table 4 provides a list of sectors and sector groups.
17
When we aggregate our dataset across US states, the correlation with aggregate trade between the entire
US and foreign countries from the NBER bilateral trade dataset is 99.9% for imports and 99.7% for exports
respectively (in 2008). When we aggregate our data across foreign countries, the correlation between state level
aggregate trade and state population is 93% for imports and 88% for exports respectively. We are therefore confident our trade dataset disaggregated at the US state × foreign country level is not subject to severe measurement
error. To further guard against measurement error, we also use data for the manufacturing sector only, final
goods only, or intermediate inputs only.
18
53 countries have no FDI links with US firms in our sample.
15

9

of ancestry (Jensen et al., 2015). For this reason, we exclude the 2000-2010 wave of migrations
from our standard specification (its inclusion however has no effect on any of our main results).
Panels B and C show summary statistics following the same format for destination counties
and origin countries for variables used in our estimation of heterogenous effects. Appendix Table
5 gives summary statistics on the intensive margin of FDI.

2

Historical Background

The 1880 US census counted 50 million residents, 10 million of which were first- or secondgeneration immigrants from 195 countries. The censuses taken since 1880 counted an additional
67 million immigrants. Our sample period thus covers the vast majority of migrations. 19
During the first part of this period, up until World War I, migration to the United States was
largely unregulated. European migrants in particular faced few or no restrictions to entry and
came in large numbers. Figure 1 shows the extent and the changing composition of migration
over time. Although the peak of British migration was passed before the beginning of our sample,
the numbers for 1880 clearly show the effect of the potato famines and the subsequently large
inflow of Irish migrants. The second big wave of migration in our sample is that of Germans
in the aftermath of the failed revolutions of 1848 and the consolidation of the German empire
under Prussian control in 1871. Similarly disrupted by political changes and an economic crisis
in the South, Italian migrants began flocking to the United States in large numbers around 1910,
followed by a peak in migrations from Eastern Europe, and in particular from Russia, in the
years after the October Revolution. The inflow of migrants overall dropped dramatically during
World War I, falling below 4 million during the period between 1910 and 1930.
Although economic and political factors in the origin countries dominated the timing of
these earlier European migrations, US immigration policies became relatively more important
during the 1920s. The first important step toward regulating the inflow of migrants was the
Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 that ended the migration of laborers, first from China, and then
in following incarnations from almost all of Asia. These restrictions were followed by literacy and
various other requirements that came into effect after 1917, culminating in the establishment of a
quota system in 1921. The quota system limited the overall number of immigrants, reduced the
flow of migrants from Southern and Eastern Europe, and effectively shut out Africans, Asians,
and Arabs. Combined with the effects of the Great Depression, these new regulations led to
The historical information in this section is from Daniels (2002) and Thernstrom (1980). Also see Goldin
(1994) for the political economy of US immigration policy.
19

10

negative net migration in the early 1930s and then a stabilization at relatively low levels of
immigration. The quota system was abolished in 1965 in favor of a system based on skills and
family relationships, leading both to a large increase in the total number of migrants and a shift
in composition toward migrants from Asia and the Americas, in particular from Mexico.
Figure 2 maps the spatial settlement pattern of newly arrived immigrants in the United
States over time. For each census from 1880 to 2010, we project the total number of new
migrants from all origins to destination d, Idt , on destination and year fixed effects to account
for general immigration time trends and persistent destination-specific effects. The figure shows
the residuals from this projection, color coded by decile. Migrants initially settled on the East
Coast of the United States (in the mid-19th century), and then the frontier for migrants moved
to the Midwest (in the late-19th century), to the West (1900-30), and to the South (in the 1980s).
Starting in the 1970s, we can also see graphically the increased settlement of migrants in urban
centers, with a series of dark dots appearing around large urban areas.
Below we use the interaction of this time-series variation in the relative attractiveness of different destinations within the United States with the staggered arrival of migrants from different
origins as the basis of our identification strategy.

3
3.1

Ancestry and Foreign Direct Investment
Identifying the Causal Impact of Migrations

To evaluate the effect of the presence of descendants of migrants from a given origin on the
probability that at least one firm within a given destination has an FDI link with a firm based
in the origin country (inward or outward), we estimate the structural equation,
0
1 [F DIo,d > 0] = δo + δd + βA2010
o,d + Xo,d γ + εo,d ,

(1)

where 1 [F DIo,d > 0] is a dummy variable equal to 1 if any firm headquartered in destination d is
either the parent or the subsidiary of any firm headquartered in origin o in 2014 (thus reflecting
both inward and outward FDI). We focus on this combined variable because our main results
are largely identical when separately considering inward and outward FDI. However, we report
separate results for each direction whenever they are relevant or important for interpretation.
Ao,d is a measure of common ancestry, usually calculated as the log of 1 plus the number of
residents in d that report having ancestors in origin o in 2010, measured in thousands. (We
choose this functional form in anticipation of non-parametric results, but also show robustness
11

0
to a wide range of alternative specifications –see section 3.4). Xo,d
is a vector of control variables

that always includes the geographic distance between o and d, and the difference in latitude
between o and d. δo and δd represent a full set of origin and destination fixed effects, augmented
in most of our specifications by fixed effects for the interaction between destination and continent
of origin, and between origin and destination census region. 20 The coefficient of interest is β,
which measures the effect of ancestry on the probability that an FDI relationship exists between
firms in o and d. The error term εo,d captures all omitted influences, including any deviations
from linearity.21 Throughout the main text, we report standard errors clustered at the origincountry level. In the appendix, we report standard errors calculated using alternative methods
for all the main results of the paper, and show our results are robust.
Equation (1) takes the form of a gravity equation, widely used in the empirical literature
describing the pattern of international trade and FDI. We maintain the same form for consistency
with this literature. Moreover, the gravity form is appealing on theoretical grounds because it
can be derived in a variety of models. 22 The destination and origin fixed effects absorb all
differences in productivity, market size, and market access between origins and destinations that
systematically affect prices. We may thus interpret the coefficient β as the effect of ancestry
controlling for the large set of conventional economic forces shaping international exchanges.

Equation (1) will consistently estimate the parameter of interest if Cov A2010
o,d , εo,d = 0. This

condition is unlikely to hold in our data, despite the inclusion of origin and destination fixed

effects. First, past origin-destination specific migration flows might be the result of economic
transactions such as FDI or trade, not their driver. 23 Second, origin-destination specific omitted
factors might drive both economic transactions and migration flows, affecting both Ao,d and
1 [F DIo,d > 0]. Third, ancestry might be selectively recalled because of past or present economic
interactions. These challenges are not unique to our data, but are likely concerns with any data
where ethnic linkages and economic transactions are simultaneously observed.
To address these concerns, we devise an instrumental variables (IV) strategy. This strategy is
guided by a simple dynamic model of migration, which helps to identify quasi-random variation
in ancestry and relate our approach to the existing literature. The stock of residents of ancestry
A census region is one of nine groupings of adjacent US states listed in Appendix Table 6.
We use a simple linear probability model, which allows for a straight-forward interpretation of the coefficient.
As a robustness check, we also report results from a probit estimator; see footnote 26.
22
See Arkolakis et al. (2012) for a derivation of the gravity structure of international trade in a variety of
theoretical settings. See Carr et al. (2001), Razin et al. (2003), Head and Ries (2008), and Ramondo (2014) for
an application of the gravity structure to foreign direct investment.
23
An example of such reverse causality is the strong concentration of Japanese in Scott County, Kentucky,
which emerged after Toyota seconded Japanese workers to a newly built manufacturing facility in the 1980s.
20
21

12

o in destination d at time t, Ato,d , depends on the past stock of residents with ancestry o and the
newly arrived migrants from o who settle in d. The combination of three forces determines the
number of new arrivals: A country-specific push factor drives migrants out of country o into the
United States; a pull factor attracts migrants entering the United States to county d, irrespective
of their origin; and a recursive factor corresponds to the tendency of newly arrived migrants to
settle in communities where people with the same ancestry already live.
Formally, the stock of residents in d with ancestry from o at time t evolves according to
t
Ato,d = at + ao,t + ad,t + bt At−1
o,d + Io

At−1
It
o,d
ct dt + dt t−1
I
Ao

!

t
+ νo,d
.

(2)

The constant terms at , ao,t , and ad,t control for residual forces, such as demographics, which may
vary over time, over space, and between different ethnic groups. The term bt At−1
o,d corresponds
to the fact that ancestry is a stock variable that evolves cumulatively, where bt modulates how
ties to one’s ancestry are passed from one generation to the next, including attenuation due to
internal migrations. The term Iot , the total number of migrants from country o entering the
United States at time t, measures the strength of the push factor, the fact that migrants are
driven out of country o. The fraction of all migrants entering the United States who settle in
county d from all origins, Idt /I t , measures the strength of the economic pull factor, the degree
to which county d is particularly appealing to migrants at time t. The fraction of people with
t−1
ancestry from country o who already live in county d, At−1
o,d /Ao , measures the strength of the

recursive factor, the propensity of migrants to settle near their countrymen. The coefficients ct
and dt control for the relative importance of the pull and recursive factors. If the pull factor is
absent, and only the recursive factor affects the allocation of newly arrived migrants ( ct = 0) our
t
model collapses exactly to the Card (2001) model. Finally, νo,d
is a sequence of error terms that

are potentially correlated with εo,d .
Equation (2) is not a suitable first stage because persistent forces are likely to shape both
the settlement of migrants and FDI, inducing a correlation between At−1
o,d and εo,d . Therefore an
IV strategy following Card (2001), using variations in Iot and At−1
o,d as instruments, would not be
suitable in our setting.
We address this challenge by noting that equation (2) is recursive, both because ancestry
is passed down from generation to generation (the first At−1
o,d term) and because newly arrived
migrants’ decision of where to settle depends on where past migrants have settled (the second
At−1
o,d term). Given that our data cover the vast majority of migration to the United States (more
than 70 million immigrants, including the entire first and second generation of immigrants alive
13

1880“−1”
in 1880), we assume the initial condition Ao,d
= 0, ∀ (o, d) for simplicity. Solving equation

(2) recursively, we get,
A2010
o,d

=

2010 
X

at + ao,t + ad,t +

It
ct Iot dt

t=1880

I

+

t
νo,d

 2010
Y

(bs + do,s Ios ),

(3)

s=t+1

where the constant do,s only contains information on total migrations from o in previous periods.
Equation (3) highlights that present-day ancestry is the result of a sequence of migration waves
and their subsequent cumulative effect. In each period t, the interaction of the contemporaneous
push factor (Iot ) and economic pull factor (Idt /I t ) determines the flow of migration from o to d.
Demographic factors (the bs ’s) and the recursive factor (the do,s ’s) then amplify these initial waves
of migrants, adding higher-order combinations of the same interactions. This simple specification
is flexible, allowing for cases in which no migrants from a given origin country exist at some initial
period of time. In the absence of a recursive factor, dt = 0, the higher-order terms drop out and
ancestry only depends on the contemporaneous interactions of the push and pull factors.
This specification suggests plausibly exogenous variation in Iot (Idt /I t ) would allow the cont
struction of an instrument for A2010
o,d . By interacting a push factor, Io , which is not specific to

destination d, but common to all destinations in the United States, and a pull factor, Idt /I t , which
is not specific to country o but to migrants from all countries, we rule out most plausible sources
t
is mechanically
of endogeneity. However, our exclusion restriction could still be violated since Io,d

a component of Iot , Idt and I t and potentially related to εo,d . This would be a concern if at some
t
a large
point in time, migrants from o to d represent a large fraction of all migrants from o (Io,d
t
fraction of Iot ), or a large fraction of all migrants to d (Io,d
a large fraction of Idt ), or if migrants

from other origins with unobserved similarities to o represent a large fraction of all migrants.
To address these concerns, we exclude from the push factor migrants from o going to all
destinations in d’s census region, and from the economic pull factor, migrants from all origins in
t
, the migrants from o who settle in destinations
the same continent as o. We replace Iot by Io,−r(d)
t
t
not in the same census region as d; and Idt /I t by I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
, the fraction of migrants not coming

from origins in the same continent as o who settle in county d. −r (d) stands for all destinations
outside of d’s census region, and −c (o) stands for all origins outside of o’s continent.
It

t
Replacing the Iot Idt terms by Io,−r(d)

A2010
o,d

= δ o + δd +

t
I−c(o),d
t
I−c(o)

in (3), our first-stage specification is thus

2000
X

t
I−c(o),d
t
αt Io,−r(d) t
I−c(o)
t=1880

14

+

5
X
n=1

0
δn P Cn + Xo,d
γ + ηo,d ,

(4)

where

P5

n=1 δn P Cn

stands for the first five principal components summarizing the information

s
t
contained in the 758 higher-order terms Io,−r(d)
∙ ∙ ∙ Io,−r(d)

t
I−c(o),d
t
I−c(o)

, ∀t < s ≤ 2010. We prefer

summarizing the higher-order interactions in (3) as principle components to avoid an excessive
number of highly co-linear instruments. 24 Our results are robust to adding those terms or not.
Our key identifying assumption is
Cov

t
Io,−r(d)

t
I−c(o),d
t
I−c(o)

, εo,d |controls

!

= 0.

(5)

It requires that any confounding factors that make a given destination more attractive for both
migration and FDI from a given origin country do not simultaneously affect the interaction of
the settlement of migrants from other continents with the total number of migrants arriving from
the same origin but settling in a different census region.
To further relax this assumption, most of our specifications also control for interactions of
fixed effects that are symmetric to the construction of our instruments: the interaction between
destination and continent-of-origin fixed effects (δd ×δc(o) ) and the interaction between origin and
destination-census-region fixed effects (δo ×δr(d) ). In these regressions we only use variation across
origin countries from the same continent, holding the destination constant, and variation across

destinations within the same census region, holding the origin constant. These specifications are,
by construction, robust to any confounding factors that are origin-census region or continentdestination specific. The main remaining challenge to our approach is that an unobserved, origindestination specific, factor correlated with FDI today may have induced migrants from that origin
to disproportionately migrate to at least two destinations in two different census regions at the
same time as it caused another group of migrants, large enough to sway averages, from another
continent to disproportionately migrate to the same destinations across census regions. We show
robustness to this and other concerns in section 3.4 with a series of falsification exercises, placebo
treatments, and alternative leave-out specifications.

3.2

The First-Stage Relationship

Table 2 shows our basic first-stage regressions, estimates of equation (4). Column 1 is the most
parsimonious specification regressing our measure of ancestry on origin and destination fixed
Principal component analysis (eigenvalue decomposition) is simply a means for compactly summarizing the
variation contained in the 758 higher-order terms. In our standard specification, the first five components summarize 99.99% of the variation, so that the explained variation in the first stage (4) is almost identical to that
using the full set of 758 higher-order terms. To the extent that the higher order terms are valid instruments, the
first five principal components are valid instruments as well.
24

15

t
t
t
effects and the nine simple interaction terms {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t . To facilitate the interpre-

tation of the results, we sequentially orthogonalize each of the terms with respect to the interac-

1900
1900
1900
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)
tion terms from the previous censuses. For example, the coefficient marked Io,−r(d)
1900
1900
1900
shows the effect of the residual obtained from a regression of Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
) on the same

interaction in 1880, the coefficient marked 1910 shows the effect of the residual from a regression
of the 1910 interaction on the interactions from the previous two censuses, and so on. Although

this procedure has no effect on the fit and predictive power of the first stage as a whole, we find
it useful because it allows us to interpret each coefficient as the marginal effect of the innovation
in the migration pattern of the period reported with respect to the previous periods.
All nine coefficients shown in column 1 are positive, and seven are statistically significant
at the 1% level. Figure 3 depicts the coefficients graphically. The first main insight from this
figure is that even our earliest (pre-1880) snapshot of the cross-sectional variation in economic
attractiveness to new migrants has left its imprint on the present-day ancestry composition of
US counties: destinations relatively more attractive to the typical migrants pre-1880 continue
to the present day to house significantly larger numbers of residents of the ethnic groups that
arrived in large numbers pre-1880. The overall pattern of coefficients suggests a hump-shape,
where very recent waves of migrants have a smaller impact on current ancestry than migrations
a few decades back, but the effect of past migrations eventually fades after about one century
(consistent with a model where each immigrant passes her ancestry to more than one offspring
and memories of distant ancestries fade over time). An exception to the general pattern is the
coefficient for 1920-30, which is smaller and insignificant. A likely explanation is the Great
Depression, which induced large reverse migrations from the United States of recently arrived
migrants, demonstrating our model is less well suited for periods with negative net migration.
Taken together, the nine simple interactions incrementally increase the R2 of the regression
by 4 percentage points and explain about 9% of the variation in ancestry not explained by
origin and destination fixed effects. Column 2 adds controls for distance and latitude difference.
Columns 3 and 4 add destination × continent-of-origin fixed effects and origin × destinationcensus-region fixed effects, respectively. Columns 1-4 estimate equation ( 4) under the restriction
that the recursive factor is irrelevant (dt = 0 in (2)). Columns 5-9 relax this restriction and add
the principal components of the higher-order interaction terms.
Our standard specification in column 5 includes these additional terms which ensure a strong
first stage. However, none of our core results depend on this choice. The Kleibergen-Papp Wald
rk-statistic against the null of weak identification is 162.2, well above the Stock and Yogo critical

16

values.25 Column 6 includes third-order polynomials in the distance and latitude difference
between o and d. Columns 7 through 9 successively show variations of our instrumentation
strategy: column 7 includes migration data from the 2005-2010 ACS survey, column 8 drops
migration prior to 1880, and column 9 estimates our standard specification in levels rather than
logs. Throughout all of these variations, we can comfortably reject the null that our instruments
are jointly irrelevant in the first stage.
Figure 4 illustrates our first-stage identification using two specific examples: That of migrations from Germany, with a migration peak in the pre-1900 period (corresponding to the failed
1848 revolution and the consolidation of the German empire under Prussian control), and that
of Italy, with a migration peak in the 1900-30 period (triggered by the end of feudalism and
demographic pressures, and ending with Mussolini’s anti-emigration policies). The top-left part
shows the relative attractiveness of US destinations for pre-1900 migrants, when German migrations to the United States peaked, where we exclude migrations from Europe – analogously to
our regression specification. At that time, most non-European migrants settled in the Midwest.
We expect most German migrants from this initial wave to have settled in the Midwest. The
top-right part shows the distribution of US residents with German ancestry in 2010, with disproportionately many in the Midwest. The bottom-left part shows the relative attractiveness of
US destinations for non-European migrants during the 1900-30 period, when Italian migrations
to the United States peaked. At that time, the preferred destination for migrants had shifted to
the West and South. We expect many Italians migrants to have settled in the West and South.
The bottom-right part shows the distribution of Italian descendants in 2010, with relatively large
populations in the West and South.

3.3

Instrumental Variables Results

In our IV estimation, we explicitly test the hypothesis that an increase in the number of descendants from a given origin increases the probability that at least one local firm engages in FDI
with that country. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if either a parent foreign
firm from origin country o owns a US subsidiary in destination US county d (inward FDI), or if a
US parent in d owns a foreign subsidiary in o (outward FDI). We present our results for two-way
FDI, because the results for inward and outward FDI separately are essentially identical. We
separate results only when the difference is relevant or important for interpretation (e.g. for FDI
in final goods sectors versus intermediate goods sectors in section 4).
The Hansen J test statistic is 15.891 with a p-value of 0.255. We thus fail to reject the null that our instruments
are uncorrelated with the error term and correctly excluded from the second-stage regression.
25

17

In column 1 of Table 3, we estimate equation (1) while instrumenting (the log of) ancestry
t
t
t
in 2010 with the simple interaction terms {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t and controlling for origin and

destination fixed effects, distance, and latitude difference. The coefficient estimate on ancestry
is 0.231 (s.e.=0.023), statistically significant at the 1% level. The coefficient on distance is not
statistically distinguishable from zero, perhaps reflecting the fact that US counties do not differ
much in their distance to most foreign countries, and that these smaller differences are irrelevant

once we control for the effect of the distance between the United States as a whole and the
country in question (absorbed in the country fixed effect). By contrast, the absolute difference
in latitude is positive and significant, showing that, all else being equal, firms tend to engage
in FDI with origin countries that are climatically different from their own location. Appendix
Figure 1 presents the corresponding reduced form results graphically. All nine coefficients are
greater than zero, and seven of them are statistically significant at the 5% level. Destinations
that received an (exogenous) increase in the number of migrants from a given origin in any of
the nine consecutive waves of immigration thus tend to have a significantly higher probability
of engaging in FDI with these origin countries today. In column 2 of Table 3, we add the first
five principal components of the higher-order interactions to our set of instruments, resulting in
a slight fall in the coefficient of interest to 0.190 (s.e.=0.024).
Column 3 shows our standard specification. The estimate, 0.187 (s.e.=0.024), implies that
doubling the number of residents with ancestry from a given origin relative to the sample mean
(from 316 to 632) increases by 4 percentage points the probability that at least one firm engages in
FDI with that origin. 26 This specification includes destination × continent-of-origin fixed effects
and origin × destination-census-region fixed effects. For a given origin country, this demanding

specification uses only variation across different destinations within the same census region while

controlling for the fact that each destination may have a high or low idiosyncratic propensity
to interact with the continent containing the origin country, and symmetrically for destinations.
Reassuringly, adding these 17,460 fixed effects has almost no effect on our coefficient of interest
(0.187, s.e.=0.024 versus 0.190, s.e.=0.024). Comparing this estimate with the same column in
panel B shows that it is about 25% larger than the corresponding OLS coefficient. The endogenous assignment of migrants to destinations within the United States thus appears to induce a
downward bias in the OLS coefficient, consistent with a simple extension of the Heckscher-Ohlin
model: Migrations tend to be driven by differences in factor endowments (creating differences in
26
Using β̂ = 0.187 from column 3 in Table 3 in equation
(1), we 
have: 1 [F DIo,d > 0|Ancestryo.d = 632] −

632
316
1 [F DIo,d > 0|Ancestryo.d = 316] = 0.187 ln 1 + 1000
− ln 1 + 1000
≈ 0.0402. An IV probit estimate of the
same specification yields a marginal effect of Log Ancestry 2010 on Pr [F DI > 0] of 0.104 (s.e.=0.037).

18

wages between origin country and destination county), while FDI flows are driven by similarities
in factor endowments (as firms use FDI to export their technology to countries with a similar
mix of factor endowments).
Another useful way to gauge the relative importance of ancestry is its partial R2 relative to
the controls included in the specification. Taken together, the standard gravity terms, that is,
the origin and destination fixed effects, distance, and latitude difference, explain 20.3% of the
variation in the FDI Dummy. Adding ancestry to these variables in a simple OLS specification
(shown in panel B) raises the R2 by 9 percentage points, accounting for about about half as
much variation as the combined explanatory power of the economic fundamentals reflected in
the gravity terms (although this effect is not necessarily causal). 27
The remaining columns of Table 3 probe the robustness of this result. The coefficient estimate remains remarkably stable and highly statistically significant across specifications. Column
4 adds a third-degree polynomial in distance and latitude difference to capture a potentially
non-linear effect of distance; column 5 adds an interaction term for the contemporaneous 2010
migrations in the first stage (as in column 7 of Table 2); and column 6 adds a more stringent set
of origin×destination-state fixed effects, exploiting only variation within US states. All of these
variations leave our coefficient of interest virtually unchanged.

3.4

The Communist Natural Experiment and Robustness

The main potential challenge to our approach is that, despite our efforts, confounding factors that
make a given destination more attractive for both migration and FDI from a given origin country
may still, in some complicated way, be correlated with our instruments, although they only use
information about migrations from other continents and to other census regions. In this section,
we address this challenge using a natural experiment and a set of alternative instrumentation
strategies. We then further corroborate our identifying assumption and demonstrate that our
results are robust to a wide number of variations in our empirical approach.
Communist Natural Experiment. We begin by combining our instrumental variables
with a natural experiment that allows us to focus on changes in FDI and changes in ancestry,
similar to a difference-in-difference approach: The periods of economic isolation between the
United States and communist countries during parts of the 20th century. These periods are
Instead adding our nine simple interactions to the standard gravity terms, thus running the most parsimonious
reduced form, raises the R2 by 1.5 percentage points, and adding them in combination with the five principal
components raises the R2 by 2 percentage points. These numbers are a lower bound on the importance of common
ancestry for FDI, since it only accounts for the part of the causal effect of ancestry which is picked out by our
instruments.
27

19

1918-90 for the Soviet Union, 1945-80 for China, 1975-96 for Vietnam, and 1945-89 for Eastern
Europe (the non-Soviet members of the Warsaw pact). They provide a useful experiment since
practically no FDI existed between the United States and each of these countries at the end
of each of these periods of isolation, 28 and defectors from communist countries arriving in the
United States during the period of isolation would plausibly not have expected to be able to
conduct FDI or otherwise interact economically with their countries of origin.
Table 4 shows estimates of (1) for each of these countries or sets of countries, using as excluded
instruments only migration waves that occurred during the period of isolation. This specification
offers two advantages. First, we can confidently assume the prospect of FDI, outlawed for political
reasons, did not drive migrations during those periods (ruling out reverse causality). Second, the
specification is similar to a difference-in-difference: It measures how cross-sectional variations in
ancestry driven only by the inflow of migrants over a period of exclusion explain changes in FDI,
from zero during the exclusion period to its current level in 2014. For all countries, we find a large
causal impact of ancestry on FDI: places that (for exogenous reasons) received more defectors
from Communism are more likely to take advantage of economic opportunities arising in these
countries after the period of isolation. The estimated coefficients are statistically significant for
the Soviet Union, China, and Eastern Europe. The coefficient is not statistically significant
for Vietnam, most likely because most migration from Vietnam occurred before or after the
relatively short 20 year period of isolation. Pooling across all former Communist countries, we
find a coefficient very close to that of our standard specification in Table 3 (0.234, s.e.=0.098).
The fact that we find similar results in these more restrictive natural experiments suggests that
reverse causality does not drive our baseline results and our exclusion restriction is likely valid.
Alternative Instruments. The remaining challenge to our approach is that a common
unobserved characteristic of destinations in two different census regions, correlated with FDI
today, may still have disproportionately caused large groups of migrants from two origins on two
different continents to simultaneously migrate to the same destinations across census regions. As
a simple way of addressing this concern, we now modify the construction of our instruments to
exclude migrations from countries that tended to push migrants towards the United States at
the same time as a given origin, thus excluding any variation stemming from such simultaneity
in the timing of the push factor.
To that end, we calculate for each pair of origin countries the correlation in the aggregate flow
of emigration to the US over time. When calculating the pull factor for origin country o at time
28

See the UNCTAD time series for the stock of FDI at www.unctadstat.unctad.org.

20

t in destination d, we then exclude all migrations to d at t from origin countries whose aggregate
flow of migrations is correlated with o’s at the 5% significance level. Panel A of Table 5 shows the
t
t
t
(I−s(o),d
/I−s(o)
)}. It is 0.197
coefficient estimate using this alternative set of instruments, {Io,−r(d)

(s.e.=0.020), and thus almost identical to our standard specification in column Table 3, again
bolstering our confidence that no spurious correlations of unobserved factors across continents
and census regions are driving our results.
The following row in the same panel also shows an additional variation of our instrument
where we remove migrants from all adjacent states, rather than the surrounding census region,
t
t
t
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
). Again the coefficient estimate remains
when calculating the pull factor as Io,−adj(d)

stable at 0.200 (s.e.=0.023). Appendix Table 7 shows additional reasonable variations of our
leave-out categories, again yielding results very similar to those in Table 3.
In Panel B of Table 5 we present results using subsets of our instruments. The first row uses
as instruments only the simple interactions from the first half of the time period covered by our
migration data (1880-1930), the second row only from the second half (1970-2010). The coefficient
of interest again remains stable at 0.209 (s.e.=0.037) and 0.175 (s.e.=0.021), respectively. The
third row excludes migrations from the first census (1880) from the set of our instruments, as
these might be more related to stocks than flows. The estimate of the coefficient of interest
remains exactly equal to the coefficient estimate in our standard specification (column 3) in
Table 3. Appendix Table 8 replicates our results using data on FDI from 2007 rather than 2014
and data on ancestry from 2000 rather than 2010, again with little effect on our results. We
conclude that our results are not driven by specific vintages of migrations and that variations in
ancestry have similar effects, regardless of whether they were induced by migrations pre or post
World War II.
Ancestry and Immigration. According to our reduced-form model of migration, the
number of migrants arriving at a given destination is a function of the economic attractiveness
of the destination at the time (measured by the interaction of our pull and push factors) and the
stock of descendants of migrants from the same origin (the recursive factor). To provide direct

evidence these two forces are at work (the push × pull and recursive factors), we estimate the

specification

t
Io,d

= δo + δd + θ

t
I−c(o),d
t
Io,−r(d) t
I−c(o)

0
+ λAt−1
o,d + Xo,d γ + ϑo,d

(6)

for t = 2000, 1990 (the census years for which we have information on lagged ancestry), where
we again instrument for At−1
o,d using (4).
t
in levels, and gives a coefficient on
Column 1 of Table 6 estimates (6) with immigration Io,d

21

the interaction of the push and pull factors close to 1. This finding is what we would expect if
newly arrived migrants were distributed uniformly on average. Columns 2 and 3 estimate ( 6) in
logs for two time periods, 1990 and 2000. Across all specifications, both the coefficient on the
push × pull interaction and on lagged ancestry are positive and significant predictors of current
migrations.

Functional Form Exploration. In our main specification, we measure our ancestry variable, Ato,d , as the log of one plus the number of residents with foreign ancestry, measured in
thousands. Our results are robust to a wide range of alternative functional form specifications.
In Appendix Table 9, we offer a formal test to justify our choice of functional form A2010
o,d =

1
2010
Ancestryo,d
ln 1 + 1000
. To that end, we perform a non-linear least squares estimation of

2010
0
+ Xo,d
1 [F DIo,d > 0] = δo + δd + β ln 1 + πAncestryo,d
γ + εo,d ,

(7)

again including the same covariates as in our simple specification from column 2 in Table 3. We
find a point estimate of β = 0.1683 and π = 0.0010. This finding forms the basis for our choice of
functional form applied throughout the paper. This functional form is convenient because it offers
a compact way to model the non-linear impact of ancestry. For small ancestry ( Ancestryo,d 

1000), the function ln (1 + Ancestryo,t /1000) is approximately linear in Ancestryo,d . For large

ancestry (Ancestryo,d  1000), it is concave and behaves approximatively like ln(Ancestryo,d ).
So for a small number of residents with foreign ancestry, the coefficient β in (1) measures the
proportional impact of ancestry on the extensive margin of FDI; for a large number of residents
with foreign ancestry, β is the elasticity of the extensive margin of FDI with respect to ancestry.
Appendix Figure 2 presents visual evidence the effect of ancestry on FDI is concave. We plot
the average number of FDI links across centiles of the distribution of ancestry. The larger the
number of residents with ancestry from country o in county d, the more likely an FDI link exists
between them, and this positive effect of ancestry on FDI is highly concave.
In Appendix Table 10, we further explore the robustness of our results to alternative functional
forms and replicate our results using measures of ancestry from the, 1980, 1990 and 2000 censuses,
instead of 2010.
Appendix Table 11 shows our main results on the impact of ancestry on both the extensive
and intensive margins of FDI is robust to varying the cutoff for ownership at which we consider
a foreign firm to be a subsidiary or parent (from 5% to 50%). Further we replicate our results
using a different level of geographic aggregation, Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs) instead
of US counties, and find similar estimates.
22

Standard Errors. Appendix Table 12 shows our standard specification from column 3 of
Table 3 using alternative standard errors. It reports robust standard errors; standard errors
clustered by origin, destination, state, continent, and state-country cells. Among all these simple analytic standard errors, clustering by origin, as we do throughout the paper, is the most
conservative choice. Doing so allows for arbitrary correlation in the error term across multiple
destinations for a given origin, including for spatial correlation of errors. The specification we
use throughout the paper thus allows for more flexible patterns of spatial correlation than for
example the standard error correction as proposed by Conley (1999).
A possible concern is that errors may still be correlated across origin countries. However, standard errors designed to adjust for such correlations (clustering by county or state) are narrower,
suggesting that any such patterns in the error structure are – if they were present – absorbed
by the rich set of fixed effects and controls contained in our standard specification. Consistent
with this view, the table also shows that standard errors double clustered at county-plus-country
and state-plus-country level, as well as various block-bootstrapped standard errors are either
narrower or only very marginally wider than those in our standard specification.
The conclusion that our results are robust to alternative standard error specifications carries
over to the other main results of our paper. In Appendix Table 13 we show how alternative
standard error specifications affect the results on the communist natural experiment, the intensive
margin of FDI, and the effect of ancestry on immigration. For each of these results our inference
remains unchanged when we cluster standard errors at the county, state, county-plus-country or
state-plus-country level.
An alternative approach to detecting any tendency to over-reject the null is to reassign the
“treatment” to a different set of outcome observations, in the spirit of Fisher’s randomization
inference procedure. We assign the interaction between push and pull factors for country o
to randomly selected other countries and calculate the t-statistic on the coefficient of interest.
Reassuringly, across 1000 random assignments, the t-statistic rejects the null of no treatment
effect in favour of the alternative of a positive treatment effect in only 2.7% of the cases.
Inward and outward FDI. We estimate our standard specification from column 3 of Table
3 separately for inward FDI, where the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if at least one
firm in US county d is a subsidiary of a parent in foreign country o, and for outward FDI,
where the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if at least one firm in US county d is the
parent of a subsidiary in foreign country o. The coefficients for both outward and inward FDI
are positive, statistically significant, and close to our baseline estimates. We find a somewhat
stronger impact of ancestry on outward FDI, βout ≈ 0.2, than on inward FDI, βin ≈ 0.15,
23

although both coefficients are not statistically distinguishable from each other.
Placebo Test. Our next robustness check uses a placebo treatment to assess whether our
instrument reliably isolates push factors that are specific only to one country, or is correlated
with omitted variables that affect FDI with other countries in a systematic fashion.
The results are presented in Appendix Table 14. In panel A, we assign the interaction between
push and pull factors for a given origin to a quasi-randomly selected other country: Its nearest
neighbor in alphabetic order. To further check whether the same push factors might affect two
countries in different continents, panel B assigns the interaction between push and pull factors
for a given country to its nearest neighbor in alphabetic order in a different continent. Across all
specifications, our placebo treatment is always statistically insignificant, and the point estimates
are near zero. We conclude from this placebo test that our instrument is not picking up any
artificial correlation (positive or negative) between the push factors for different countries.
Robustness in Sub-Samples & Heterogeneous Effects. Appendix Table 15 shows
results from separate regressions for the five largest origins (by number of descendants, panel A),
destinations (in total number of foreign ancestry, panel B), and for six individual sector groups
(panel C), flexibly applying our instruments to individual origins, destination, and sectors. The
impact of ancestry on FDI is similar across these sixteen specifications, bolstering our confidence
that no outliers are driving our results. For example, the effect is 0.216 (s.e.=0.009) for Germany,
0.271 (s.e.=0.009) for Britain, and 0.165 (s.e.=0.024) for the manufacturing sector.
Figure 5 shows the heterogeneity of the effect of ancestry on FDI more broadly by running
separate regressions for 112 origin countries (Panel A), the 100 largest US counties (Panel B), and
20 2-digit NAICS sectors (Panel C). 29 Each figure is a funnel plot of the country/country/sectorspecific coefficients on ancestry against the reciprocal of their standard errors, where the circles
reflect the relative shares in ancestry, US population and firms, respectively. The coefficients are
significant at the 5% level for 84 out of 112 countries, 99 out of 100 counties, and 18 out of 20
sectors. This further demonstrates that our results are not driven by any specific subsample or
outliers. These results also suggest that there is some heterogeneity in the size of the effect. We
will exploit this heterogeneity when probing the mechanisms linking Ancestry to FDI.

3.5

The Intensive Margin of FDI

So far, we have studied the impact of ancestry on the extensive margin of FDI, the probability
that at least one firm engages in FDI. We now turn to the impact of ancestry on the intensive
29

Appendix Tables 16 and 17 show the results from separate regressions for all countries and sectors, respectively.

24

margin of FDI: Conditional on being positive, how large are FDI flows for a given size of the
local population with a given foreign ancestry?
In Table 7, we estimate
0
ln F DIo,d = δo + δd + κA2010
o,d + Xo,d γ + ζo,d .

(8)

where F DIo,d corresponds to various measures of the volume of FDI between o and d and
where we instrument A2010
o,d with the same first-stage equation (4) as earlier. Because of the log
specification, cases of zero FDI will automatically be dropped from our sample. This creates a
selection problem, as counties with non-zero FDI are likely to be systematically different from
those with zero FDI. To correct for this potential selection bias, we implement a simple Heckman
(1979) correction. We first estimate an IV probit regression for the extensive margin of FDI

0
pr
,
ρo,d = Pr (F DIo,d > 0|observables) = Φ δopr + δdpr + β pr A2010
o,d + Xo,d γ

(9)

−1
(ρ̂o,d ),
where A2010
o,d is again instrumented as in equation (4). We extract an estimate for ẑo,d = Φ

the predicted latent variable that determines non-zero FDI. We then include an inverse Mills ratio
term, μ̂o,d = ϕ (ẑo,d ) /Φ (ẑo,d ), within our set Xo,d of controls in the intensive margin equation
(8), where ϕ and Φ denote respectively the p.d.f. and c.d.f. of the normal distribution. This
correction for selection, the extensive margin of FDI, is similar to the procedure in Helpman
et al. (2008) for international trade. 30
We use various measures for the volume of FDI. In panel A of Table 7, we count the total
number of FDI relationships, that is, the sum of the number of firms in d which are either parent
or subsidiary of a firm in o and the number of firms in o which are parent or subsidiary of a firm
in d. In panel B, we only count the number of firms in d which are a subsidiary of a firm in
o, a measure of inward FDI. In panel C, we measure the total local employment in county d at
We use the Heckman (1979) correction suggested by Helpman et al. (2008) rather than the Poisson pseudomaximum likelihood method of Silva and Tenreyro (2006) for its more explicit theoretical underpinning, and
because running a PPML estimation with a very large number of fixed effects is impractical. Note that in the
absence of a plausible excluded instrument for the selection equation, our Heckman (1979) correction is identified
primarily off of the functional form of the inverse Mills ratio. Note also that Helpman et al. (2008) correct for both
the selected presence of zeros, as well as for the unobserved selection of which firm engages in foreign activities,
export in their case. We only correct for the presence of zeros, not for the selection of firms, for three reasons.
First, we are not interested in how ancestry affects the volume of FDI of one individual firm but rather in how
ancestry affects the total volume of FDI between a US county and a foreign country, unlike Helpman et al. (2008)
who are interested in how various covariates affect the export of one individual firm. Second, we directly use
firm-level data, so that we do not require an explicit correction for firm selection. Finally, at the very fine level
of geographic disaggregation we use – US counties versus entire countries in Helpman et al. (2008) – the simple
structural model they use to motivate their correction for firm selection is unlikely to be appropriate.
30

25

subsidiaries of firms in o, giving us a measure of the impact of inward FDI on local employment.
Across all specifications, we find a positive impact of ancestry on the volume of FDI. The
effect of ancestry on the intensive margin of FDI, the coefficient κ in equation (8), is large
and significant across most specifications. Furthermore, the size of these effects is economically
significant. For example, doubling the number of residents in county d who report ancestry from
country o (from the mean, 316, to 632) increases the number of FDI relationships by 6.5% and
local employment at subsidiaries of foreign firms by 7.3%. 31
With all measures of the volume of FDI, correcting for selection using our Heckman type
procedure leads to a lower estimated impact of ancestry on the volume of FDI (column 4). 32 In
Panel C the impact of ancestry becomes insignificant but remains positive. Overall, the results
in this panel are likely prone to measurement error as employment data is missing for many US
subsidiaries. However when we re-run the same specification for employment at subsidiaries in
the origin (where we have data for half of all firms) the coefficient estimates are very similar, for
example, (0.303, s.e.=0.194) in column 3.
Figure 6 illustrates these results graphically by estimating equation (8) using data only for
Germany and Britain (top parts), and LA and Cook counties (bottom parts). Each graph shows
a conditional scatterplot of the number of subsidiaries as a function of ancestry. They all show
a positive and significant slope close to the corresponding full-sample estimate in column 3 of
Table 7 and no obvious outliers.
The conclusion from Table 7 is that foreign ancestry affects both the extensive and intensive
margins of FDI. More descendants of foreign migrants increases the likelihood that local firms
engage in FDI, the number of firms that do so, and the local employment by foreign-owned firms.

3.6

Quantifying the Effect of Ancestry on FDI

Having estimated the impact of ancestry on FDI, we illustrate the quantitative implications
of our findings using two thought experiments. First, we estimate how investment relations
between US counties and China might have evolved if Chinese migrants had not been effectively
barred from entering the United States between 1882 and 1965. Second, we report how FDI
relationships between Los Angeles and the world might have evolved if Los Angeles had had an
Employment

[Ancestry

=2×316]

o,d
Using κ̂ = 0.326 in panel C, column 3 of Table 7 in equation (8), we have: Employmento,do,d [Ancestry
−1 =
o,d =316]


2×316
316
− 1 ≈ 0.073.
exp 0.326 ln 1 + 1000 − ln 1 + 1000
32
The number of interacted fixed effects in column 2 is too large for a probit estimation of the extensive margin
of FDI to be computationally feasible. Moreover, Greene et al. (2002) show that that probit regressions tend
to give biased estimates in the presence of a large number of fixed effects. For both reasons, in column 4, we
implement the Heckman correction in the simple specification with fixed effects only for origins and destinations.

31

26

influx of migrants in the 1800s similar to that resulting from the San Francisco Gold Rush. These
thought experiments are not meant as formal counterfactuals, but merely as illustrations of the
magnitude of the long-term effect of immigration policies on FDI implied by our estimates.
The Effect of Chinese Exclusion. The US government passed the Chinese Exclusion Act
into law in 1882 in response to increased immigration from China, essentially closing the United
States to legal immigration of laborers from China. In 1943, it was replaced by the Magnuson
Act, which allocated a quota of 105 immigrants per year from China, and was in effect until
1965, when the removal of the quota system allowed for large-scale Chinese immigration for the
first time. We refer to the entire period from 1882 through to 1965 as the period of “Chinese
Exclusion.” How different would the ancestry composition and FDI of US counties be today had
it not been for Chinese Exclusion?
To answer this question we require an estimate for the impact of Chinese exclusion on the
number of immigrants from China. We use our own data to derive a rough estimate. This is by
no means a structural estimate, only a rough quantification. We aggregate our immigration data
t
= δt,r + δo − ξ ∙
at the time × census-region × origin level and run a regression of the form Io,r
t
t
+ νt,o,r , where DChina
is a dummy equal to 1 if o = China and t ∈ [1882, 1965], and δt,r
DChina

and δo are time×census region and origin fixed effects, respectively. The coefficient ξ can then
be interpreted as the average negative impact of the Chinese Exclusion Act on immigration from
ˆ we then calculate a hypothetical time path of immigration in
China. Denoting its estimate as ξ,
t
t
t
≡ Io,r
+ ξˆ ∙ DChina
. It suggests that the United States
the absence of Chinese exclusion as I˜o,r

would have received 1.8 million additional Chinese immigrants during the period of exclusion.

Given this hypothetical time path of immigration we can then use our estimates from Table

 It
P
t
t
˜
, where α̂t are the
2 to predict the change in ancestry as dAo,d ≡ t α̂t ∙ Io,−r(d) − Io,−r(d) I−c(o),d
t
−c(o)

estimated first-stage coefficients. The hypothetical change of FDI relations with China at the

county level is d Pr [F DIo,d > 0] ≡ β̂ ∙ dAo,d , where β̂ is the estimated second-stage coefficient in
a specification as in column 3 in Table 3, excluding the principal components to be consistent
with the above described methodology to predict hypothetical levels of ancestry. 33
These calculations suggest that the increase in Chinese migration would have been highly
unequally distributed, translating into heterogenous changes in the incidence of FDI relationships
with China. The map in Figure 7 depicts the expected change in the probability of positive FDI
with China, d Pr [F DIChina,d > 0]. The absence of Chinese exclusion would have resulted in
substantially stronger FDI ties with the Northeast, the Midwest and the Southwest. The bar
Dropping the principal components from this specification has only a negligible effect on the coefficient of
interest which rises only sightly from 0.187 (s.e.=0.024) to 0.188 (s.e.=0.023).
33

27

graph depicts the fraction of counties within a state which have positive FDI with China in
2014, and the predicted change in this measure of the extensive margin of FDI linkages, i.e. the
unweighted average of d Pr [F DIChina,d > 0] across counties within the state. To save space, the
graph shows only the ten states with the highest predicted change. For example, we predict that
in the absence of Chinese exclusion, the proportion of counties with an FDI link to China would
have doubled in New York, and increased by 60% in Massachusetts and Illinois.
Los Angeles Gold Rush. To similarly gauge the magnitude of the estimated intensive
margin effects, we derive predictions on the intensity of FDI relationships between Los Angeles
county and the world under the hypothetical scenario that Los Angeles had experienced a Gold
Rush similar to that in San Francisco. In particular, we derive predictions on the intensity of FDI
relationships with the world if the number of immigrants pre-1880 had been fivefold the actual
number of immigrants to Los Angeles. Table 8 presents the results of this thought experiment
for the 10 foreign countries with the largest predicted change in their ancestry group in Los
Angeles in 2010. Columns 1 and 2 show the actual number of individuals of each ancestry in
Los Angeles County in 2010 and the total number of FDI links recorded in our data between Los
Angeles County and the respective origin countries. Columns 3 and 4 present the predictions
of our thought experiment based on the IV specification corresponding to column 2 of Table
7, again without the principle components as instruments. A Gold Rush in Los Angeles would
have resulted in sizeable effects on the intensity of FDI with those countries that were the source
of immigration pre-1880: The intensity of FDI between Los Angeles County and Germany and
Ireland would have increased by around 60%. Column 4 presents the predicted absolute change
in the size of the ancestry groups, based on a reduced form regression analogous to column 9
of Table 2 with Ancestry 2010 (in levels) as outcome variable, again excluding the principle
components. It suggests that the population of Irish and German descent living in Los Angeles
County today would each be counting about 60,000 more individuals.

4

Understanding the Effect of Ancestry

So far, we have documented a quantitatively large causal effect of common ancestry on FDI. We
now turn our attention to the mechanism linking ancestry to FDI. Existing research suggests that
migrations and common ancestry may affect FDI either by making the destination more “similar”
to the origin in terms of preferences and skill endowments or by generating social capital that
creates an absolute advantage for firms to operate in both the origin and destination country.
In the first category, Atkin (2010) and Bronnenberg et al. (2012) suggest that descendants
28

of migrants may share the same tastes for foods and other products as consumers in their origin
country. To the extent that these tastes persist over generations, firms that cater to those tastes
may serve both markets. Similarly, we might suspect that migrants may bring with them a
specific skill-mix or other factors abundant in their origin country, so that firms can more easily
outsource production, using the same skill-mix at home and abroad.
In the second category, common ancestry may create an absolute advantage in conducting FDI
for local firms, because social ties between populations in the origin and the destination provide
social collateral that helps to enforce contracts when the legal system of o or d is imperfect (Greif,
1993; Besley and Coate, 1995). Alternatively, migrants and descendants of migrants from a given
origin may have a privileged access to information (Varian, 1990; Stiglitz, 1990): A more intimate
knowledge of the business environment in their origin country and social ties or language skills
that provide access to information about business opportunities and practices at a lower cost.
The following section presents evidence testing auxiliary predictions of these distinct channels
through which common ancestry may be driving FDI. The collection of these results suggests
that ancestry affects FDI primarily because it creates an absolute advantage for local firms by
attenuating information frictions. Our most direct evidence in favor of this view comes from a
novel measure of information demand constructed from Google Trends data. Using this measure,
we show that common ancestry significantly increases the demand for information about the
politics and culture of the origin country, and that variation in this demand for information across
locations within the United States fully accounts for the effect of ancestry on FDI. We then further
probe the mechanism linking the flow of information to FDI and find evidence consistent with
the view that information is transmitted internationally through networks created by common
ancestry. These links appear to be long-lasting, where the presence of second and third generation
descendants of immigrants is as effective as the presence of first-generation immigrants. We also
find that descendants of migrants are significantly more likely to use the language spoken in the
origin country, suggesting that links to the origin country may be facilitated or maintained by
the inter-generational transmission of language and culture.

4.1

Channel Linking Ancestry to FDI

Panels A-C of Table 9 present evidence on the “similarities” hypothesis. Panel A shows the IV
coefficient of ancestry on FDI separately for firms producing final goods and for firms producing
intermediate inputs. 34 If common tastes were the explanation behind the positive impact of
To separate firms into final-goods producers and intermediate-goods producers, we use the upstreamness
index from Antràs et al. (2012). A sector is labelled as final goods (intermediate input) if its upstreamness index
34

29

ancestry on FDI, we would expect its impact to be stronger for final goods, for which consumers’
tastes matter directly, than for intermediate inputs, for which tastes matter little. We find on
the contrary that there is no statistical difference between final goods and intermediate input
producers; if anything, the point estimate is slightly larger for intermediate input producers than
for final goods producers. Panel B shows similar results for inward FDI only, where the local
tastes of descendants from country o may plausibly matter more.
Panel C of Table 9 shows the IV coefficients of a regression of ancestry on measures of sectoral
similarity between the origin and the destination. For each origin-destination pair, we compute
the rank and cosine correlation of the shares of employees in 127 manufacturing sectors. 35 Both
correlations increase with the similarity of the allocation of employees across sectors between the
origin and destination. If skill similarities were the explanation behind the positive impact of
ancestry on FDI, we would expect common ancestry to cause an increase in these measures. We
find, on the contrary, that ancestry has no discernible impact on sectoral similarity. This nonresult—migrations do not cause a convergence in the sectoral composition of employment—is
robust to using alternative measures of sectoral similarity, as well as alternative data sources. 36
Panel D of Table 9 examines the contract enforcement channel. If contract enforcement were
the explanation behind the positive impact of ancestry on FDI, we would expect the impact to
be stronger for countries where the quality of the local judiciary is weaker, as ethnic ties would
substitute for weak institutions. We find the opposite result in columns 1 (extensive margin)
and 2 (intensive margin), where we add the interaction of ancestry with a measure of the origin
country’s judicial quality taken from Nunn (2007) to our simple IV specification of column 2
in Table 3. The coefficients show that the effect of ancestry on FDI is significantly larger for
countries with good institutions than for countries with bad institutions, suggesting that common
ancestry and good institutions are complements rather than substitutes.
We conclude from Table 9 that the data show no evidence for the “similarities” hypothesis
and that our results are also not driven by ethnic ties substituting for poor contract enforcement.
is below (above) 2.
35
We use county and country level industry data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and the UN
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), respectively. Correlations are calculated for 2006, the year with
the largest availability of the data (28 countries). Using this smaller sample of countries, the coefficient on ancestry
in our standard specification linking ancestry to FDI is 0.348 (s.e.=0.046).
36
Results are unchanged whether we use rank or cosine correlation, or when we repeat the same exercise using
the OECD Stan country level industry data.

30

4.2

Information Demand

To directly test the remaining hypothesis that common ancestry affects FDI by reducing information frictions, we require data on the flow of information from foreign countries to US
destinations. Because such data is not readily available we construct a simple index of differential information demand using data from internet searches. 37 The Google Trends portal provides
data on the relative popularity of different search terms across 210 US metropolitan areas (“media markets” according to the Nielsen DMA definition). 38 For each search term i and US metro
area d, the portal returns an index number that is equal to the normalized share of searches
conducted in d that contain the search term i:


share(i, d)
1[#(i, d) > T ] ,
G(i, d) = 100
maxδ {share(i, δ)}
where share(i, d) is the share of searches in d that contains i and 1[#(i, d) > T ] is an indicator
function that is one if the absolute number of searches containing i in d is greater than some
threshold number (Stephens-Davidowitz and Varian, 2015; Liang, 2017).39 Thus, G(i, d) is equal
to 100 in the metro area in which the largest share of searches contain i and a positive number
smaller than 100 in all other metro areas that have a sufficient number of searches containing i.
To measure the relative demand in a given metro area for information about a given origin
country, we compile a list of the five most prominent actors, athletes, musicians, and politicians
for each origin country. We automate this process by searching for “notable [country] [category]”
and then extracting the five top suggested names from the Google Answer Box, a feature of
Google search that automatically suggests the most often clicked names associated with this
kind of query.40 We then calculate our Information Demand Index as
IDI(o, d) =

1 X X
G(i, d),
20 p
i∈q(o,p)

where q(o, p) is the set of top five names for country o in category p ∈ {actors, athletes,...}. We
We thank Jack Liang for writing his Bachelor Thesis at the University of Chicago on this topic.
For other recent studies using this data source see Da et al. (2011), Stephens-Davidowitz (2014), Kearney
and Levine (2015), and Baker and Fradkin (2016).
39
As a result of this cutoff, our index tends to assign a value of zero to small origins-destination pairs (38% of
our sample). For this reason we focus our attention on the 100 largest origin countries by 2015 population and
do not attempt to construct it for all present-day origin countries.
40
See Appenix Table 21 for the full list of search terms used for Germany and Italy as examples. Liang (2017)
shows evidence that search terms with multiple meanings (where for example two prominent politicians from two
different countries share the same name) do not impact our results, and gives a detailed account demonstrating
that the Google Answer Box generally delivers relevant search terms for each country.
37
38

31

implement this procedure for the 100 largest foreign countries by 2015 population. To facilitate
the interpretation of results, we standardize this measure to a unit standard deviation. (See
Appendix A.4 for details on our procedures.)
Panel A of Table 10 shows the results of regressions of our differential information demand
index on ancestry (instrumented as in (4)), and our standard set of controls at the metropolitan
area - country level. Column 1 documents a large causal effect of ancestry on information demand
(0.871, s.e.=0.257), where doubling the number of descendants of migrants from a given origin
relative to the mean is associated with a 0.19 standard deviation increase in our index of demand
for information about prominent actors, athletes, musicians, and politicians in that origin. 4142
Columns 2 and 3 show that this effect remains positive and statistically highly significant even
when we control for the foreign-born population, that is, the demand for information from firstgeneration immigrants from that origin, and when we condition only on ancestry in 1980 (rather
than 2010). Taken together, these results suggest that the differential interest in information
about the origin country persists among the US-born descendants of first-generation migrants.
(We will show formally below that the effect of ancestry on FDI exhibits a similar persistence over
generations and does not require a sustained inflow of new migrants from the origin country.)
The remaining columns show that this persistent interest in the origin country is not limited
to politics, but is similar across our four sub-indices for demand for information about actors,
athletes, musicians, and politicians. Common ancestry thus engenders a broad-based interest in
information about the origin country that may plausibly generate a comparative advantage for
local firms to acquire information about the origin country and vice versa.
The longevity of the effect of ancestry on differential information demand suggests that immigrants pass traits to their descendants that facilitate or encourage the exchange of information
with their origin countries, such as social ties to family or friends, or knowledge of the origin
country’s language and culture. Although data on such traits is generally hard to come by at
the required level of disaggregation, Panel B shows one additional piece of evidence from the US
census: the use of foreign languages. The table again shows systematic evidence that a larger
community in county d with ancestry from country o has a positive and significant impact on
the number of residents in d who speak o’s language at home (column 1). This effect persists
if we remove from d’s population all foreign-borns, since they ‘mechanically’ speak the foreign
language from their home country (column 2). Columns 4-6 present the results from separate


632
316
− ln 1 + 1000
= 0.19.
Following the same calculation as above we have 0.871 ln 1 + 1000
42
Complimentary evidence to ours is provided in Bailey, Cao, Kuchler, Stroebel, and Wong (2016), who find
that recent immigrations from origin country o to US county d, as well as the composition of ancestry across US
counties d, are close correlates of a measure of social ties derived from Facebook friendship links.
41

32

regressions for large non-English languages: Spanish, Arabic, Chinese and Hindi. 43 The effect of
ancestry on foreign languages spoken is positive and statistically significant for all four.

4.3

Ancestry, Information Flow, and FDI

We next ask whether these differences in information flows can account for the the link between
ancestry and FDI. We can get a superficial answer to this question by running our standard specification relating ancestry to FDI (column 2 in Table 3), while controlling for our information
demand index. We find that the coefficient on ancestry drops to close to zero and becomes statistically insignificant (-0.025, s.e.=0.028), while the coefficient on information demand remains
positive and highly statistically significant (0.078, s.e.=0.013). By contrast, similarly controlling
for sectoral similarity and the various other channels probed above has no effect on the causally
identified coefficient on ancestry (see Appendix Table 20). In this sense, our results suggest that
the effect of ancestry on FDI indeed transmits itself through the information channel. To corroborate this finding, we now probe in more detail the mechanisms through which information
transmission may generate an absolute advantage in conducting FDI.
Network effects of common ancestry. Theoretical models emphasize the role of networks in facilitating the percolation of information across international borders ( Arkolakis, 2010;
Chaney, 2014). This class of models tends to predict effects that are concave (as all the relevant
information is gradually exhausted), weaker if many people from the same or neighboring origins
live in the surrounding area (as relevant information is more likely to have already percolated),
and stronger for destinations that are more ethnically diverse (due to a hub-effect, where for
example Poland and Venezuela do not communicate directly but through a hub in New York).
We test each of these reduced-form predictions.
We have already shown that the relationship between ancestry and FDI is concave as part of
our robustness checks in section 3.4 (see Appendix Figure 2). By the same token, information
percolation on a network suggests negative spillovers from neighboring regions: If many people
with ancestry from o live in locations surrounding d, or if many people in o have an ancestry from
countries adjacent to o, it is more likely that relevant information about investment opportunities
has already reached the firm, so that the marginal impact of ancestry on FDI is mitigated. In
Table 11, panel A, column 1, we use our simple specification from column 2 in Table 3, but
add the total number of descendants of ancestry o at the state level. We are able to identify
the effect of this spillover at the state level by aggregating our instruments from equation ( 4)
Appendix Table 19 presents the regression coefficients of ancestry on foreign languages for the 50 largest
linguistic groups.
43

33

to the state level and including them as a separate set of instruments in the specification, such
that both endogenous variables are identified. The coefficient on our measure of ancestry at the
state level is -0.020 (s.e.=0.010), suggesting a negative and significant spillover. In column 2
we include a measure of the number of descendants from the closest neighboring country, and
we again find a negative and highly significant spillover effect. 44 On balance, our findings are
thus consistent with the presence of negative spillovers within co-ethnic networks, so that a large
Polish community in a given county has a lower effects on FDI with Poland if the state overall
contains a large Polish contingent, or if that county also hosts a large Czech community.
In columns 3 and 4, we repeat the same estimation for the intensive margin of FDI, but in
this much smaller sample we lack the statistical power to identify a consistent pattern.
An additional prediction of network-based models is the existence of hubs, where exceptionally
well-connected locations also mediate economic activity between distant origins that do not have
sufficiently strong direct connections to each other. If such hub-effects were at work, we would
expect the effect of ancestry on FDI to be larger in more ethnically diverse destinations. In panel
B of Table 11 we explore this possibility by studying the heterogeneity of the effect of ancestry on
FDI across US destinations, interacting ancestry with a measure of ethnic diversity (measured
as 1 minus the Herfindhal index of ancestry shares). The table shows that the coefficient on
this interaction is indeed positive and significant, both at the intensive and the extensive margin
(column 2 and 4). By contrast, we find no effect on the interaction between ancestry and the
share of the population that are of foreign descent (column 1 and 3). This suggests that the
effect in columns 2 and 4 is indeed picking up the role of ethnic diversity, and not simply the
effect of a large population share with foreign descent.
Our main conclusion from this set of results is that the patterns by which ancestry affects
FDI are consistent with the auxiliary predictions of models of network effects, where information
(or other effects of social capital) are transmitted internationally through networks created by
common ancestry.
Cost of Information Transmission. If information frictions indeed were the explanation
behind the positive impact of ancestry on FDI, we would also expect this effect to be stronger in
relationships that suffer from higher costs of information transmission. For example, we might
conjecture that information asymmetry is particularly large for distant countries or for countries
that are themselves ethnically very diverse.
We confirm this prediction in the Panel C of Table 11. In all specifications, the coefficient on
We determine the nearest adjacent country by creating country pairs, using a standard optimal non-bipartisan
matching algorithm, such that the average distance between centroids of country pairs is minimised.
44

34

the interaction between ancestry and geographic distance is positive and significant, both for the
extensive (columns 1 and 2) and intensive margins of FDI (columns 3 and 4). 45 Columns 2 and
4 also show some evidence that the effect of ancestry on FDI is larger for more ethnically diverse
origins (a higher level of ethno-linguistic fractionalization as defined by Alesina et al. (2003)).46
Trade versus FDI. Further to the point above, we may expect reducing information frictions
between an origin and a destination to have a larger impact on FDI than trade, because FDI
(by definition) requires fixed investments in the foreign country and thus better access to local
information than shipping goods abroad on a spot market. If common ancestry indeed facilitates
FDI by reducing information frictions we would thus expect this effect to be more pronounced for
FDI than trade. Table 12 tests this hypothesis, estimating the impact of ancestry separately for
FDI (panel A), exports (panel B), and imports (Panel C). Because we do not have access to trade
data at the firm level, we use instead data on trade flows between US states and foreign countries
sourced from the US Census Bureau. We again instrument for the composition of ancestry as in
equation (4), except that all variables are defined at the state, not county, level. To compare our
results to the existing literature on migrations and trade, we focus our attention on the intensive
margin, and correct for the selection bias due to zero trade using a Heckman correction. As
conjectured, the impact of ancestry on FDI at the state-level is positive, significant, and larger
than on trade, once we instrument and include both origin and destination effects (column 3). 47
In fact, the effect of ancestry on trade becomes indistinguishable from zero in our preferred
specification. Although we interpret this non-result with due caution due to the limited data
available, it contrasts with earlier findings in the literature, started by the seminal contributions
of Gould (1994) and Rauch and Trindade (2002) (using OLS), and the recent IV results of Cohen
et al. (2015) for trade with Japan, and Parsons and Vezina (2016) for trade with Vietnam, that
all find the presence of migrants facilitates exports. Our preferred specification shows no such
positive and statistically significant impact of ethnic ties (ancestry) on international trade. A
closer look at the data suggests two important features are essential in reaching this negative
conclusion: When either a formal identification is missing (OLS in column 1), or no control for
destination—US state—fixed effect is included (column 2), we erroneously find a positive and
significant estimated impact of ancestry on trade. But when both are present (column 3 panels
Once we account for this interaction, the interaction terms on genetic, linguistic, and religious distance, as
defined by Spolaore and Wacziarg (2015), are statistically insignificant, suggesting geographic distance effectively
summarizes alternative notions of distance in cultural space.
46
Results are virtually identical when we consider outward FDI by itself.
47
In unreported robustness checks, we find similar results for other years, or when restricting our analysis only
to trade in manufacturing goods, where determining the final destination (origin) of an import (export) is less
subject to measurement error, as well as for separate regressions on final goods and on intermediate inputs.
45

35

B and C), we find none.

4.4

Generational Effects

Having already shown in section 3.4 that historical migrations prior to World War II had causal
effects on FDI that persist to the present day, and that historical migrations predict future
migrations through a recursive factor, we now ask whether the effect of ancestry on FDI requires
a sustained inflow of migrants from the same origin—or if it persists even after migration from
that origin ceases. Table 13 compares the (causally identified) effect of ancestry to that of
foreign born, that is, first-generation immigrants. Column 1 replicates our standard specification
for comparison. Column 2 replaces our measure of ancestry in equation ( 1) with a measure of
foreign born from a given origin alive in 2010, instrumenting as in equation ( 4). As expected, we
obtain a positive and statistically significant coefficient on foreign born (the correlation between
the two variables is 0.59). When we simultaneously include both endogenous variables in the
specification, the coefficient on ancestry remains positive and statistically significant at the 1%
level, whereas the coefficient on foreign born in 2010 is close to zero and insignificant in the
OLS specification in column 3, the same pattern we observed for relative information demand
demand in Table 10. In the IV specification in column 4 the coefficient turns slightly negative
and marginally statistically significant. 48 We thus conclude that the presence of the descendants
of immigrants continues to predict FDI even after migration from the origin ceases.
If anything, the (marginally negative) coefficient on foreign-born suggests that the effect of
ancestry on FDI is slightly smaller for foreign-born than that of their descendants. (Because each
foreign born also increase the number of individuals with foreign ancestry, the total marginal
effect of foreign-born on FDI is still positive.) Using the number of foreign born in 1970 as a proxy
for second-generation immigrants, column 6 repeats the same procedure as column 4, comparing
the marginal effect of second-generation immigrants to that of the average descendant with
foreign ancestry. This time, the coefficient on second-generation immigrants remains positive
(albeit not significant) when we control for descendants of migrants with a foreign ancestry. 4950
Although these specifications, disentangling the marginal effects of several endogenous variables,
The Kleinbergen-Paap rk LM statistic on the excluded instruments is 18.211 with a p-value of 0.150. We are
unable to reject the null that our instruments do not induce differential variation in the two endogenous variables,
and therefore interpret any difference in the coefficient estimates with caution.
49
The Kleinbergen-Paap rk LM statistic on the excluded instruments is 29.04 with a p-value of 0.007. We
therefore have sufficient power to detect differences between the coefficient estimates on the two endogenous
variables.
50
These results continue to hold when we drop migrations from Mexico (the largest origin country in recent
decades) from the sample.
48

36

should be interpreted with caution, they suggest the effect of ancestry on FDI develops over long
periods of time, and possibly peaks with the second, but not the first generation of immigrants.
This latter finding is consistent with a set of microeconomic studies that show that only
those individuals that advance to managerial or other positions of influence successfully establish
business linkages to their origin countries (Aleksynska and Peri, 2014); and that it tends to be
the second and third generations of immigrants, that achieve such advancement ( Borjas, 2006;
Algan et al., 2010). Simply put, to transmit information instrumental for the establishment of
foreign investments, one must first have access to this kind of information and be in a position
to act on it, which tends to require having reached a sufficiently high hierarchical status within
the firm—a feat more likely to be achieved by the second than the first generation.
To conclude, we find a collage of evidence that migrations, and the distribution of ancestry that
results from it, has a positive impact on FDI primarily because it reduces information frictions
associated with foreign direct investment. We also find evidence consistent with network effects
and the inter-generational transmission of traits that facilitate the flow of information between
the origin country and the US destination. Two potential channels through which information
frictions may be attenuated are differential demand for information about the origin country and
the knowledge and use of foreign languages.

Conclusion
The economic effects of migration loom large in public debates about illegal immigration to
the U.S. and the ongoing flow of migrants to Europe from places such as Syria, Afghanistan,
and the Balkans. Much of the academic debate on the subject has focused on relatively shortterm consequences, identifying effects of immigration on local labor markets and consumer prices
(Card, 1990; Cortes, 2008). We add to this debate by showing causally identified evidence of an
effect of migrations on the propensity of firms based in the areas receiving migrants to interact
economically with the migrants’ origin countries. This effect of ancestry on FDI explains an
economically large share of the variation in patterns of FDI across US counties and states.
Our identification strategy uses 130 years of census data to isolate variation in today’s ancestry
composition of US counties that derives solely from the interaction of time-series variation in the
relative attractiveness of different destinations within the United States with the staggered timing
of factors that drove out-migration from the migrants’ countries of origin. This approach allows
us to generate four main insights.
37

First, we are able to causally identify and quantify the effect of ancestry on FDI in a setting
with a high degree of external validity while guarding against a wide range of possible confounding
factors, including unobserved origin and destination effects. We find that a doubling of a US
county’s residents with ancestry from a given foreign country relative to the mean increases by 4
percentage points the probability that at least one local firm engages in FDI with that country.
Second, the effect of ancestry on FDI is long lasting and appears to unfold over generations
rather than years, where even the earliest migrations for which we have data going back to the
19th century significantly affect the pattern of FDI today.
Third, we find a range of results that show a positive effect of ethnic diversity on FDI. The
most obvious of these findings is the strong indication of concavity in the number of descendants
of migrants from a given origin, such that a more ethnically diverse population, combining many
smaller communities from different origins, should generate more FDI than one large community
of foreign descent. Further, we find negative spillovers both within states and between migrants
from geographically proximate countries, such that a larger community of the same ethnic descent
in surrounding counties or a larger community of descent from a neighboring country decreases
the effect of ancestry on FDI. In addition, the effect of ancestry on FDI significantly increases
with the diversity of the community of residents with foreign ancestry. Ethnic diversity may be
a quantitatively important driver of FDI.
Fourth, we present direct evidence in support of the hypothesis that common ancestry affects
FDI because it reduces information frictions, but not because it generates similar consumer tastes
or factor endowments, or facilitates contract enforcement when legal institutions are poor.

References
Ager, P. and M. Brückner (2013): “Cultural divsersity and economic growth: Evidence
from the US during the age of mass migration,” European Economic Review, 64, 76–97.
Aleksynska, M. and G. Peri (2014): “Isolating the Network Effect of Immigrants on Trade,”
The World Economy, 37, 434–45.
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003):
“Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8, 155–194.
Alesina, A., J. Harnoss, and H. Rapoport (2015a): “Birthplace Diversity and Economic
Prosperity,” Working paper.
Alesina, A., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2015b): “Ethnic Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
38

Algan, Y., C. Dustmann, A. Glitz, and A. Manning (2010): “The Economic Situation
of First and Second-Generation Immigrants in France, Germany and the United Kingdom,”
The Economic Journal, 120, F4–F30.
Antràs, P., D. Chor, T. Fally, and R. Hillberry (2012): “Measuring the Upstreamness
of Production and Trade Flows,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 102,
412–416.
Arkolakis, C. (2010): “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118, 1151–99.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodr ı́guez-Clare (2012): “New Trade Models,
Same Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102, 94–130.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013): “The ”Out of Africa” Hypothesis Human Genetic Diversity,
and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 103, 1–46.
Atkin, D. (2010): “Trade, Tastes and Nutrition in India,” Yale University Economic Growth
Center Discussion Paper No. 986.
Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, J. Stroebel, and A. Wong (2016): “Measuring Social
Connectedness,” Working paper, NYU.
Baker, S. R. and A. Fradkin (2016): “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance on Job
Search: Evidence from Google Search Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics.
Bartik, T. J. (1991): Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?, no.
wbsle in Books from Upjohn Press, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Besley, T. and S. Coate (1995): “Group Lending, Repayment Incentives and Social Collateral,” Journal of Development Economics, 46, 1–18.
Bhattacharya, U. and P. Groznik (2008): “Melting Pot or Salad Bowl: Some Evidence
from US Investments Abroad,” Journal of Financial Markets, 11, 228–258.
Borjas, G. J. (1994): “The Economics of Immigration,” Journal of Economic Literature,
XXXII, 1667–1717.
——— (2003): “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
Immigration on the Labor Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1335–1374.
——— (2006): “Making it in American: Social Mobility in the Immigrant Population,” Working
Paper 12088, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bronnenberg, B. J., J.-P. H. Dub é, and M. Gentzkow (2012): “The evolution of brand
preferences: Evidence from consumer migration,” The American Economic Review, 102, 2472–
2508.
39

Burchardi, K. B. and T. A. Hassan (2013): “The Economic Impact of Social Ties: Evidence
from German Reunification,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1219–1271.
Card, D. (1990): “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 43, 245–257.
——— (2001): “Immigrant Inflows, Native outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 22–64.
Card, D. and J. Di Nardo (2000): “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?”
American Economic Review, 90, 360–367.
Carr, D. L., J. R. Markusen, and K. E. Maskus (2001): “Estimating the KnowledgeCapital Model of the Multinational Enterprise,” American Economic Review, 91, 693–708.
Chaney, T. (2014): “The network structure of international trade,” The American Economic
Review, 104, 3600–3634.
——— (2016): “Networks in International Trade,” in Oxford Handbook of the Economics of
Networks, ed. by Y. Bramoulle, A. Galleoti, and B. Rogers, Oxford University Press.
Cohen, L., U. Gurun, and C. Malloy (2015): “Resident Networks and Firm Value,” The
Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Combes, P., M. Lafourcade, and T. Mayer (2005): “The trade-creating effects of business
and social networks: Evidence from France.” Journal of International Economics, 66 (1), 1–29.
Conley, T. (1999): “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of Econometrics, 92, 1 – 45.
Cortes, P. (2008): “The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI
Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 116, pp. 381–422.
Da, Z., J. Engelberg, and P. Gao (2011): “In Search of Attention,” The Journal of Finance,
66, 1461–1499.
Daniels, R. (2002): Coming to America, HarperCollins Publishers.
Duncan, B. and S. J. Trejo (2016): “The Complexity of Immigrant Generations: Implications for Assessing the Socioeconomic Integration of Hispanics and Asians,” Working Paper
21982, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Friedberg, R. (2001): “The impact of mass migration on the Israeli labor market.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116 (4), 1373–1408.
Fuchs-Schündeln, N. and T. A. Hassan (2015): “Natural Experiments in Macroeconomics,” Working Paper 21228, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fulford, S. L., I. Petkov, and F. Schiantarelli (2015): “Does It Matter Where You
40

Came From? Ancestry Composition and Economic Performance of U.S. Counties, 1850-2010,”
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Paper No. 9060.
Garmendia, A., C. Llano, A. Minondo, and F. Requena (2012): “Networks and the
disappearance of the intranational home bias,” Economics Letters, 116, 178–182.
Goldin, C. (1994): “The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United States,
1890 to 1921,” in The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political Economy, ed.
by C. Goldin and G. D. Libecap, University of Chicago Press, 223–258.
Gould, D. M. (1994): “Immigrant links to the home country: Empirical implications for U.S.
bilateral trade flows.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 76, 302–316.
Greene, W., C. Han, and P. Schmidt (2002): “The bias of the fixed effects estimator in
nonlinear models,” Unpublished Manuscript, Stern School of Business, NYU.
Greif, A. (1993): “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
Maghribi Traders’ Coalition,” The American Economic Review, 83, 525–548.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2009): “Cultural biases in economic exchange.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1095–1131.
Head, K. and J. Ries (1998): “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from
Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 31, 47–62.
——— (2008): “FDI as an Outcome of the Market for Corporate Control: Theory and Evidence,”
Journal of International Economics, 74, 2–20.
Heckman, J. J. (1979): “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica, 47,
153–161.
Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008): “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading
Partners and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 441–487.
Holmes, T. J., E. R. McGrattan, and E. C. Prescott (2015): “Quid Pro Quo: Technology Capital Transfers for Market Access in China,” The Review of Economic Studies, 82,
1154–1193.
Javorcik, B. S., C. Ozdenc, M. Spatareanu, and N. Cristina (2011): “Migrant Networks and Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of Development Economics, 94, 231–41.
Jensen, E. B., R. Bhaskar, and M. Scopilliti (2015): “Demographic Analysis 2010:
Estimates of Coverage of the Foreign-Born Population in the American Community Survey,”
Tech. rep., U.S. Census.
Juhász, R. (2014): “Temporary Protection and Technology Adoption: Evidence from the
Napoleonic Blockade,” CEP Discussion Paper 1322, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.
41

Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35–78.
Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi (2003): “Governance Matters III: Governance Indicators for 1996–2002,” Working Paper No. 3106, World Bank.
Kearney, M. S. and P. B. Levine (2015): “Media Influences on Social Outcomes: The
Impact of MTV’s 16 and Pregnant on Teen Childbearing,” American Economic Review, 105,
3597–3632.
Leblang, D. (2010): “Familiarity Breeds Investment: Diaspora Networks and International
Investment,” American Political Science Review, 104, 584 – 600.
Liang, J. (2017): “Cultural Similarity – Measurement using Google Trends,” mimeo University
of Chicago.
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2010): “Technology Capital and the US Current
Account,” American Economic Review, 100, 1493–1522.
Nunn, N. (2007): “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 569–600.
Nunn, N., N. Qian, and S. Sequeira (2015): “Migrants and the Making of America,”
Working Paper.
Ottaviano, G. I. and G. Peri (2006): “The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence
from US cities,” Journal of Economic Geography, 6, 9–44.
Parsons, C. and P.-L. Vezina (2016): “Migrant Networks and Trade: The Vietnamese Boat
People as a Natural Experiment,” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Peri, G. (2012): “The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from U.S. States,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94, 348–358.
Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005): “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,” Journal
of International Economics, 65, 269–296.
Putterman, L. and D. N. Weil (2010): “Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run
Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125,
1627–1682.
Ramondo, N. (2014): “A Quantitative Approach to Multinational Production,” Journal of
International Economics, 93, 108–122.
Rauch, J. and V. Trindade (2002): “Ethnic Chinese Networks In International Trade,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 116–130.
Razin, A., Y. Rubinstein, and E. Sadka (2003): “Which countries export FDI, and how
42

much?” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Redding, S. and D. Sturm (2008): “The Cost of Remoteness: Evidence from German Division
and Reunification,” The American Economic Review, 98, 1766–1797.
Silva, J. S. and S. Tenreyro (2006): “The Log of Gravity,” The Review of Economics and
statistics, 88, 641–658.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2015): “War and Relatedness,” The Review of Economics
and Statistics, forthcoming.
Steinwender, C. (2014): “Information Frictions and the Law of One Price: “When the States
and the Kingdom became United”,” Working Papers 190, Oesterreichische Nationalbank (Austrian Central Bank).
Stephens-Davidowitz, S. (2014): “The cost of racial animus on a black candidate: Evidence
using Google search data,” Journal of Public Economics, 118, 26 – 40.
Stephens-Davidowitz, S. and Varian (2015): “A Hands-on Guide to Google Data,” Working Paper.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1990): “Peer Monitoring and Credit Markets,” The World Bank Economic
Review, 4, 351–366.
Thernstrom, S. (1980): Havard encyclopedia of American ethnic groups, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge MA.
Varian, H. R. (1990): “Monitoring Agents With Other Agents,” Journal of Institutional and
Theoretical Economics (Zeitschrift fur die gesamte Staatswissenschaft), 146, 153–174.

43

Figure 1: Origins of Immigrants to the United States, pre-1880 to 2000

Notes: The left side depicts the share of total immigration to the United States in each census period
for the largest five origin countries of US residents that claim foreign ancestry in the 2010 census:
Germany, Britain, Ireland, Mexico, and Italy. The right side shows the the number of migrants (in
millions) by continent of origin. See section 1 of the main text and appendix A.1 for details.
Figure 2: Destinations of Immigrants to the United States, pre-1880 to
2000
Pre 1880
1880 - 1900
1900 - 1910

1910 - 1920

1920-1930

1930-1970

1970 -1980

1980-1990

1990-2000

Notes: This figure maps immigration flows into US counties by census period. We regress
the number of immigrants into US county d at time t, Idt , on destination county d and year
t fixed effects, and calculate the residuals. The maps’ color coding depicts the residuals’
decile in the distribution of residuals across counties and within census periods. Darker
colors indicate a higher decile.

44

Figure 3: First-Stage Coefficients

Coefficient on excluded IVs

.4

.3

.2

.1

0

-.1
1880

1900

1910

1920

1930

1970

1980

1990

2000

Notes: Coefficient estimates (bars) and 95% confidence intervals (lines) on the excluded instruments
t
t
t
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 from Table 2, column 2. The dependent variable is Log Ancestry
{Io,−r(d)
2010. Robust standard errors are clustered at the origin country level.

Figure 4: Migrants and Ancestors:
The Cases of Germany Pre-1900 and Italy 1900-1910
Non-European immigration: PreGerman descendants in 2010
1900

Non-European immigration: 19001930

Italian descendants in 2010

Notes: This figure contrasts Italian and German ancestry in 2010 (right panels), and non-European
immigration patterns pre-1900 and 1910-1930 (left panel). The left two panels are created in the same
way as the maps in Figure 2, restricted to non-European immigration and the two periods we consider
(pre-1900 and 1910-1930). The right two panels plot the county level residuals from a regression of
log ancestry in 2010 on county, Italy and Germany fixed effects on the sample of European countries.
The maps’ color coding depicts the residuals’ decile in the distribution of residuals across counties.
Darker colors indicate a higher decile.

45

150

200

Figure 5: Heterogeneous Effects across Countries, Counties, and Sectors

1 / Standard Error
100

Italy
Germany Britain

0

50

Ireland
Mexico

0

.1

.2

.3
.4
.5
.6
Coefficient Estimate: Countries

.7

.8

.9

1

1 / Standard Error
50

75

100

-.1

Los Angeles, CA

0

25

Orange, CA
Cook, IL
Harris, TX
San Diego, CA

0

.1
.2
.3
Coefficient Estimate: Counties

.4

.5

1 / Standard Error
200

300

-.1

Transportation

100

Technical Services
Wholesale Trade
Manufacturing

0

Information

-.1

0

.1

.2

Coefficient Estimate: Sectors

Notes: This figure shows funnel plots of the estimated coefficients and standard errors from separate
IV regressions of the FDI dummy on Log 2010 Ancestry for each origin country (top), destination US
t
t
t
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880..2000
counties (middle), and sectors (bottom). In all regressions, we use {Io,−r(d)
and principal components as excluded instruments, and control for log distance as well as latitude
difference. We plot the estimated coefficients (x axis) against the reciprocal of estimated standard
errors on ancestry. The size of the circle is proportional to the size of country ancestry (top), the size
of county population (middle), and the size of the sector (bottom). The imposed curve is y = 1.96/x for
positive x region and y = −1.96/x for negative x region. Circles above the curve indicate statistically
significant coefficients. See section 3.4 for details.

46

Figure 6: Ancestry and FDI: Germany and Britain; Los Angeles and Cook counties

Cook

Orange
Los Angeles
San Diego

Cook
Los Angeles
Harris
Orange
San Diego

-2

-1

Harris

Log # of Subsidiaries in Origin | X
0
2
4

Log # of Subsidiaries in Origin | X
0
1
2
3

6

Britain

4

Germany

-2

0

2
4
Predicted Log Ancestry 2010 | X

6

-2

coef = .367822, (robust) se = .06300454, t = 5.84

0

2
4
Predicted Log Ancestry 2010 | X

3

Cook IL

4

Los Angeles CA

CH
IR

BL
FR
IS CH
FI
MY

BM
CY

BR
ES
DN

TH
CH
NZ
KE
AR CO
ARIDGH
MW
TU
GI
SE
ZA
SA
PE
BRPA
AL VE EG
UR

SW

JP

YU

NO

DE ME
IT

PO
IN
SU

KO
PA
HU CO

PH
CS
GR

Log # of Subsidiaries in Origin | X
-1
0
1
2

NL

NLAU
ZA
BL
CA

JA

BH

-2

0
2
Predicted Log Ancestry 2010 | X

4

-2

coef = .26942742, (robust) se = .07098784, t = 3.8

BR
CH
DE

FR MY
TH

PA
ID
CH
CH
AR
ES
AR
MU
KE
EC
PE
NA ZW
NG AU
KO
IS
HU
NZ
VE CS
NO
DN
TZ
TU FIPN
PR HN
BO GR
EG
ZM SL
MA
UG
UR CR
TT
ML
GI
NI
MO
RO
SAAG
GT
MW YU
PA
FJ
CY
BR
OM
QA
BG BH
JA
LB
TU
BH

0

ME

JPIN
CO

IR
PO

SW
SU

CY
BM

-2

Log # of Subsidiaries in Origin | X
0
2
-2

CA

GB

SG

GB

SG
AU

6

coef = .52316614, (robust) se = .06799654, t = 7.69

IT
PH

VN

2
4
Predicted Log Ancestry 2010 | X

6

coef = .36623872, (robust) se = .06396882, t = 5.73

Notes: The figure shows conditional scatterplots from regressions corresponding to column 3 of Table
7, but restricting the sample to one origin country only (top parts: Germany and Britain) or one
destination county only (bottom parts: LA and Cook counties). The solid line depicts the fitted
regression line. In each case, the regression controls for distance and latitude difference. The upperleft panel shows a conditional scatterplot from a regression of log # of subsidiaries in Germany for
firms in each US county on predicted log 2010 German ancestry. The upper-right panel shows a
similar scatterplot for British ancestry and the log # of subsidiaries in Britain. The bottom-left panel
shows a conditional scatterplot from the corresponding regression for LA county, CA and the log #
of subsidiaries of LA based firms in each origin country. The bottom-right part shows the same plot
for Cook county, IL.

47

Figure 7: Thought Experiment: Removing the Chinese Exclusion Act

Notes: The map on the left depicts for each US county the predicted increase in the probability of
having positive FDI relations with China in a counterfactual world where the “Chinese Exclusion”
Act of 1882 had never been passed, that is, if Chinese immigration to the United States had not
been discriminated against between 1882 and 1965. Darker colors indicate larger increases. The bar
graph on the right shows the fraction of counties within each state with FDI relations with China
(light color) and the predicted increment in the fraction of counties with FDI relations with China
(dark color), which we calculate as the unweighted average of d Pr [F DIChina,d > 0] across counties
in a given state. We also provide the size of this increase relative to the actual fraction in percentage
terms. The histogram only depicts the ten US states with the largest change. Interpretation: If Chinese
immigration to the United States had not been outlawed, the fraction of counties in Massachusetts
with FDI relations to China would have increased from 43% to 69%, a 62% increase. The details of
this calculation are section 3.6.

48

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Ancestry > 0

All
All

Bottom Quintile

Top Quintile

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.018
(0.132)
0.316
(5.962)
0.023
(1.070)
0.020
(0.665)
0.069
(2.749)
9,122.393
(3,802.105)
19.440
(11.312)
0.196
(5.486)
0.033
(1.345)
0.015
(0.399)
0.039
(4.941)
0.068
(1.903)
0.079
(2.282)
0.050
(2.798)
0.599
(1.000)
19,110

0.031
(0.173)
0.575
(8.036)
0.042
(1.443)
0.036
(0.898)
0.125
(3.708)
8,397.379
(3,763.718)
16.319
(10.902)
0.351
(7.396)
0.060
(1.813)
0.027
(0.537)
0.069
(6.661)
0.122
(2.565)
0.143
(3.077)
0.088
(3.743)
0.741
(1.105)
13,962

0.003
(0.052)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.002)
0.000
(0.004)
9,142.553
(4,299.572)
18.915
(11.388)
0.028
(1.461)
0.003
(0.281)
0.001
(0.103)
0.010
(1.298)
0.011
(0.546)
0.012
(0.580)
0.027
(2.098)
0.260
(0.439)
2,182

0.127
(0.333)
2.852
(17.790)
0.199
(3.221)
0.173
(1.999)
0.594
(8.267)
7,463.619
(2,986.233)
13.750
(8.807)
1.620
(16.294)
0.270
(3.844)
0.123
(1.175)
0.319
(14.750)
0.562
(5.667)
0.664
(6.811)
0.392
(7.895)
1.647
(1.544)
3,677

0.103
(0.053)
155
0.950
(0.110)
132
0.820
(0.129)
131
0.503
(0.208)
144
0.442
(0.269)
162

0.084
(0.041)
119
0.937
(0.121)
103
0.807
(0.137)
101
0.537
(0.214)
115
0.405
(0.256)
122

0.106
(0.050)
18
0.990
(0.010)
8
0.923
(0.050)
8
0.546
(0.224)
15
0.433
(0.246)
20

0.066
(0.036)
25
0.920
(0.114)
26
0.732
(0.128)
25
0.661
(0.202)
26
0.239
(0.197)
27

0.577
(0.188)
0.790
(0.075)
3,141

0.577
(0.187)
0.789
(0.075)
3,137

0.560
(0.223)
0.764
(0.071)
628

0.648
(0.137)
0.838
(0.077)
627

Panel A: Origin-destination pairs
FDI Dummy
Ancestry 2010 (in thousands)
Immigrants between 1990-2000 (in thousands)
Immigrants between 2000-2010 (in thousands)
Foreign-born 2010 (in thousands)
Geographic Distance (km)
Latitude Difference (degree)
# of FDI Relationships
# of Subsidiaries in Origin
# of Parents in Destination
# of Workers Employed at Subsidiary in Origin (in thousands)
# of Subsidiaries in Destination
# of Parents in Origin
# of Workers Employed at Subsidiary in Destination (in thousands)
Information Demand Index (standardized)*
N
Panel B: Countries
Genetic Distance
N
Linguistic Distance
N
Religious Distance
N
Judicial Quality
N
2010 Country Diversity
N
Panel C: Counties
2010 Share of Population with Foreign Ancestry
2010 Diversity of Ancestries
N

Notes: The table presents means (and standard deviations). Variables in Panel A refer to our sample of (country-county) pairs.
Variables in Panel B refer to our sample of countries. Variables in Panel C refer to our sample of counties. Column 1 shows data for all
observations. Columns 2 to 4 show all, the bottom quintile, and the top quintile of observations with positive ancestry, respectively.
In Panel A, the FDI dummy is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the destination county has either subsidiaries or shareholders in the
origin country. The details of variables in Panel B are given in the Data Appendix. The ancestry-diversity variable is computed as
1 minus the Herfindahl index of ancestry group shares in each county. *The data is at the metropolitan area level.

49

Table 2: First-stage: The Effect of Historical Migrations on Ancestry
Log ancestry 2010
(1)
1880
Io,−r(d)
×
1900
Io,−r(d)
×
1910
×
Io,−r(d)
1920
Io,−r(d)

×

1930
Io,−r(d)
×
1970
Io,−r(d)
×
1980
Io,−r(d)

1990
Io,−r(d)

×
×

2000
Io,−r(d)
×
2010
Io,−r(d)
×

Ancestry 2010

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.057*** 0.056***

0.045***

0.035***

0.056***

0.056***

0.056***

(0.012)

(0.011)

(0.009)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.008)

1900
I−c(o),d

0.097*** 0.095***

0.067**

0.068***

0.099***

0.099***

0.100***

(0.031)

(0.028)

(0.019)

(0.033)

(0.033)

(0.036)

(0.043)

(1.425)

1910
I−c(o),d

0.192*** 0.193***

0.145***

0.123***

0.137***

0.137***

0.132**

0.123**

5.646**

(0.039)

(0.042)

(0.031)

(0.050)

(0.050)

(0.054)

(0.049)

(2.345)

0.205*** 0.209***

14.726***

1880
I−c(o)

1900
I−c(o)

1910
I−c(o)

1920
I−c(o),d
1920
I−c(o)

1930
I−c(o),d
1930
I−c(o)

1970
I−c(o),d
1970
I−c(o)

1980
I−c(o),d
1980
I−c(o)

1990
I−c(o),d
1990
I−c(o)

2000
I−c(o),d
2000
I−c(o)

(0.013)
(0.032)
(0.039)

Destination FE
Origin FE
Distance
Latitude Difference
Destination × Continent FE
Origin × Census Region FE
Principal Components
3rd order poly in dist and lat

(0.290)
0.106**

3.634**

0.176***

0.174***

0.283***

0.283***

0.249***

0.276***

(0.070)

(0.061)

(0.052)

(0.045)

(0.045)

(0.047)

(0.041)

(3.012)

0.062

0.061

0.061

0.035

0.079

0.079

0.065*

0.078

11.812***

(0.056)

(0.056)

(0.056)

(0.048)

(0.051)

(0.051)

(0.034)

(0.051)

(2.855)

0.183*** 0.184***

0.163***

0.149***

0.149***

0.148***

0.150***

0.151***

6.256***

(0.038)

(0.036)

(0.031)

(0.028)

(0.029)

(0.027)

(0.029)

(0.669)

0.173*** 0.173***

0.205** 0.213***

18.694***

(0.038)

0.174***

0.169***

0.214***

0.214***

(0.066)

(0.064)

(0.061)

(0.076)

(0.077)

(0.080)

(0.075)

(2.390)

0.123*** 0.124***

10.786***

(0.066)

0.124***

0.111**

0.101**

0.101**

0.115**

0.102**

(0.048)

(0.048)

(0.048)

(0.044)

(0.045)

(0.045)

(0.048)

(0.044)

(3.675)

0.020

0.019

0.026

0.026*

0.046***

0.046***

0.039** 0.046***

5.194***

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.016)

(0.015)

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.016)

(0.017)

(1.148)

0.317***

2010
I−c(o)

R2
N

2.145***

(0.070)

2010
I−c(o),d

Kleibergen Wald rk statistic
Stock-Yogo 5% critical values
Stock-Yogo 10% critical values

(8)

(9)

(2)

1880
I−c(o),d

(0.089)
10.608
20.53
11.46

10.958
20.53
11.46

8.327
20.53
11.46

9.607
20.53
11.46

162.194
21.18
11.52

158.125
21.18
11.52

195.423
21.23
11.51

142.800
21.10
11.52

910.331
21.18
11.52

0.56
612,495

0.56
612,495

0.66
612,495

0.72
612,495

0.73
612,495

0.73
612,495

0.73
612,495

0.73
612,495

0.49
612,495

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates of our first stage equation (4) at the country-county level. All specifications control for
origin and destination fixed effects. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are clustered at the origin country level. In columns 1-8
the dependent variable is the log of 1 plus the number of residents of the county in 2010 that report having ancestors in the origin country,
measured in thousands (Log Ancestry 2010 ). In column 9 the dependent variable is the level of ancestry in 2010 (again in thousands). The
t
t
t
t
excluded instruments are, for each census period, interactions of pull and push factors in migration, Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
), where Io,−r(d)
t
t
stands for the number of migrants from o who settle in destinations not in the same census region as d in period t and I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
for
the fraction of migrants not coming from origins in the same continent as o who settle in county d. Columns 3-9 also include the first five
principal components of higher-order interactions of these factors. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

50

Table 3: Second-stage: The effect of Ancestry on FDI
Panel A: IV
Log Ancestry 2010
Log Distance
Latitude Difference
N

FDI 2014 (Dummy)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.231***
(0.023)
0.007
(0.010)
0.006**
(0.002)
612495

0.190***
(0.024)
0.004
(0.009)
0.005**
(0.002)
612495

0.187***
(0.024)
0.024
(0.029)
0.006*
(0.003)
612495

0.187***
(0.024)
0.009
(0.033)
-0.000
(0.003)
612495

0.198***
(0.023)
0.026
(0.030)
0.006*
(0.003)
612495

0.191***
(0.024)
-0.027
(0.027)
0.003
(0.004)
612300

Panel B: OLS
Log Ancestry 2010
R2
N
Destination FE
Origin FE
Principal Components
Destination × Continent FE
Origin × Census Region FE
3rd order poly in dist and lat
2010
2010
2010
Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)
Origin × State FE

FDI 2014 (Dummy)
0.173***
(0.016)
0.2967
612495

0.149***
(0.018)
0.3635
612495

0.149***
(0.018)
0.3635
612495

0.149***
(0.018)
0.3635
612495

0.149***
(0.018)
0.3635
612495

0.161***
(0.019)
0.3930
612495

Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from IV (Panel A) and OLS (Panel B) regressions
of equation (1) at the country-county level. The dependent variable in all panels is a dummy
indicating an FDI relationship between origin o and destination d in 2014. The main variable
of interest is Log Ancestry 2010, instrumented using various specifications of equation (4). In
t
t
t
all columns in Panel A, we include {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 as excluded instruments.
Columns 3-6 also include the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of
push and pull factors as instruments. Column 5 also includes the interaction of the push and pull
factor constructed using data from the 2006-2010 American Community Survey. All specifications
control for log distance, latitude difference, origin, and destination fixed effects. Standard errors
are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the origin country level. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. (We also run an IV
probit regression using the specification in column 2 yielding a marginal effect evaluated at the
mean of Log Ancestry 2010 on FDI equal to 0.104***(0.037).)

51

Table 4: The Effect of Ancestry on FDI: The Communist Natural Experiment
FDI 2014 (Dummy)
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Destination FE
Countries considered
Years excluded

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.197***
(0.066)

0.380***
(0.053)

0.075
(0.054)

0.242**
(0.104)

0.234**
(0.098)

3,141

3,141

3,141

18,846

28,269

No

No

No

No

Yes

Soviet Union
1918-1990

China
Vietnam Eastern Europe
1949-1980 1975-1996
1945-1989

All communist countries

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from IV regressions of equation ( 1) at the country-county
level. Each column uses data from a subset of origin countries: Soviet Union (column 1), China (column 2),
Vietnam (column 3), as well as Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania (column
4). The dependent variable in all columns is a dummy indicating an FDI relationship between origin country
o and destination county d in 2014. All specifications use the same set of instruments as the one in column 3
of Table 3, but only exclude the interaction terms containing measures of pull and push factors in migrations
that occur during the years of economic isolation from the United States indicated above; the remaining
variables are included as controls. All specifications control for log distance, latitude difference, and origin
fixed effects. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are robust. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 5: Alternative Instruments
Panel A: Variations of leave-out categories

FDI 2014 (Dummy)

t
t
t
Excluding origins with correlated migration flows: Io,−r(d)
× (I−s(o),d
/I−s(o)
)

0.197***
(0.020)

t
t
t
× (I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)
Excluding states adjacent to the destination: Io,−a(d)

0.200***
(0.023)

Panel B: Using subsets of instruments for identification

FDI 2014 (Dummy)

Only migrations 1880 − 1930

0.209***
(0.037)

Only migrations 1970 − 2000

0.175***
(0.021)

Only migrations 1900 − 2000

0.187***
(0.024)

Notes: This table presents coefficient estimates from instrumental variable regressions that are
variations of our standard specification (column 3 of 3), but not using the principal components
of higher-order interactions for identification. The dependent variable in all regressions is FDI 2014
(Dummy). Each row lists the coefficient estimate on Log Ancestry 2010. In Panel A we show
alternative specifications of our leave-out instrument. First, when calculating the pull-factor of o to
d we exclude all countries whose aggregate time path of migrations to the US is correlated with o’s
migrations to the US. Second, when calculating the push factor of o we exclude migrations to any
state adjacent to the state of d. In Panel B we use throughout the interacted instrument of our
standard specification. In contrast to the standard specification, each specification in this panel uses
as instruments only the simple interaction terms from a subset of the full time period covered by
our data. Standard errors are given in parenthesis and clustered at the country level. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

52

Table 6: The Effect of Ancestry on Immigration
Immigration 1990-2000

Log immigration 1990-2000

Log immigration 1980-1990

(1)

(2)

(3)

9.662**
(4.455)

0.556***
(0.075)

Log Ancestry 1990
Log Ancestry 1980
2000
Io,−r(d)

1990
Io,−r(d)

2000
I−c(o),d
2000
I−c(o)

0.447***
(0.076)
1.082***

0.033**

(0.358)

(0.015)

1990
I−c(o),d

0.061***

1990
I−c(o)

(0.015)

N

612,495

612,495

612,495

Notes: The table presents the coefficient estimates from IV regressions of equation ( 6) at the countrycounty level. The dependent variable is the immigration flow from 1990 to 2000 in columns 1-2 and the
immigration flow from 1980 to 1990 in column 3. In all columns, we instrument for Log Ancestry with
t
t
t
the double-interactions of pull and push factors from prior censuses, {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,1980 .
All specifications control for log distance, latitude difference, origin ×destination-census-region, and
destination×continent-of-origin fixed effects. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are clustered
at the origin country level.

Table 7: The Effect of Ancestry on the Intensive Margin of FDI

Panel A
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Panel B
Log Ancestry 2010
N

OLS

IV/GMM

IV/GMM

IV/GMM

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Log Total # of FDI relationships
0.245***
(0.048)
10,851

N
Destination FE
Origin FE
Destination × Continent FE
Origin × Census Region FE
Heckman Correction

0.292***
(0.021)
10,851

0.147***
(0.031)
10,851

Log # of subsidiaries in destination
with shareholders in origin
0.275***
(0.050)
9,082

0.339***
(0.059)
9,082

0.288***
(0.016)
9,082

0.242***
(0.045)
9,082

Log # of workers employed at
subsidiaries in destination

Panel C
Log Ancestry 2010

0.356***
(0.056)
10,851

0.304*
(0.175)
9,082

0.077
(0.236)
9,082

0.326***
(0.051)
9,082

0.192
(0.139)
9,082

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

Notes: The table presents OLS (column 1) and IV/GMM (columns 2-4) estimates of equation (8). The dependent variables are specified for each panel in
the table. The main variable of interest is Log Ancestry 2010. All IV columns
use as instruments the same set of variables as column 3 of Table 3. All specifications control for log distance, latitude difference, origin, and destination
fixed effects. The coefficient estimates on these controls are not reported in the
interest of space. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors
are clustered at the country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

53

Table 8: Thought Experiment: A Gold Rush in Los Angeles in 1880
Predicted Counterfactual Change

Germany
Ireland
UK
Norway
Sweden
France
Canada
Switzerland
Czechoslovakia
Netherlands

Ancestry 2010

FDI #

Ancestry 2010

FDI # (in %, IV)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

343,276
256,621
396,439
39,515
51,395
77,372
27,722
10,156
17,905
38,392

241
40
582
55
71
278
531
162
4
121

+65,344
+61,701
+26,645
+4,657
+4,010
+3,293
+3,132
+2,456
+2,140
+1,638

+62.70
+58.34
+21.95
+3.53
+3.03
+2.48
+2.36
+1.85
+1.61
+1.23

Notes: The table presents the number of individuals of selected ancestries living
in Los Angeles County (column 1), the number of FDI links between Los Angeles County and the countries of origin (column 2), and the predicted changes
in these variables under a counterfactual scenario where the pre-1880 pull factor of Los Angeles is 5 times as large as in reality (columns 3 and 4). Column
3 shows the predicted absolute change in ancestry based on a regression analogous to column 9 of Table 2 with Ancestry 2010 (in levels) as dependent variable, again excluding the principal components. Column 4 shows the predicted
change of Total # of FDI relationships (in percent) based on the IV regression
of Log Total # of FDI relationships on Log Ancestry 2010, instrumented for by
t
t
t
{Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 , similar to column 2 of Table 7 without the
principal components as instruments. All regressions control for log distance and
latitude difference and include a origin × destination-census-region, and destination × continent-of-origin fixed effects. Only the 10 countries with the highest
absolute change in ancestry are shown in the interest of space. The details for
the construction of this thought experiment are presented in section 3.6.

54

Table 9: The “Similarities” Hypothesis and Contract Enforcement
(1)
Panel A: Final vs. Intermediate Goods
Log Ancestry 2010

FDI 2014 (Dummy)
0.156***
(0.026)

N
Sample

612,495

612,495
Intermediate goods

Inward FDI 2014 (Dummy)
0.108***
(0.033)

N
Sample
Panel C: Sector similarity

0.169***
(0.024)

Final goods

Panel B: Final vs. Intermediate Goods
Log Ancestry 2010

(2)

0.117***
(0.032)

612,495

612,495

Final goods

Intermediate goods

Rank Correlation

Cosine correlation

Log Ancestry 2010

0.011
(0.015)

0.010
(0.013)

N

21,518

21,518

FDI 2014 (Dummy)

Log # of FDI relationships

0.180*
(0.094)
452,304

1.414***
(0.243)
10,089

Panel D: Judicial Quality
Log Ancestry × Judicial Quality
N

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from IV regressions at the country-county
level. In Panel A, the outcome variable is the FDI dummy; we restrict our sample to firms
producing final goods or intermediate inputs, respectively. Final goods and intermediate
inputs are defined as 4-digit NAICS sectors with upstreamness index below and above 2,
respectively, where we use the upstreamness index from Antràs et al. (2012). The number of
country-county pairs that have an (non-zero) FDI link in the corresponding sector is 4,201
and 5,842 in columns 1 and 2, respectively. In Panel B, we replicate the same regressions,
except that the outcome variable indicates only the existence of any inward FDI. In Panel
C, the outcome variable is the rank and cosine correlation of the share of employees in 127
manufacturing sectors within a given origin-destination pair, respectively. The relatively low
number of observations is due to data availability in the industry share of employment: When
calculating the correlation between industries’ share of employment in county d and country
o, the correlation coefficient is missing for those country-county pairs that have at least one
missing share of employment. In Panel D, the outcome is the extensive (FDI dummy) and
intensive (log # of FDI relationships) margin, and the measure of judicial quality is from Nunn
t
t
t
(2007). Throughout we use {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 and principal components as
instrumental variables. All specifications control for log distance, latitude difference, and origin
and destination fixed effects. In Panels A-C we additionally control for origin ×destinationcensus-region, and destination×continent-of-origin fixed effects. Standard errors are given in
parentheses and are clustered by origin country.

55

Table 10: The Effect of Ancestry on Differential Information Demand and Language
Panel A: Google Trends

Log Ancestry 2010

Information Demand Index
(standardized)
(1)

(2)

0.871***
(0.257)

1.717**
(0.783)
-1.108
(0.809)

Log Foreign-born 2010
Log Ancestry 1980

(3)

19,110

19,110

0.801***
(0.186)
19,110

Destination FE
Origin FE
Principal Components

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel B: Language

# of residents in d speaking
language of o at home

N

Ancestry 2010

Actors
(standardized)

Athletes
(standardized)

Musicians
(standardized)

Politicians
(standardized)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.659**
(0.257)

0.948***
(0.359)

0.531***
(0.076)

0.688***
(0.183)

19,110

19,110

19,110

19,110

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

# of US-born in d that speak
the language of o at home

(1)

(2)

2.226***
(0.717)

0.942***
(0.301)

Ancestry 1980

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

1.170***
(0.042)

1.257***
(0.230)

0.085***
(0.006)

0.015***
(0.003)

65,877

78,376

3,137

3,137

454,812

454,813

1.241**
(0.504)
454,813

Non-English language

Any

Any

Any

Spanish

Arabic

Chinese

Hindi

Destination FE
Origin FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

N

Notes: This table presents coefficient estimates from IV regressions at the country-DMA (Panel A) and country-county (Panel B) level. In Panel A, all
dependent variables are based on a count of Google searches in the category specified above the panel. The Information Demand Index in columns 1-3 is
a simple average of the other four categories. Each of the four categories is the average of Google Trends value G(i, d), which measures the (normalized)
fraction of queries that include search term i relative to the total number of queries of Designated Market Area (DMA) d. For the search terms i we
use the first five terms from Google’s Answer Box when we search for “notable [foreign country d] [category]”. All outcome variables in Panel A are
standardized by their standard deviation. In Panel B, the dependent variable in column 1 is the number of residents in d that speak the language of o
at home, excluding English; in column 2 and 3, it is the number of US-born residents in d that speak the language of o at home, excluding English; and
in columns 3-6, it is the number of US-born residents in d that speak the language indicated in the respective column. Spanish is the official language
in twenty-one countries; Arabic is the official language in twenty-five countries; Chinese and Hindi each are the official language in only one country.
Ancestry 2010, Ancestry 1980, Log Ancestry 2010, Log Foreign-born 2010, and Log Ancestry 1980 are instrumented as in column 3 of Table 3. All
specifications control for log distance and latitude difference. Standard errors are given in parentheses and clustered at the country level (all of Panel
A and columns 1-2 of Panel B) or state level (columns 3-6 of Panel B). *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

56

Table 11: Network Effects
FDI 2014 (Dummy)

Log Total # of FDI relationships

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.191***
(0.024)
-0.020**
(0.010)

0.197***
(0.020)

0.359***
(0.132)
-0.159
(0.102)

0.283***
(0.099)

Panel A: Spillovers
Log Ancestry 2010
Log Ancestry 2010, State Level
Log Ancestry 2010 of Nearest Origin Country
N

612,495

-0.056***
(0.020)
612,495

10,851

0.049
(0.215)
10,851

Panel B: Diversity
Log Ancestry 2010
Log Ancestry × Foreign Share

0.197***
(0.061)
1.388
(3.103)

Log Ancestry × Ethnic Diversity
N

611,910

0.123***
(0.030)

1.270***
(0.204)
612,495

0.661***
(0.245)
3.548
(7.803)

10,851

0.641***
(0.089)

3.692***
(1.009)
10,851

Panel C: Fractionalization
Log Ancestry 2010
Log Ancestry × Geographic Distance

0.269***
(0.037)
0.101***
(0.036)

Log Ancestry × Judicial Quality
Log Ancestry × Fractionalization
N

446,022

0.334***
(0.081)
0.170**
(0.076)
0.373**
(0.187)
0.470
(0.324)
446,022

0.914***
(0.149)
0.414***
(0.128)

10,089

1.247***
(0.109)
0.864***
(0.156)
2.375***
(0.494)
3.087***
(0.831)
10,089

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from IV regressions at the country-county level. The
dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the dummy for FDI in 2014. The dependent variable in columns
t
t
t
3 and 4 is the log of the number of FDI links in 2014. We use {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 and
principal components as instruments. All specifications control for log distance, latitude difference, origin,
and destination fixed effects, as in column 2 of Table 3. Foreign Share, Ethnic Diversity, Distance, Judicial
Quality, and Fractionalization are demeaned. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are clustered
at the origin country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. Foreign Share is the share of the destination county’s population that are of any foreign
ancestry in 2010. Diversity of Ancestries is measured as 1 minus the Herfindhal index of ancestry shares in
the destination county. Judicial quality in the origin is from Nunn (2007); genetic distance is from Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2015); and Ethnic Fractionalization refers to 1 minus the Herfindahl index of ethnicities in
the origin country calculated using the data in Alesina et al. (2003).

57

Table 12: The Effect of Ancestry on the Intensive Margin of Trade (State Level)

Panel A
Log Ancestry 2010
R2
N

OLS

IV

IV

(1)

(2)

(3)

Log Total # of FDI relationships
1.001***
(0.077)

1.374***
(0.183)

0.079***
(0.025)

0.659
2,208

0.626
2,202

0.847
2,191

Panel B
Log Ancestry 2010
R2
N

Log Aggregate Exports
1.519***
(0.173)

2.993***
(0.357)

-0.149
(0.138)

0.416
4,799

0.374
4,783

0.665
4,739

Panel C
Log Ancestry 2010
R2
N
Origin FE
Destination FE
Heckman Correction

Log Aggregate Imports
1.927***
(0.148)

3.447***
(0.497)

0.003
(0.150)

0.419
3,823

0.360
3,764

0.576
3,815

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel D

Log Exports to Vietnam

Log Ancestry 2010

1.169***
(0.124)

1.230***
(0.124)

R2
N

0.680
51

0.678
51

Panel E

Log Exports to Japan

Log Ancestry 2010
R2
N
Origin FE
Destination FE

0.898***
(0.197)

1.107***
(0.128)

0.442
51

0.419
51

Yes
No

Yes
No

Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of equation (8) at the state level for FDI and trade. The dependent variables are the log number of total FDI links in 2014
(Panel A), the log of aggregate exports (from the US state)
(Panel B), aggregate imports (Panel C), exports to Vietnam
(Panel D), and exports to Japan (Panel E). Exports and
imports are measured in US dollars in 2011. In all columns,
t
t
t
we use {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 and principal components as excluded instruments. All specifications control
for log distance, latitude difference, and origin fixed effects.
Standard errors are given in parentheses and are double clustered at the destination state and origin country. *, **, and
*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.

58

Table 13: Generational Effects
FDI 2014 (Dummy)

Log Ancestry 2010

IV

IV

(1)

(2)

0.207***
(0.014)

OLS

0.187***
(0.024)

Log Foreign-born 2010

IV

IV

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.155***
(0.022)
-0.012
(0.031)

0.242***
(0.043)
-0.082*
(0.049)

Log Foreign-born 1970
N

612,495

612,495

612,495

612,495

IV
(6)
0.163***
(0.014)

0.286***
(0.025)
612,495

0.046
(0.034)
612,495

Notes: The table presents the OLS (column 3) and IV (all other columns) estimates of
equation (1), contrasting the effect of ancestry and first-generation immigrants (foreignborn) on FDI. The dependent variable is the dummy for FDI in 2014. All IV columns use as
instruments the same set of variables as column 3 of Table 3. All specifications control for log
distance, latitude difference, origin×destination-census-region, and destination×continentof-origin fixed effects. The coefficient estimates on these control variables are not reported
in the interest of space. Standard errors are given in parentheses and clustered at the
origin country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively. For column 4, the Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic on the excluded
instruments is 18.21 with p-value 0.150. For column 6, the Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic
on the excluded instruments is 29.04 with p-value 0.007.

59

Online Appendix
“Migrants, Ancestors, and Foreign Investments”
Konrad B. Burchardi
Thomas Chaney
Tarek A. Hassan
A

Data Appendix

Overview
To construct the migration and ancestry data up until the year 2000, we download the 1880,
1900, 1910, 1920, 1930, 1970, 1980, and 2000 waves of the Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series (IPUMS) from https://usa.ipums.org/usa-action/samples. For each wave, we select
the largest available sample; for example, if a 1% and 10% sample was available for 1880 data, we
used the 10% sample. To construct the 2010 data, we used the 2006-2010 American Community
Survey (ACS) sample provided on the IPUMS website. For a more detailed overview on the
specific waves used, see Appendix Table 1.
For each sample, we obtain the following variables: year, datanum, serial, hhwt, region, statefip, county, cntygp97, cntygp98, puma, gq, pernum, perwt, bpl, mbpl, fbpl, nativity, ancestr1,
yrimmig, mtongue, mmtongue, fmtongue, and language.
t
We construct the number of migrants from origin country o to destination county d in t, Io,d
,
t
as well as the measure of ancestry Ao,d from 1980 onward. We first aggregate the individual-level
census data to counts of respondents at the level of historic US counties (or country groups from
1970 onwards) and foreign countries, and then transform the data into 1990 country-county level
using various transition matrices. Details are given in the following sections.
How we create transition matrices
We create a set of transition matrices that transform non-1990 countries to 1990 countries and
non-1990 counties/county groups to 1990 counties.
• Birthplace-to-country: The aim is to construct transition matrices that map all the birthplace answers into 1990 countries. In each wave of the US Census, respondents were
asked to report their country of birth. All possible answers (across time) are listed
here: https://usa.ipums.org/usa-action/variables/BPL#codes_section. The censuses from 1850-2012 contain roughly 550 possible different answers to the question of
birthplace. In each census data set, they are saved in the variable “bpld.” What follows is
our procedure for building those matrices:
1. We start with a transition matrix of zeros, with all possible answers to the 1990
birthplace question as rows and all 1990 countries as columns. A cell in row r and
column c of the transition matrix answers the question, “What is the probability that
an individual who claims his/her birthplace as r refers to the area that in 1990 is
country c?” So all cells contain values in [0,1], and rows sum up to 1.
60

2. For each row r in the transition matrix, if r with certainty refers to the area that in
1990 is country c, we simply change the entry in cell (r,c) from 0 to 1; if r does refer to
an area that in 1990 is in multiple countries, then we search for the 1990 population of
each possible country, and assign probabilities in proportion to the population data.
We use the population information from the Worldbank database. 51 .
Panel A in Appendix Table 2 lists the distribution of weights that we end up using, and
the affected countries and persons.
• Ancestry-to-country: The aim is to construct transition matrices that map all the answers
to the ancestry question into 1990 countries. The 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010 census
data provide information on the ancestry (ancestr1, 3-digit version). All possible answers (across time) are listed here: https://usa.ipums.org/usa-action/variables/
ANCESTR1/#codes_section. The procedure is the same as in the birthplace-to-country
procedure. Panel B in Appendix Table 2 lists the distribution of weights that we end up
using, and the affected countries and persons.
• Group-to-county & PUMA-to-county: The aim is to construct transition matrices that map
all the county groups/PUMAs into individual counties. For the years 1970 and 1980, the US
census data are at the US county group level. A “county group” is an agglomeration of US
counties. For the years 2000 and 2010, the census data are at the PUMA level. A “PUMA”
is also an agglomeration of US counties. 52 To construct transition matrices from county
agglomeration level to county level, we download the corresponding matching files from
the IPUMS website. We use data on the population of each county (within each county
group/PUMA) to assign a probability that an observation from county group/PUMA g
in year t is from county c in year t. This approach gives a transition matrix from year t
county groups to year t counties. Appendix Table 3 lists the distribution of weights that
we end up using, and the affected counties and persons.
• County-to-county: The aim is to construct transition matrices that map all the non-1990
counties into 1990 counties. This step is necessary because the list and boundaries of US
counties changed over time. Similarly to the birthplace-to-country and ancestry-to-country
procedure, we use one transition matrix per census year (1880, 1900, 1910, 1920, 1930, 1970,
1980, 2000, 2010). Such a transition matrix has as rows all US counties, indexed c, in year
t, and as columns all 1990 US counties, indexed m. Each cell of the transition matrix takes
a value that answers the question, “Which fraction of the area of the county c in year t is
in 1990 part of county m?” Appendix Table 3 lists the distribution of weights that we end
up using, and the affected counties and persons. More specifically, we build these matrices
as follows:
1. We download the year-specific map files. For 1880 us counties, we obtain the 503MB
GIS file from Atlas: http://publications.newberry.org/ahcbp/downloads/united_
states.html and extract the 1880 part. For 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1930 counties, we
obtain the maps from IPUMS: https://usa.ipums.org/usa/volii/ICPSR.shtml.
51

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL
Detailed description of “county group” and “PUMA” can be found here: https://usa.ipums.org/usa/
volii/tgeotools.shtml.
52

61

Finally, for 1970, 1980, and 1990 counties, we obtain the maps from NHGIS: https:
//data2.nhgis.org/main.
2. We project non-1990 maps onto 1990 counties. We used the intersect command in
ArcGIS to map year-specific counties onto 1990 counties based on area. This approach
gives a transition matrix from non-1990 counties to 1990 counties.
Appendix Table 1: Description of each IPUMS wave
Wave

Description

1880

We use the 10% sample with oversamples; the sample is weighted, so we use the
provided person weights to get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers
statefip and county.
We use the 5% sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights
to get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and county.
We use the 1% sample; the sample is unweighted; we use the region identifiers statefip
and county.
We use the 1% sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights
to get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and county.
We use the 5% sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights
to get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and county.
We use the 1% Form 1 Metro sample; the sample is unweighted; we use the region
identifiers statefip and cntygp97 (county group 1970); note that only four states can
be completely identified because metropolitan areas that straddle state boundaries are
not assigned to states; identifies every metropolitan area of 250,000 or more.
We use the 5% State sample; the sample is unweighted; we use the region identifiers
statefip and cntygp98 (county group 1980); the sample identifies all states, larger
metropolitan areas, and most counties over 100,000 population.
We use the 5% State sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person
weights to get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and
puma; the sample identifies all states, and within states, most counties or parts of
counties with 100,000 or more population.
We use the 5% Census sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person
weights to get to a representative sample; we use region identifiers statefip and puma;
the sample identifies all states, and within states, most counties or parts of counties
with 100,000 or more population.
We use the American Community Service (ACS) 5-Year sample; the sample is weighted,
so we use the provided person weights to get to a representative sample; we use region
identifiers statefip and puma, which contain at least 100,000 persons; the 2006-2010
data contains all households and persons from the 1% ACS samples for 2006, 2007,
2008, 2009 and 2010, identifiable by year.

1900
1910
1920
1930
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

62

Appendix Table 2: Historical birthplace to current country: transition matrices
Panel A: Birthplace

weights ∈ (0, 1)

weight = 1

weights = 0

1880

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

22
26,301
0.05%

258
50,177,184
99.94%

9
4,933
.01%

1900

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

15
23,345
0.35%

131
6,555,140
99.56%

6
5,339
.08%

1910

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

20
31,072
0.55%

99
5,613,136
99.39%

4
3,105
.05%

1920

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

13
36,070
0.91%

174
3,905,455
98.77%

7
12,559
.32%

1930

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

25
35,930
1.13%

194
3,086,341
96.94%

9
61,462
1.93%

1970

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

12
318,800
4.64%

77
6,323,100
92.00%

3
230,800
3.36%

1980

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

32
491,760
8.81%

222
4,774,820
85.57%

7
313,300
5.61%

1990

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

24
721,595
7.41%

209
8,532,585
87.62%

7
484,433
4.97%

2000

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

11
1,122,532
7.87%

136
13,144,632
92.13%

0
0
0%

2010

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

14
1,302,255
10.46%

137
11,131,046
89.40%

1
17,148
.14%

2010*

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

14
3,512,123
1.16%

188
300,415,680
98.83%

1
37,469
.01%

weights ∈ (0, 1)

weight = 1

weights = 0

Panel B: Ancestry
1980

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

29
924,400
0.41%

227
198,525,616
87.51%

143
27,412,380
12.08%

1990

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

29
2,941,941
1.19%

239
217,720,512
87.75%

9
27,445,182
11.06%

2000

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

17
6,000,639
2.13%

137
191,300,704
67.98%

22
84,120,558
29.9%

2010

# of answers
# of persons
% of persons

19
8,454,279
2.78%

142
229,211,968
75.41%

30
66,299,030
21.81%

The table reports statistics on the transition of data from the ‘answer’ level to 1990
country level. For each survey wave, and each question – birthplace in Panel A and
primary ancestry in Panel B – the table reports the number of answers that can be
directly linked to a 1990 country (weight = 1), that are assigned to several 1990
countries using population weights (weights ∈ (0, 1)) and that cannot be linked to
any modern country with sufficient certainty (weights = 0). The table also reports
the number of respondents (scaled from the original data using the person weights
provided) in each category. Answers with weights zero essentially consists of ”Not
Reported” (e.g. 23, 24, 54 and 30 million respondents for the 1980, 1990, 2000 and
2010 ancestry data, respectively) and ”African-American” (e.g. 26, 22 and 25 million
respondents for the 1990, 2000 and 2010 ancestry data, respectively). The remainders
are mostly cases such as ”African”, ”Uncodable”, ”Bohemian”, ”Nuevo Mexicano”,
”Other”, etc. In Panel A, all years except 1880 consist of the number of persons that
report birthplace since the last Census wave. For the 2010 Census wave the additional
entry (denoted by a *) reports the respective numbers for all respondents in that wave.

63

Appendix Table 3: Historical state-county unit to 1990 state-county unit: transition matrices

Census wave

weights ∈ (0, 1) weight = 1 weights = 0

1880

# of counties 658
% of persons (birthplace data) 21.54%

1854
78.45%

1
.01%

1900

# of counties 2211
% of persons (birthplace data) 99.09%

7
0.87%

4
.05%

1910

# of counties 1517
% of persons (birthplace data) 99.00%

5
0.94%

1
.05%

1920

# of counties 1355
% of persons (birthplace data) 90.80%

7
9.20%

0
0%

1930

# of counties 1801
% of persons (birthplace data) 90.61%

6
9.39%

0
0%

1970

# of countygroups 310
% of persons (birthplace data) 34.07%

98
65.93%

0
0%

1980

# of countygroups 580
% of persons (birthplace data) 17.96%
% of persons (ancestry data) 40.02%

573
82.04%
59.98%

0
0%
0%

1990

# of PUMAs 541
% of persons (birthplace data) 8.97%
% of persons (ancestry data) 32.15%

1185
91.03%
67.85%

0
0%
0%

2000

# of PUMAs 620
% of persons (birthplace data) 10.66%
% of persons (ancestry data) 30.36%

1451
89.34%
69.64%

0
0%
0%

2010

# of PUMAs 619
% of persons (birthplace data) 12.31%
% of persons (ancestry data) 30.13%

1449
87.65%
69.81%

1
.03%
.05%

The table reports statistics on the transition of data from the ‘historical spatial
area’ level to 1990 US county level. For each Census wave the table reports the
number of contemporaneous spatial areas that are a subset of a 1990 US county
(weight = 1) and the number of contemporaneous spatial areas whose data
is transitioned to 1990 US county level using non-degenerate weights (weights
∈ (0, 1)). For Census waves 1880 to 1930 the share of their contemporaneous
county spatial area in each 1990 US county area is used as weight. For waves
1970 to 2010 there are two steps: In step 1 the share of their contemporaneous
countygroup (waves 1970 and 1980) or PUMA (waves 1990 to 2010) population
in the contemporaneous county population are used as weights; in step 2 the
share of their contemporaneous county spatial area in each 1990 US county area
is used as weight. The two-step procedure is necessary because the 1970 to 2010
Census waves do not have a county-level identifier (to protect the privacy of the
respondents). The table also reports the share of respondents affected by this
transition in the birthplace and ancestry data, respectively.

64

A.1

Details on the construction of migration and ethnicity data

Details calculation of post-1880 flow of immigrants
For each census wave after 1880, we count the number of individuals in each historic US county
d who were born in historic country o (as identified by birthplace variable “bpld” in the raw
data) that had immigrated to the United States since the last census wave that contains the
immigration variable (not always 10 years earlier). Then we transform these data
• from the non-1990 foreign-country (“bpld”) level to the 1990 foreign-country level using
bpld-to-country transition matrices.
• from the US-county group/puma level to the US-county level using group/puma-to-county
transition matrices.
• from the non-1990 US-county level to the 1990 US-county level using county-to-county
transition matrices.
• from the post-1990 US-county level to the 1990 US county level. Based on the information
from https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/county-changes.html, a new county is
either created from part of ONE 1990 county or assigned a new FIPS code after 1990,
so we manually change that county’s FIPS code to what it was in 1990. A few counties’
boundaries have been changed after 1990 but that only involved a tiny change in population,
so we ignore these differences.
Details calculation of pre-1880 stock of immigrants
For the year 1880, we calculate for each historic US county d the number of individuals who
were born in a historic foreign country o (no matter when they immigrated). We add to those
calculations the number of individuals in county d who were born in the United States, but whose
parents were born in historic foreign country o. (If the parents were born in different countries,
we count the person as half a person from the mother’s place of birth, and half a person from
the father’s place of birth). Then we transform these data
• from the pre-1880 foreign-country (“bpld”) level to the 1990 foreign-country level using the
pre-1880 country-to-country transition matrix.
• from the pre-1880 US-county level to the 1990 US-county level using the pre-1880 countyto-county transition matrix.
Details calculation of stock of ancestry (1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010)
For the years 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010, we calculate for each US county group the number
of individuals who state as primary ancestry (“ancestr1” variable) some nationality/area. We
transform the data
• from the ancestry-answer (“ancestr1”) level to the 1990 foreign-country level using ancestryto-country transition matrices.

65

• from the US-county group/puma level to the US county-level using group/puma-to-county
transition matrices.
• from the non-1990 US-county level to the 1990 US-county level using county-to-county
transition matrices.
• from the post-1990 US-county to the 1990 US-county level. Based on the information
from https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/county-changes.html, a new county is
either created from part of ONE 1990 county or assigned a new FIPS code after 1990,
so we manually change that county’s FIPS code to what it was in 1990. A few counties’
boundaries have been changed after 1990 but that only involved a tiny change in population,
so we ignore the difference.

A.2

Details on the construction of FDI data

Our FDI data are from the US file of the Bureau van Dijk ORBIS dataset. For each US firm,
the raw data set lists the location of its (operational) headquarters, the addresses of its foreign
parent entities, and the addresses of its international subsidiaries and branches. It also provides
the number of employees for both US and foreign firms. The steps for building the data follow
below.
Clean postcode information
We use firm’s postcode as a unique identifier for the county location of the US firm, and then
need to ensure that one county uniquely corresponds to one postcode. Vance, NC; Wakulla,
FL; Citrus, FL; Rankin, MS; Union, OH; and Du Page, IL share at least one postcode with a
neighboring county. In each case we assign that postcode wholly to the county with the larger
population (according to Google 2012 population data). In the last step, we hand-coded missing
postcodes that we took from main data set. Only one such case existed: 75427 for Dallas.
Build the parent data
We used the following variables from the parent dataset: “Mark” “Company name” “BvD ID
number” “Country ISO Code” “City” “Postcode” “NAICS 2007 Core code (4 digits)” “NAICS,
text description” “Number of employees 2013” “Shareholder - Name” “Shareholder - BvD ID
number” “Shareholder - City” “Shareholder - Postal code” “Shareholder - NAICS 2007, Core
code” “Shareholder - NAICS 2007, text description” “Shareholder - Country ISO code” “Shareholder - Direct %” “Shareholder - Total %” “Shareholder - Number of employees”. Here “shareholder” is equivalent to “parent” in our context. The key data-building steps are as follows:
1. Assign numerical values to “Shareholder Direct” and “Shareholder Total”:
• When the stake of a shareholder is described by an acronym rather than a number,
we replace it with numerical values as follows: MO, majority owned, is replaced by
“75%”; JO, jointly owned, is replaced by “50%”; NG, negligent, is replaced by ‘0%’;
BR, branch and WO, wholly owned are both replaced by “100%”. 53
53

See http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2407845 for reference.

66

• When the stake of a shareholder is described by the following expressions, we replace
it with a numerical value as follows: Values with a “>”, e.g., “ > 25.00” were replaced
by the original number plus 10; values with a “<”, e.g., “ < 34.00”, were replaced by
the original number minus 10; values with a “±”, e.g. “±25.00”, were replaced by the
original number.
2. Postcode matching: We matched both US firms and US parents (foreign parents were ignored in this step), with our postcode data. Besides the original string variable postcode, we
generated new variables postcode5digit and postcodeextension and labeled them “Postal
code (5 digit)” and “Postal code (extension).” Similarly, shareholders had shareholderpostcodeUS5digit and shareholderpostcodeUSextension (note the spelling postal code in
shareholder variables was unified to postcode).
3. Country-code matching: We matched both companies and their parents. Each firm had
four country variables: numerical country code, country name, and 2- and 3- digit ISO
country code. Then we adjusted those 2014 country codes to 1990 codes based on the
information on post-1990 country changes.
Build the subsidiary data
We used the following variables from the subsidiary dataset: “Mark” “Company name” “BvD ID
number” “Country ISO Code” “City” “Postcode” “NAICS 2007 Core code (4 digits)” “NAICS,
text description” “Number of employees 2007” “Subsidiary - Name” “Subsidiary - BvD ID number” “Subsidiary - Country ISO code” “Subsidiary - City” “Subsidiary - Postal code” “Subsidiary
- NAICS 2007, Core code” “Subsidiary - NAICS 2007, text description” “Subsidiary - Number of
employees” “Subsidiary - Direct %” ”Subsidiary - Total%” “Branch - Name” ”Branch - BvD ID
number” “Branch - Country ISO code” “Branch - City” “Branch - Postcode” “Branch - NAICS
2007, Core code” “Branch - NAICS 2007, text description” “Branch - Number employees”. The
data cleaning process is identical to that of the parent data described above, with the exception
that we merged subsidiaries with branches and refer to them collectively as “subsidiaries”.

A.3

Details on the construction of other data

International trade.— The data on trade between US states and foreign countries, both at the
aggregate level and at the sectoral level, are from the Commodity Flow Survey for the year 2012.
The data are collected by the US Census Bureau. A representative sample of establishments
are surveyed every five years, and information on their shipments collected. The value of all
shipments crossing the US international border are recorded as international trade, along with
their foreign origin/destination country. We only used thes readily available data aggregated at
the US state and foreign country level. Although they do not cover all of the US foreign trade (the
data com from a representative survey, not from the universe of foreign transactions), they are
the only publicly available source of international data disaggregated at a geographic level below
that of the entire United States. For each origin country and destination state, Importo,d are
aggregate imports (in dollars) from country o to US state d in 2012, and Exporto,d are aggregate
exports (in dollars) from US state d to country o in 2012, where we keep the convention of using
o for foreign countries and d for US administrative units, states or counties.

67

Bilateral distances and latitude differences.— To compute the distance between US counties
or states and foreign countries, we used the coordinates for all postal codes within a county or
state, and the coordinates of the main city for foreign countries. 54 We define the latitude and
longitude of a US county as the unweighted average of the latitudes and longitudes of all postal
codes within the county. We define the latitude and longitude of a US state as the unweighted
average of the latitude and longitude of all counties within the state. The distance between
foreign country o and a US county or state d, Distanceo,d , is computed as the great circle
distance between the two, measured in kms. The latitude difference between a foreign country
o and a US county or state d, Latitude Dif f erenceo,d , is the absolute difference between the
latitudes of the two, measured in degrees.
Country characteristics.— To shed light on the mechanism through which the presence of
foreign ancestry affects the patterns for foreign investment, we constructed several measures of
foreign country and US county characteristics. “Genetic Distance” is a measure of the genetic
distance between a given foreign country and the United States, normalized to take values between 0 and 1. “Linguistic Distance” is a measure of the linguistic distance between a given
foreign country and the United States; it measures the probability that a randomly selected
person in the United States speaks the same language as a randomly selected person from that
country. “Religious Distance” measures the religious distance between a given foreign country
and the United States, with a similar construction as the linguistic distance. 55 A higher index
for “Genetic Distance”, “Linguistic Distance”, or “Religious Distance” corresponds to a greater
distance between the United States and that country. “Judicial Quality” is a measure of the
judicial quality in a given country. 56 A higher index for “Judicial Quality” corresponds to a
higher-quality judicial system. “Ethnic Diversity” is a measure of a country’s ethnolinguistic
fractionalization. 57
US county characteristics.— We define three US-county level measures. “Diversity of Ancestries” is a measure of the diversity of communities from different ancestries in a given US
county.58 “Foreign Share” measures the share of residents in a given county who claim foreign
ancestry.
Sectoral characteristics.— We separated sectors into final consumption goods and intermediate inputs. To do so, we use the measure of upstreamness from Antràs et al. (2012). We
classified 4-digit NAICS sectors as “final goods” if their upstreamness index is below 2, and as
“intermediates” if their upstreamness index is above 2.
The geo-coordinates are downloaded from www.geonames.organd www.cepii.fr, respectively. When a
county has multiple postcodes we randomly select one of them and use the geocoordinates for that randomly
selected postcode.
55
Both genetic and religious distance measures come from Spolaore and Wacziarg (2015).
56
The measure of judicial quality comes from Kaufmann et al. (2003) and is used in Nunn (2007). It is based
on a weighted average of variables measuring perceptions of the effectiveness of the judiciary and the enforcement
of contracts.
57
The measure of fractionalization comes from Alesina et al. (2003). It is equal to 1 minus the Herfindahl index
of ethnolinguistic group shares.
58
It is equal to 1 minus the Herfindahl index of ancestry, measured as the sum of squared fractions of all possible
ancestry among people who report foreign ancestry within that US county
54

68

A.4

Details on the construction of information demand indices

The Information Demand Index is based on data gathered from Google and created in three
steps. In the first step we identify five prominent individuals from country o in category p, where
p ∈ {actors, athletes, musicians, politicians}. In the second step we utilise Google Trends to
obtain data on the spatial variation in the relative frequency of search queries related to these
individuals. In the last step we construct indices of the search intensity related to country o in
destination d.
Step 1: To identify the top five prominent individuals from o in each category p, we utilise a
tool called Google’s featured snippet box. Google’s featured snippet box is a response to a search
query that is generated by Google and pushed to the top of the result list. Google generates
these answers by scraping its top results and using an algorithm to provide what it determines
to be the most relevant answer. 59 For our purposes we record the top five names in Google’s
featured snippet box in response to the query “notable [country] [p]”, where [country] is one
of the 100 largest countries by 2015 population. For example, searching for “notable Belgium
actors” yields Google’s featured snippet box with an ordered list of Belgian actors. We save the
top five names from left to right as the set of search queries q(o, p). If Google’s featured snippet
box does not give a response for a country, we record a missing entry. 60
Step 2: Google Trends provides historical and cross-sectional information about the relative
importance of a search query. For the United States, the cross-sectional information with the
highest granularity is at the level of a Designated Market Area (DMA). 61 Google Trends expresses
the relative importance of a search query in a given DMA as an integer value from 0 to 100.
This integer value is calculated as follows. First, find the number of searches for the query at
hand relative to the total number of searches, and define the maximum search market share of
any DMA to 100. Second, divide each search market share by the maximum, and express it as a
rounded percentage. If the result does not exceed an unreported threshold, set it to zero ( Liang,
2017; Stephens-Davidowitz and Varian, 2015). Formally,


sharei,d
G(i, d) = 100
1[#(i, d) ≥ T ]
maxδ {sharei,δ }
where bxe is the integer round function, sharei,d is the search market share of search query i in
DMA d, and T is the unreported search volume threshold. Note that T is defined on the absolute
number of searches, rather than the search market share. This implies that DMAs with a larger
population will tend to report more data than those with smaller populations. Note also that
in addition to G(i, d) being reported as zero for some i and d, we set its value equal to zero if
there is no search result from Google’s featured snippet box, or if there is no result from Google
Trend.
See https://support.google.com/webmasters/answer/6229325?hl=en
This is the case for about 4-10% of our sample, depending on the category.
61
Google Trends also breaks the information down by major city; however, we would lose non-city data.
59
60

69

Step 3: We define the p-specific Index for each DMA-country pair as
I(p, o, d) =

1 X
G(i, d)
5
i∈q(o,p)

We define the Information Demand Index as the average over the p-specific indices:
IDIo,d =

1X
I(p, o, d).
5 p

to the query “notable [country] [p]”, where [country] is one of the 100

70

Additional figures and tables

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02
-.04

Coefficient on excluded IVs

.08

B

1880

1900

1910

1920

1930

1970

1980

1990

2000

Appendix Figure 1: Reduced-Form Coefficients

0

FDI Dummy 2014
(Average by Ancestry 2010 bin)
.05
.1
.15
.2

.25

Notes: Coefficient estimates (bars) and 95% confidence intervals (lines) on the excluded instruments
t
t
t
{Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 from a reduced form regression corresponding to the specification
in column 2 of Table 2, using the 2014 FDI dummy as dependent variable. Robust standard errors are
clustered at the origin country level. The R2 of this regression is 0.218.

0

1000

2000
Ancestry 2010

3000

4000

Appendix Figure 2: Concavity of Effect

Notes: This figure plots of the mean of FDI Dummy 2014 within bins of Ancestry 2010. The
Ancestry 2010 bins are constructed as centiles of the conditional distribution of Ancestry 2010 |Ancestry
2010 > 0. The lowest bin corresponds to Ancestry 2010 = 0. We do not plot the mean of FDI Dummy
2014 in the 99th and 100th centile Ancestry 2010 bin for visual clarity; the overall concave pattern
extends to these observations.

71

72

Natural Resources

Health, Education, Utilities,
and Other Public Services

Construction, Real Estate,
Accomodation, Recreation

Information, Finance,
Management, and Other Services

Group
Manufacturing
Trade

NAICS Sectors
Manufacturing
Wholesale Trade
Retail Trade
Information
Finance and Insurance
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
Management of Companies and Enterprises
Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
Other Services (Except Public Administration)
Construction
Transportation and Warehousing
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
Accommodation and Food Services
Utilities
Educational Services
Health Care and Social Assistance
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction

Appendix Table 4: Composition of Sector Groups used in Table 17

871

1257

3039

10052

# of US Firms
10009
7191

Appendix Table 5: Summary Statistics on the Intensive Margin of FDI

Origin-destination pairs
Ancestry 2010 (in thousands)
# of FDI Relationships
# of Parents in Destination
# of Parents in Origin
# of Workers Employed at Subsidiary in Destination (in thousands)
# of Subsidiaries in Origin
# of Parents in Destination
# of Workers Employed at Subsidiary in Origin (in thousands)
N

(1)
(2)
(3)
10.038
16.502
10.861
(40.989) (62.950) (43.593)
11.043
(39.738)
2.282
(4.336)
8.063
(26.132)
6.328
(32.695)
1.797
(10.671)
0.761
(3.105)
2.435
(40.360)
10851
4065
9082

Notes: The table presents means (and standard deviations). Variables refer to our sample of countrycounty pairs used in Table 7. Column 1 shows data for observations that have at least one FDI link.
Column 2 shows data for observations that have at least one subsidiary in the origin. Column 3 shows
data for observations pairs that have at least one subsidiary in the destination.

Appendix Table 6: Assignment of States to Census Regions

Census Region
New England
Middle Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South Atlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Mountain
Pacific

State Names
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont
New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania
Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin
Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota
Delaware, District Of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia
Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee
Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas
Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming
Alaska, California, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington

73

Appendix Table 7: The Effect of Ancestry on FDI: Variations of Leave-Out Instrument

(1)
Panel A
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Panel B
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Panel C
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Panel D
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Panel E
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Destination FE
Origin FE
Principal Components
Destination × Continent FE
Origin × Census Region FE
3rd order poly in dist and lat
2010
2010
2010
Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)
Origin × State FE

0.204***
(0.020)
612495
0.212***
(0.020)
612495
0.223***
(0.022)
612495
0.232***
(0.024)
640764
0.224***
(0.022)
612495
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

(6)
(3)
(4)
(5)
FDI Dummy (2014)
{Iot (Idt /I)} excluded
0.202*** 0.174*** 0.174*** 0.183*** 0.215***
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.017)
612495
612495
612495
612495
612300
t
t
t
(I−o,d
/I−o
)} excluded
{Io,−d
0.204*** 0.172*** 0.171*** 0.185*** 0.216***
(0.019)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.017)
612495
612495
612495
612495
612300
t
t
t
{Io,−d
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)} excluded
0.217*** 0.183*** 0.183*** 0.200*** 0.227***
(0.021)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.018)
612495
612495
612495
612495
612300
t
t
t
{Io,−adj(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)} excluded
0.204*** 0.192*** 0.192*** 0.206*** 0.237***
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.019)
640560
640764
640764
640764
640764
t
t
t
(I−s(o),d
)(I−s(o)
)} excluded
{Io,−r(d)
0.188*** 0.193*** 0.193*** 0.197*** 0.197***
(0.020)
(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.021)
(0.024)
612495
612495
612495
612495
612300
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
(2)

Notes: The table shows variations of the estimates from Panel A in Table 3, removing or not different
sets of migrants from the interaction of pull and push factors. The construction of the interaction is
indicated above each panel. In Panel D, adj (d) refers to the adjacent states for the state of county d;
thus we exclude from the push factor of o migrations to any state adjacent to the state of d, including
the state itself. In Panel E, “s” refers to similar countries; that is, we exclude from a given pull factor
of o to d all countries for which the time correlation of total migration to the US is significantly (at the
5% level) correlated with o’s migration to the US.

74

Appendix Table 8: The effect of Ancestry in 2000 on FDI in 2007

(1)

Panel A: IV
Log Ancestry 2000

(3)
(4)
(5)
FDI 2007 (Dummy)
0.250*** 0.184*** 0.182*** 0.182*** 0.188***
(0.018)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.019)
12.06
20.25
11.39
612,495

(2)

KP F-stat on excluded IV’s
Stock-Yogo 5% critical values
Stock-Yogo 10% critical values
N
Panel B: OLS
Log Ancestry 2000

10.32
20.25
11.39
612,495

167.32
165.46
156.29
21.10
21.10
21.18
11.52
11.52
11.52
612,495 612,495 612,495
FDI 2007 (Dummy)
0.216*** 0.184*** 0.184*** 0.184*** 0.184***
(0.015)
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.018)

N
Destination FE
Origin FE
Destination × Continent FE
Origin × Census Region FE
Principal Components
3rd order poly in dist and lat
2000
2000
2000
Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)
Origin × State FE

612,495
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

612,495
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

612,495
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

612,495
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

612,495
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

(6)
0.184***
(0.021)
189.21
21.18
11.52
612,300
0.200***
(0.019)
612,300
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from IV (Panel A) and OLS (Panel B) regressions of
equation (1) at the country-county level. The dependent variable in all panels is a dummy indicating
an FDI relationship between origin o and destination d in 2007. The main variable of interest is Log
Ancestry 2000, instrumented using various specifications of equation (4). In all columns in Panel A,
t
t
t
we include {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,1990 as excluded instruments. Columns 3-6 also include the
first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as instruments.
Column 5 also includes the interaction of the push and pull factor constructed using data from the
1990-2010 wave. All specifications control for log distance, latitude difference, origin, and destination
fixed effects. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the origin
country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

75

Appendix Table 9: Nonlinear Least Squares Estimation

β
π
0.1683*** 0.0010***
(0.0011)
(0.0003)
Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from a nonlinear least squares regression at the countrycounty level. The dependent variable is the dummy for FDI in 2014. It shows (un-adjusted) NLS
standard errors. We obtain the optimal β and π by solving the nonlinear least squares problem in
equation (7). *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Appendix Table 10: Alternative Functional Forms

Ancestry 2010

(1)
0.002***
(0.001)

Log Ancestry 2010 (-1 for −∞)

(2)

FDI 2014 (Dummy)
(3)
(4)

(5)

0.190**
(0.080)

(Ancestry 2010)1/3

0.187***
(0.021)

Log Ancestry 1980

0.127***
(0.031)

Log Ancestry 1990

0.128***
(0.036)

Log Ancestry 2000
N

(6)

612495

612495

612495

612495

612495

0.132***
(0.038)
612495

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from IV regressions at the country-county level. The
dependent variable is the dummy for FDI in 2014. The main variable of interest in each column
is the measure of ancestry indicated by the first column of the table. In the second row, we use
Log(Ancestry/1000) instead of Log(1+Ancestry/1000), and replace Log(0) with -1. All specifications
are the same as that in Table 3, column 3. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are clustered
at the country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

76

Appendix Table 11: Varying ownership cutoffs
Panel A: FDI dummy on ancestry (IV)
Log Ancestry 2010
R2
N

FDI 2014 (Dummy)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.189***
(0.024)
0.352
612495

0.190***
(0.024)
0.352
612495

0.190***
(0.024)
0.352
612495

0.157***
(0.029)
0.318
612495

Panel B: # of FDI relationships on ancestry (IV)
Log Ancestry 2010
R2
N
Ownership cutoff
Destination FE
Origin FE
Principal Components
Destination × Continent FE
Origin × Census Region FE

Log Total # of FDI relationships
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.408***
(0.042)
0.750
10445

0.394***
(0.045)
0.749
10393

0.402***
(0.046)
0.749
10365

0.075
(0.062)
0.770
6981

keep ≥ 5%
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

keep ≥ 25%
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

keep ≥ 50%
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

keep < 50%
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table presents coefficient estimates from variations of the IV regression in column 3 of Table 3
(Panel A) and in column 2 of Table 7 (Panel A). We vary the ownership cutoff across columns: In columns 1,
2, 3, and 4 we keep all shareholder-subsidiary pairs with ownership ≥ 5%, ≥ 25%, ≥ 50%, respectively. The
number of origin-destination pairs with any FDI under these cutoffs are 10445, 10393, and 10365. In column
4 we keep all shareholder-subsidiary pairs with ownership < 50%, which results in 6981 origin-destination
pairs with any FDI. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are clustered at the origin country level.
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

77

Appendix Table 12: Alternative Standard Errors: Main Specification

Panel A: Analytical
Robust
Cluster
Cluster
Cluster
Cluster
Cluster
Cluster
Cluster

by
by
by
by
by
by
by

county
country†
county and country
state and country
state
continent
state×country

0.0092
0.0171
0.0243
0.0280
0.0285
0.0189
0.0070
0.0114

Panel B: Bootstrap
Robust
Cluster by county
Cluster by country

0.0092
0.0161
0.0291

Notes: This table shows various standard
errors on Log Ancestry 2010 based on our
standard specification (column 3 of Table
3). The bootstrapped standard errors in
Panel B are obtained using 1,000 draws
with replacement. † denotes our standard
specification.

78

Appendix Table 13: Alternative Standard Errors: Other Specifications
Standard
specification

Communist natural
experiment

Intensive
margin

Immigration
1990-2000

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Outcome variable

FDI Dummy (2014)

Log total # of
Immigration
FDI Relationships
1990-2000

Panel A: Clustered by Country (Standard)
Log Ancestry 2010

0.187***
(0.024)

0.234**
(0.098)

0.356***
(0.056)

Log Ancestry 1990
2000
Io,−r(d)

9.662**
(4.455)

2000
I−c(o),d

1.082***

2000
I−c(o)

(0.358)

Panel B: S.E. Clustered by County
Log Ancestry 2010

0.187***
(0.017)

0.234**
(0.092)

0.356***
(0.077)

Log Ancestry 1990
2000
Io,−r(d)

9.662**
(4.327)

2000
I−c(o),d

1.082***

2000
I−c(o)

(0.230)

Panel C: S.E. Clustered by State
Log Ancestry 2010

0.187***
(0.019)

0.234**
(0.101)

0.356***
(0.071)

Log Ancestry 1990
2000
Io,−r(d)

9.662**
(3.942)

2000
I−c(o),d

1.082***

2000
I−c(o)

(0.267)

Panel D: Clustered by County and Country
Log Ancestry 2010

0.187***
(0.028)

0.234*
(0.106)

0.356***
(0.120)

Log Ancestry 1990
2000
Io,−r(d)

9.662**
(4.800)

2000
I−c(o),d

1.082***

2000
I−c(o)

(0.105)

Panel E: Clustered by State and Country
Log Ancestry 2010

0.187***
(0.028)

0.234*
(0.113)

Log Ancestry 1990
2000
Io,−r(d)

0.356***
(0.116)
9.662**
(4.308)

2000
I−c(o),d

1.082***

2000
I−c(o)

(0.044)

Notes: This table shows variations based on four main regressions: standard specification (column 3 in Table 3),
communist natural experiment (column 5 in 4), intensive margin (based on column 2 in Panel A of Table 7), and
immigration 1990-2000 (column 1 in Table 6). In Panel A, we reproduce the standard error clustering in our main
tables; in Panel B, we cluster by county; in Panel C, we cluster by country, in Panel D we double cluster by county
and country, and in Panel E we double cluster by state and country.

79

Appendix Table 14: Placebo Regressions

(1)
Panel A
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Panel B
Log Ancestry 2010
N
Destination FE
Origin FE
Principal Components
Destination × Continent FE
Origin × Census Region FE
3rd order poly in dist and lat
2010
2010
2010
Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)
Origin × State FE

-0.012
(0.020)
612495
Assign
-0.026
(0.021)
612495
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

(6)
(3)
(4)
(5)
FDI 2014 (Dummy)
Assign to alphabet neighbor
-0.007
0.009
0.009
0.010
0.012
(0.015) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028) (0.031)
612495 612495 612495 612495 612300
to alphabet neighbor on a different continent
-0.021
0.009
0.009
0.013
0.012
(0.015) (0.033) (0.033) (0.038) (0.037)
612495 612495 612495 612495 612300
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
(2)

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from placebo regressions corresponding the the specifications in Table 3. In Panel A, we assign the outcomes (FDI 2014 Dummy) for each origin country
to the next country in the alphabet. In Panel B, we assign the outcomes (FDI 2014 Dummy) for each
origin country to the next country in the alphabet that is from another continent.

80

Appendix Table 15: The Effect of Ancestry on FDI: Five Largest Countries and Counties

Panel A: Top 5 Ancestries
Germany
Britain
Mexico
Ireland
Italy
Panel B: Largest 5 Counties
Los Angeles, California
Cook, Illinois
Harris, Texas
San Diego, California
Orange, California

FDI 2014 (Dummy)
Log Ancestry 2010
0.216***
(0.009)
0.271***
(0.009)
0.171***
(0.011)
0.202***
(0.010)
0.219***
(0.007)
Log Ancestry 2010
0.137***
(0.019)
0.146***
(0.020)
0.169***
(0.023)
0.164***
(0.024)
0.160***
(0.020)

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from IV regressions at the country-county level. The
dependent variable in all panels is the dummy for FDI in 2014. Panel A presents the coefficient on Log
Ancestry 2010 when we run our estimation separately for each of the largest five origin countries. Panel
B presents the coefficient on Log Ancestry 2010 when we run our estimation separately for each of the
five US counties with the largest population in 2010. The composition of sector groups in panel A is
t
t
t
given in Appendix Table 4. We use {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 and principal components as
IVs. All specifications control for log distance and latitude difference. Standard errors are clustered
at the country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

81

Appendix Table 16: The Effect of Ancestry on FDI: Country Specific Effects

United Arab Emirates
Kuwait
Finland
New Zealand
Oman
British Virgin Islands
Australia
Malaysia
South Africa
Tunisia
Iceland
Saudi Arabia
Belgium and Luxembourg
Puerto Rico
Israel
Bahamas
Switzerland
Denmark
Thailand
Japan
Uruguay
Austria
Chile
Brazil
Barbados
Canada
Norway
Malta
Costa Rica
Turkey
Netherlands
Panama
Indonesia
Argentina
Sweden
Senegal
France
South Korea
Liberia
Spain
India
China
Kenya
Venezuela
Britain
Egypt
Belize

Point Estimate
11.875***
6.098***
4.113***
2.980***
2.481
2.467***
2.201***
2.005***
1.832***
1.438***
1.359***
1.144***
1.086***
1.034***
0.944***
0.943***
0.814***
0.684***
0.583***
0.566***
0.541***
0.531***
0.502***
0.496***
0.462**
0.461***
0.459***
0.451
0.447***
0.444***
0.442***
0.439***
0.413***
0.412***
0.405***
0.383
0.346***
0.346***
0.341*
0.335***
0.320***
0.299***
0.292*
0.275***
0.271***
0.259***
0.255***

82

Standard Error
(2.712)
(2.120)
(0.513)
(0.511)
(1.597)
(0.604)
(0.384)
(0.406)
(0.247)
(0.345)
(0.276)
(0.158)
(0.087)
(0.240)
(0.156)
(0.308)
(0.048)
(0.043)
(0.070)
(0.051)
(0.115)
(0.042)
(0.078)
(0.047)
(0.234)
(0.024)
(0.028)
(0.281)
(0.140)
(0.067)
(0.019)
(0.115)
(0.076)
(0.056)
(0.018)
(0.314)
(0.013)
(0.023)
(0.190)
(0.014)
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.175)
(0.046)
(0.009)
(0.051)
(0.086)

FDI 2014 (Dummy) > 0
60
22
180
107
6
100
369
90
80
9
25
29
354
26
137
44
371
278
68
575
21
148
73
140
38
809
239
11
30
48
398
44
29
64
323
2
528
155
6
300
233
248
5
32
664
23
14

Hungary
Colombia
Italy
Peru
Germany
Portugal
Samoa
Ireland
Morocco
Nigeria
Sri Lanka
Czechoslovakia
Romania
Mexico
Pakistan
USSR
Ghana
Bulgaria
Philippines
Lebanon
Bolivia
Greece
Trinidad and Tobago
Socialist Yugoslav
Jamaica
Honduras
Algeria
Guatemala
Poland
Viet Nam
Jordan
Cameroon
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Paraguay
Nicaragua
Albania
North Korea
El Salvador
Sudan
Fiji
Bangladesh
Cambodia
Haiti
Ethiopia
Syria
Myanmar
Afghanistan
Guyana

0.240***
0.237***
0.219***
0.218***
0.216***
0.206***
0.204**
0.202***
0.197**
0.190***
0.180
0.177***
0.173***
0.171***
0.168***
0.165***
0.156
0.156**
0.154***
0.150***
0.142**
0.131***
0.130*
0.121***
0.114***
0.103***
0.099
0.097***
0.092***
0.091***
0.090
0.085
0.082***
0.081**
0.079
0.069*
0.069
0.068
0.066**
0.065
0.065
0.040
0.039
0.026
0.026
0.016
0.007
0.003
0.002

(0.033)
(0.028)
(0.007)
(0.033)
(0.009)
(0.028)
(0.086)
(0.010)
(0.078)
(0.055)
(0.120)
(0.029)
(0.041)
(0.011)
(0.039)
(0.015)
(0.095)
(0.064)
(0.019)
(0.047)
(0.066)
(0.028)
(0.067)
(0.028)
(0.032)
(0.032)
(0.076)
(0.033)
(0.015)
(0.025)
(0.063)
(0.065)
(0.025)
(0.032)
(0.056)
(0.036)
(0.046)
(0.072)
(0.026)
(0.065)
(0.046)
(0.032)
(0.028)
(0.019)
(0.025)
(0.016)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.002)

83

52
45
489
30
608
85
5
247
11
18
6
54
23
259
23
97
6
11
50
20
8
42
15
29
15
14
3
14
63
18
7
2
16
15
4
7
3
1
13
1
5
2
3
2
1
1
1
1
1

Iraq
Cuba
Libya
Nepal
Grenada
State of Palestine
Sierra Leone
Yemen
Equatorial Guinea
Somalia
Greenland
Cape Verde
Mauritania
Tonga
Lao
Mongolia
Iran

0.002
-0.000***
-0.022
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

(0.002)
(0.000)
(0.024)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Notes: The table is an extension of Table 15 Panel A, where we only show the results for top five
ancestries. Results are sorted on the point estimate. The last column shows the number of US counties
that have an FDI link with the corresponding country. All countries with ancestry < 1 are discarded.

84

85

Point Estimate
0.165***
0.141***
0.122***
0.085***
0.084***
0.084***
0.083***
0.077***
0.071***
0.053***
0.049***
0.040**
0.035***
0.030***
0.028***
0.024**
0.022*
0.009
0.007**
0.001

Standard Error
(0.024)
(0.026)
(0.024)
(0.020)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.018)
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.010)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.001)

FDI 2014 (Dummy) > 0
5,549
2,513
1,925
846
906
620
855
662
1,143
301
524
510
239
131
528
291
338
111
149
10

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates on Log Ancestry 2010 from IV regressions for each of the 20 2-digit NAICS sectors at the
country-county level. Each row of the table corresponds to one regression. The dependent variable in each row is a dummy variable for FDI
in 2014 in the sector indicated. The last column shows the number of country-county pairs that have an FDI link with the corresponding
t
t
t
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 and principal components as IVs. All specifications control for log distance, latitude
country. We use {Io,−r(d)
difference, origin×destination-census-region, and destination×continent-of-origin fixed effects. Standard errors are given in parentheses and
are clustered at the origin country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

20 Sectors Based on 2007 NAICS code
Manufacturing
Wholesale Trade
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
Retail Trade
Information
Transportation and Warehousing
Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
Finance and Insurance
Other Services (except Public Administration)
Management of Companies and Enterprises
Construction
Accommodation and Food Services
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
Health Care and Social Assistance
Utilities
Educational Services
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
Public Administration

Appendix Table 17: The Effect of Ancestry on FDI: Sector-Specific Effects

Appendix Table 18: Heterogeneous Effects across Sectors and Firms

FDI 2014 (Dummy)

Log Ancestry 2010

FDI 2014 (Dummy) > 0

(1)

(2)

Panel A: Individual Sectors
Manufacturing
Trade
Information, Finance, Management, and other Services
Construction, Real Estate, Accomodation, Recreation
Health, Education, Utilities, and other Public Services
Natural Resources

0.165***
(0.024)
0.158***
(0.025)
0.143***
(0.024)
0.125***
(0.021)
0.042**
(0.019)
0.035***
(0.009)

Panel B: Small vs. Large Firm Size
Above Median

0.112***
(0.018)
0.051***
(0.024)
0.000

Below Median
p-value of χ2 test, H0 : equality of coefficients

1,840
723

Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates on Log Ancestry 2010 from IV regressions at the countrycounty level. Each row of the table corresponds to a separate regression. The dependent variables in
all rows are dummy variables that are one if any firm within the indicated subset of firms in destination
county d has a parent or subsidiary in origin country o. These subsets of firms are five sector groups
(panel A) and for small- versus large firms (panel C). The composition of sector groups in panel A is given
in Appendix Table 4. The cutoff value between small and large firms is the median employee number,
which is 1380 for US firms that are subsidiaries and 1057 for US firms that are parents. Throughout,
t
t
t
we use {Io,−r(d)
(I−c(o),d
/I−c(o)
)}t=1880,...,2000 and principal components as intrumental variables. “FDI 2014
(Dummy) > 0” refers to the number of country-county pairs that have an (non-zero) FDI link in the
corresponding sector. All specifications control for log distance, latitude difference, origin ×destinationcensus-region, and destination×continent-of-origin fixed effects. Standard errors are given in parentheses
and are clustered at the origin country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.

86

Appendix Table 19: The Effect of Ancestry on Language: Language Specific Effects

Aleut
Malay
Arabic
Spanish
French
Haitian Creole
Greek
Vietnamese
Portuguese
Korean
Mon-Khmer
Urdu
Bengali
Japanese
Persian
Chinese
Thai
Polish
Filipino
Laotian
Albanian
Italian
Samoan
Amharic
Tongan
Russian
German
Hindi
Rumanian
Turkish
Croatian
Swahili
Finnish
Magyar
Indonesian
Swedish
Dutch
Norwegian
Pashto
Czech
Burmese
Sinhalese
Danish
Irish
Afrikaans
Nepali

Point Estimate

Standard Error

N

1.608***
1.376
1.222***
1.172***
0.212***
0.198***
0.196***
0.188***
0.174***
0.170***
0.167***
0.159***
0.153***
0.142***
0.102***
0.085***
0.077***
0.061***
0.059***
0.050***
0.049***
0.041***
0.036
0.035**
0.034
0.027***
0.022***
0.015***
0.014**
0.012**
0.012**
0.006
0.005
0.004**
0.002
0.002**
0.002**
0.002**
0.002
0.001***
0.001
0.000
0.000***
0.000***
-0.000***
-0.000***

(0.028)
(0.897)
(0.171)
(0.380)
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.033)
(0.006)
(0.030)
(0.041)
(0.005)
(0.020)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.010)
(0.015)
(0.002)
(0.009)
(0.014)
(0.005)
(0.031)
(0.015)
(0.027)
(0.008)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.012)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)

3,137
9,411
78,376
65,877
87,836
3,137
6,273
3,137
28,233
6,274
3,136
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
6,274
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
15,685
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
6,274
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
9,411
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
6,274
3,137
3,137
3,137

87

# of US-born in d that
speak o at home in 2010
116
176
45,953
65,877
87,416
595
1,849
1,739
13,095
3,040
316
499
191
1,972
538
1,745
619
1,670
1,229
592
181
5,068
261
123
115
53
15,513
558
417
263
65
606
373
578
130
888
4,746
965
26
367
19
9
1,200
459
6
52

-0.000***
n/a
n/a

Bulgarian
Bantu
Creole

(0.000)
n/a
n/a

3,137
9,411
3,136

85
432
2,252

Notes: The table is an extension of Table 10, where we only show the results for a set of selected
languages. The table is sorted on the size of the point estimate. The last column shows the # of
US-born residents in d that speak the language of o at home.
Appendix Table 20: Accounting For the Effect of Ancestry
FDI Dummy (2014)
Log Ancestry 2010

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.222***
(0.021)

0.213***
(0.068)
0.012
(0.020)

0.212***
(0.068)

0.213***
(0.025)

-0.025
(0.028)

Sector Similarity (Rank Correlation)
Sector Similarity (Cosine Correlation)

0.022
(0.023)

Log # of residents in d that speak language of o at home

0.005
(0.006)

Information Demand Index (standardized)
N
Destination FE
Origin FE
Principal Components

612,495

23,708

23,708

454,812

0.078***
(0.013)
19,110

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table shows IV regressions at the county-country (columns 1-4) and DMA-country (column 5) level.
Each column is a variation of the simple specification (column 2 in Table 3) that has origin and destination fixed
effects. All variables are defined as in the previous tables. The relatively low number of observations in columns
2 and 3 is due to data availability in the industry share of employment: When calculating the correlation between
industries’ share of employment in county d and country o, the correlation coefficient is missing for those countrycounty pairs that have at least one missing share of employment. Standard errors are given in parentheses and are
clustered at the origin country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

88

Appendix Table 21: Search terms for Germany and Italy

Germany

Italy
Politicians

Angela Merkel
Helmut Kohl
Willy Brandt
Joseph Goebbels
Karl Marx

Aldo Moro
Benito Mussolini
Alessandra Mussolini
Amintore Fanfani
Angelino Alfano
Actors

Jürgen Prochnow
Til Schweiger
Franka Potente
Udo Kier
Daniel Brühl

Isabella Rossellini
Robert De Niro
John Turturro
Roberto Rossellini
Roberto Benigni

Athletes
Katarina Witt
Dirk Nowitzki
Boris Becker
Steffi Graf
Franz Beckenbauer

Mario Andretti
Armin Zoggeler
Roberto Baggio
Andrea Barzagli
Gerhard Plankensteiner

Musicians
Ludwig van Beethoven
Nena
Johann Sebastian Bach
Nina Hagen
Felix Mendelssohn

Antonio Vivaldi
Gioachino Rossini
Giacomo Puccini
Ennio Morricone
Luciano Pavarotti

This table shows the top five results from Google’s
Answer Box for each category for the countries Germany and Italy when typing “notable [country] [category]” into Google.

89

