                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ELECTORAL INCENTIVES AND THE ALLOCATION OF PUBLIC FUNDS

                                          Frederico Finan
                                         Maurizio Mazzocco

                                        Working Paper 21859
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21859


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




We are grateful to participants at various seminars and conferences for helpful comments. Research
reported in this paper was supported by the National Science Foundation, Award Number 922444.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Frederico Finan and Maurizio Mazzocco. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Electoral Incentives and the Allocation of Public Funds
Frederico Finan and Maurizio Mazzocco
NBER Working Paper No. 21859
January 2016
JEL No. H40,H41

                                              ABSTRACT

It is widely believed that politicians allocate public resources in ways to maximize political gains.
But what is less clear is whether this comes at a cost to welfare; and if so, whether alternative electoral
rules can help reduce these costs. In this paper, we address both of these questions by modeling and
estimating politicians' decisions to allocate public funds. We use data from Brazil's federal legislature,
which grants each federal legislator a budget to fund public projects in his state. We find that 26 percent
of the public funds are distorted relative to a social planner's allocation. We then use the model to
simulate several potential policies reforms to the electoral system, including adopting approval voting
and implementing term limits. We find that an approval voting system reduces the distortions by 7.5
percent. Term limits also reduce distortions, but come at the cost of more corruption, which makes
it a welfare-reducing policy.


Frederico Finan
Department of Economics
University of California
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ffinan@econ.berkeley.edu

Maurizio Mazzocco
Department of Economics
UC, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 8377
Los Angeles, CA 90095
mmazzocc@econ.ucla.edu
1         Introduction
A central function of government is the provision of public goods and services. For instance, in
2014 governments throughout the world spent on average more than 34 percent of their countries’
GDP on public goods and services.1 When allocated and spent efficiently, these expenditures
can be important drivers of economic development and key determinants of quality of life. But,
as an extensive theoretical literature on distributive politics has argued, politicians care about
getting elected and these electoral incentives can often distort how public expenditures, and
hence public goods, are allocated. While the existence of these distortions are rarely disputed,
there is no empirical evidence on their magnitude or whether they can be reduced, which is
what we ultimately care about.
    The main contribution of this paper is to fill this gap in the literature. Specifically, we answer
two questions: What is the size of the distortions generated by electoral incentives? And, can
electoral policies reduce these distortions? We answer them in four steps.
    We begin by providing descriptive evidence on the main factors that underlie a politician’s
decision to allocate public funds using data from Brazil’s federal legislature. Consistent with
findings in other settings, we observe three main patterns in the data. First, the number of votes
a politician receives in a given region is strongly correlated with the amount of public funds he
had allocated there during the previous term. Other studies have documented this relationship
in other contexts as evidence that voters reward politicians who provide them with transfers
(e.g. Levitt and Snyder (1997), Manacorda, Miguel, and Vigorito (2011)). Second, studies
have also shown that politicians with electoral incentives target regions with more votes (Cary
M. Atlas (1995), Rodden (2002), Knight (2008)). We document a similar pattern, but find that
politicians also target regions with few voters, suggesting that non-electoral motives may also
affect a politician’s allocation decisions. Lastly, we provide evidence that legislators who run for
reelection allocate funds differently from those who do not, with the former targeting their funds
to regions that have relatively more voters and the latter favoring poorer and less developed
areas. This last pattern is consistent with a large literature documenting the importance of
reelection incentives on spending and policy choices (e.g. Besley and Case (1995), List and
Sturm (2006), Lim (2013)).
    We then develop a model sufficiently rich to not only capture these patterns in the data, but
to also allow for the evaluation of alternative electoral policies. In so doing, our model highlights
the following five key aspects of the allocation decisions of politicians.
    1
        This statistic comes from the 2014 Index of Economic Freedom.


                                                        1
    First, some politicians may value citizens’ welfare more than others. In our model, politicians
care about getting elected as well as aggregate welfare within the district, and they do so to
varying degrees. This heterogeneity in the degree of altruism of politicians can help explain why
they target poorer places that offer few votes.
    Second, we explicitly model the decision to run for reelection. Politicians who decide to run
are likely to have stronger reelection incentives than those who do not, which can affect how
they allocate public funds. By endogenizing this decision, our model can capture the observation
that politicians who run for reelection target regions with more voters, whereas those who do
not target relatively poorer and less populated areas.
    Third, we assume that citizens value public funds and vote for the politicians who they
believe will provide them with more resources in the future. With this feature of the model,
we can explain why in the data residents are more likely to vote for the incumbents who had
provided them with the most resources.
    Fourth, it is common in politics for the actions of one politician to affect the decisions of
other politicians. While this tends to be the case in general, it is particularly relevant in settings
where incumbents belong to and compete in the same electoral district. Because citizens can
only vote for one candidate, an incumbent may not want to allocate public funds to places that
he believes other incumbents are targeting. Our model explicitly accounts for the existence of
this type of strategic interactions.
    Finally, as exposed in recent media accounts in Brazil, the funds politicians allocate may
not translate fully into aggregate welfare gains. This could be because politicians steal some of
the funds. Or, the funds are designated for public goods that may not be entirely non-rival, in
the sense that one person’s use of the good may reduce the welfare derived by other residents
in the region. Our model allows for both of these possibilities when mapping public funds into
aggregate welfare.
    Given these features, we estimate our model by Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) using
data on the universe of public funds allocated by each federal legislator in Brazil from 1996-
2013. Brazil’s federal legislature provides an ideal setting to estimate a model of how politicians
allocate public funds across regions. Each year the Brazilian Constitution grants each federal
legislator a budget of BRL$1.5 million (US$750,000) to fund public projects in the state where
the legislator is elected.2 This constitutional provision allows us to investigate what factors
   2
   The study of Brazil’s budgetary amendments has a long tradition in the comparative politics literature. Since
Ames (1995) classic study, there have been a number of empirical studies investigating both the allocation of these
budget appropriations, as well as their electoral returns (e.g. Samuels (2003); Pereira and Renno (2003)). The


                                                        2
influence the politicians’ allocation decisions without worrying about the endogeneity of who
has access to these funds, which is an important concern in other contexts, such as in the
U.S. Congress. Moreover, these budgetary appropriations, which are commonly earmarked for
large-scale development projects, have important welfare considerations.
    Based on our estimates, we find that allocation patterns can be explained by two types of
politicians: an egoistic type, who cares almost exclusively about electoral incentives; and an
altruistic type, who also values the welfare implications of their decisions. The candidate pool
comprises 60 percent of egoistic types.
    Our estimates also suggest that legislators who decide not to run for reelection engage in 15
percent more corruption than deputies who have reelection concerns. This finding is consistent
with a large literature on term limits, and in particular with Ferraz and Finan (2011) who find
that mayors in Brazil with reelection incentives misappropriate 27 percent fewer resources than
mayors without reelection incentives. In addition to the fraction of resources diverted, we also
estimate the degree of rivalry of the public goods funded by the transfers. For every dollar a
municipality receives, slightly less than one cent of it represents a pure public good. Given the
average population size of municipalities in the data, our estimate implies that legislators are
funding goods that are approximately halfway between a pure public good and a private one.
    Consistent with the descriptive evidence, we find that voters are quite responsive to pub-
lic expenditures, and this responsiveness varies across regions. For instance, if an incumbent
transfers all of his resources from the region with the smallest political gains to the one with
the largest political gains his probability of getting reelected increases by 52 percentage points.
Incumbency advantage also matters in our model. Incumbent politicians have a probability of
being elected that is 36 percentage points higher than politicians that are not in power, all else
equal.
    Given our model estimates, we then proceed to answer our first question: What is the size
of the distortions generated by electoral incentives? We find that 26 percent of public funds
are distorted relative to a social planner’s allocation. Egoistic politicians who target regions
with more votes at the cost of poorer and more productive places are responsible for 74 percent
of these distortions. Had the pool of politicians only consisted of altruistic incumbents, the
distortions would reduce to 16 percent. These findings highlight not only the importance of
most recent example is Firpo, Ponczek, and Sanfelice (2012). The authors show that politicians tend to reward
municipalities that supported them in the previous election, and that among the legislators who seek reelection,
voters reciprocate by voting for the candidates who have brought more resources to their localities. Our study
complements and extends this body of work. Many of these results, which we replicate in our reduced-form
analysis, help to motivate our model and its underlying assumptions.


                                                       3
unobserved heterogeneity in the allocation of public funds, but also the need to account for it
when trying to understand allocation decisions.
    Lastly, we use counterfactual simulations to answer the second question: Can electoral poli-
cies reduce these distortions? To address this question, we simulate three possible policy reforms.
First, we consider the effects of adopting approval voting rules, which allow residents to vote
for more than one candidate. We find that approval voting has the desired effect of reducing
distortions, but the size of the decline is limited. For example, if Brazil’s government adopted a
system that allowed residents to vote for 8 candidates, the distortions in the allocation of public
funds would decrease by 7.5 percent.
    Although this represents an important improvement in aggregate welfare, there are two
countervailing forces that limit the efficacy of approval voting. On the one hand, under approval
voting the incentive to target regions with the most voters is not as strong. Thus, as politicians
shift their resources to other more productive municipalities, the distortions decrease. On the
other hand, approval voting lowers incumbency advantage, therefore making elections more
competitive. As we allow residents to select an increasing number of candidates, the probability
that a challenger is elected rises substantially. For instance, going from the current system
in which residents can vote for only one candidate to an 8-person voting system increases the
probability that a challenger wins by 29 percent. But as elections become more competitive,
the incentive to target regions with more voters become stronger and, if these places are less
productive, distortions increase.
    The second policy experiment considers an exogenous increase in the number of challengers.
Political contestation is widely considered the hallmark of a healthy political system. And
while we do not necessarily dispute this claim, our findings suggest that policies aimed at
increasing candidate entry will only increase the distortions in the allocation of public funds.
Given our previous finding, this is hardly a surprise. As political competition increases, political
considerations become more salient.
    The final policy we consider is the introduction of term limits. Brazil currently allows
legislators to be elected an indefinite number of times, but several countries have argued for,
and in some cases implemented, term limits as a way to improve representation and reduce
politician pandering. In our model the advantage of this policy is that electoral incentives would
no longer influence the way public funds are allocated. The disadvantage is that legislators who
do not run divert significantly more of the funds than those who still face reelection incentives.
The ability to determine which of these two effects dominate is an important contribution of


                                                 4
our model. When we compare the results of our model to a counterfactual situation in which
deputies cannot run for reelection, we find that political distortions do decrease by almost 40
percent (from 26 to 16 percent). However, because of the increase in corruption, welfare as a
whole actually goes down by 2 percent, suggesting that this policy is not welfare improving.
    Overall, our findings contribute to two broad strands of the literature. First, our study relates
to an extensive literature in both economics and political science that investigates the causes
and consequences of distributive politics. As Golden and Min (2013) report in an excellent and
comprehensive review of this vast literature, there have been numerous studies documenting the
importance of electoral incentives in the allocation of public goods and services, often at the
expense of aggregate welfare. And yet despite this attention, our study is, to our knowledge,
the first to quantify the welfare consequences of electoral incentives, and to show how different
electoral rules can help reduce potential deviations from a social planner’s allocation.
    Our focus on electoral rules naturally relates to a more specific literature within distributive
politics that examines the importance of electoral rules on public goods provision.3 The focus of
this literature has been mostly theoretical. For example, in his seminal study, Myerson (1993)
shows how different electoral systems can cause candidates to target minorities of voters even
when voters are identical. Lizzeri and Persico (2001) extend the Myerson model to also include
public goods. They show that, compared to a system of proportional representation, a winner-
take-all system will result in the under-provision of public goods even when they are highly
desirable. Persson and Tabellini (2005) show that majoritarian systems generate less public
goods provision than systems with proportional representation.
    We complement this literature in various ways. Most of the models in this literature have
focused exclusively on the electoral motives of politicians. In our model, we allow politicians to
also care heterogeneously about their district’s welfare. This feature of the model is important
for explaining why politicians target regions with few votes. Moreover, these models also tend
to only consider the allocation decisions of politicians who have decided to run. Here, we model
the decision to allocate public funds jointly with the decision to run. This extension allows us
to capture the fact that the allocation decisions of politicians with reelection incentives differ
from those who forgo reelection.
    The empirical literature has relied mostly on reduced-form evidence at the country or state
level. For example Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti, and Rostagno (2002) and Persson and Tabellini
   3
    See Persson and Tabellini (2000) for a general review of the literature. The implications of different vote-
counting schemes for candidate behavior is also reviewed in a 1995 JEP issue, see for example Levin and Nalebuff
(1995).


                                                       5
(2005) examine the effects of different political institutions, including electoral systems, on
outcomes such as economic policy, government spending, and budget deficits. They show that
the type of electoral system affects both the size and type of federal spending. Besley and
Case (2003) examine how differences in political institutions across the U.S. states, such as term
limits, can affect various policy outcomes. However, one limitation of relying on cross-country
or cross-state variation is the inability to control for unobserved heterogeneity, which we show is
an important driver of allocation decisions. One notable exception is the paper by Beath et al.
(2014), who use experimental variation in Afghanistan to show how electoral rules can affect
political selection.
    In contrast to the reduced-form literature, this paper uses a structural approach to under-
stand the effects of electoral institutions on the allocation of public funds. In this regard, our
paper is methodologically similar to Stromberg (2008).4 In that paper, he structurally estimates
how U.S. presidential candidates allocate their campaign resources across states. He finds that
had the U.S. adopted a popular vote system, as opposed to the Electoral College system, the
allocation of campaign spending would be much less concentrated.
    The paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes Brazil’s Federal legislature and
provides some institutional background. Section 3 describes the data we use to estimate the
model and presents the reduced-form evidence that motivates the study. The model is then
presented in Section 4, followed by a discussion of our estimation approach in Section 5. In
Section 6, we discuss the identification of our model’s parameters. Section 7 presents both our
estimation results, as well as our policy simulations. Section 8 concludes the paper.


2       Background: Brazil’s Federal Legislature
Brazil’s federal legislature provides an ideal laboratory to study the allocation of public funds.
In this section, we provide some basic background on Brazil’s political system, and highlight
some of the institutional features that facilitate our analysis.
   Brazil’s federal legislature, also referred to as Chamber of Deputies (we will use the terms
“Deputy” and “Legislator” interchangeably), consists of 513 seats allocated across 26 states
according to population size. Each state represents a multi-member voting district, where
candidates can receive votes from residents of any of its municipalities. As opposed to a single-
    4
    More broadly, our paper is related methodologically to a nascent literature in political economy that struc-
turally estimates the behavior of politicians. Examples include among others: Diermeier, Keane, and Merlo
(2005), Da Silveira (2012), Aruoba, Drazen, and Vlaicu (2015), and Kang (2015).


                                                       6
member district, incumbents not only face competition from new potential challengers, but also
from the other incumbents. Given this institutional feature, it is important for us to allow for
the possibility of strategic interactions.
    Nationwide elections for the legislature are held on a four-year cycle and incumbents can be
elected an unlimited number of times. Despite the lack of any term limit, legislative careerism
is relatively absent in Brazil. For instance, on average only 75 percent of deputies run for
reelection. Candidates are elected based on the D’hondt open-list proportional representation
method, which determines how the available seats are allocated. Specifically, seats are allocated
to parties based on the total number of votes their candidates receive. Then given the number
of seats a party has earned, candidates within the party are elected based on their vote total.
Voting in Brazil is mandatory, and although the electorate can vote for the political party, this
option is rarely exercised as elections tend to be highly individualized. It is also not unusual for
several elected officials to change parties during their electoral terms. In the 49th parliamentary
session, for example, 55 percent of deputies switched parties during their term. With such a
low degree of party loyalty, both from the standpoint of the politician as well as the electorate,
objectives of the party are unlikely to play an important role in the allocation of public funds.
As a result, our empirical analysis does not focus on party politics but instead on the individual
behavior of federal deputies.
    Another advantage of our setting is that the primary responsibility of federal deputies is to
allocate public funds and, unlike in other settings, access to these funds is exogenous. Brazil’s
legislature is comparatively weak and seldom legislates on issues of national concern (Ames
1995). As a Federal Deputy from Ceará stated in the Brazilian newspaper Folha de São Paulo
on February 21, 1988: “A political career in Brazil is closely connected to success in bringing
home material benefits . . . Especially in the poorest regions, communities judge their deputies on
what they bring home”; or Federal Deputy Joaquim Haickel expressed: “The primary function of
a deputy is getting resources; legislating comes second.” (Mainwaring 2002). To facilitate these
objectives, federal deputies have had the right to submit pork-barrel amendments to the budget
since 1988. Before 1996, members of Congress were not limited in the number of budgetary
proposal and between 1992 and 1995 averaged close to 137 per year per member. But starting
from 1996, the year we begin our analysis, Brazil’s constitution has allowed each member of
Congress discretion on how to allocate a fixed budget of BRL$1.5 million per year.




                                                 7
3       Summary Statistics and Descriptive Evidence
In this section, we present some summary statistics and descriptive evidence that will help
develop and estimate our structural model.


3.1     Data sources
To provide the descriptive evidence, we assemble an extensive database of political and municipal
characteristics for the period 1996 to 2013 and for all states in Brazil. The data used for this
study combines administrative data from three sources.
    To investigate budgetary allocations, we collected budgetary amendment data from the Fed-
eral Chamber of Deputies. Each budgetary amendment issued from 1996 to 2013 records the
author’s name, and the amount, type, and location of the public investment. These data are then
merged with election data from the Tribunal Superior Eleitoral (TSE). These data contain vote
total for each candidate by municipality, along with various individual characteristics, including
gender, education, occupation, and party affiliation. We use this information to construct our
primary measure of political support – municipal vote share – as well as various other measures
of electoral performance and competition, such as the candidate’s rank and vote total. Our final
data source is from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (Instituto Brasileiro de
Geografia e Estatı́stica (IBGE)). The 2000 and 2010 population censuses provide several socioe-
conomic and demographic characteristics such as poverty rates, income inequality, population
density, share of the population that is urban, and share of the population that is literate.


3.2     Summary Statistics
Table A.1 in the on-line appendix presents some basic information on the budgetary amendments
issued by federal deputies.5 For convenience, the results are based on the 50th legislature, which
issued budgetary amendments from 1996-1999 and faced the possibility of reelection in 1998.
Although for the reduced-form analysis we restrict the sample to a single term, the patterns we
present here are similar to those found in Firpo, Ponczek, and Sanfelice (2012) who also consider
additional terms.
    5
    The sample also contains the budget allocation of 135 non-elected deputies who were originally voted as
alternates, but later replaced elected deputies who were unable to fulfill their responsibilities. Inclusion of these
deputies does not affect our estimation results.




                                                         8
    On average, each year a deputy proposes 15 budgetary amendments that are approved, with
an approximate value of $1.3 million reais.6 Both the number and the amount decline slightly
over the electoral cycle, although differences across years are not large. The geographic variation
in the distribution of these public works is considerable (see Figure A.1 in the on-line appendix).
More than 10 percent of municipalities did not receive a single public work during the 1996-1999
term, with the median municipality only receiving BRL$280,000 in budgetary amendments. In
contrast, the top one percent of municipalities receive BRL$10,000,000.
    Table A.2 in the on-line appendix displays summary statistics by state corresponding to the
1998 election. On average, 68 percent of deputies from the 1996-1999 term, who had issued a
budgetary amendment, ran for reelection in 1998. Of those, 65 percent were reelected. These
averages however, mask considerable variation across states. In some states reelection rates
are above 80 percent, while in others they are even below 50 percent. Elected federal deputies
average anywhere between 5 to 21 times the number of votes that non-elected deputies receive.
Federal deputies are predominately male (90 percent), and only 60 percent of them have a college
degree.


3.3     Descriptive Evidence
Several features of the data guide our modeling choices. Our most basic assumption is that
voters care about the public funds they received from politicians, and reward the ones who
supply them. This assumption is based on the strong association observed in Panel (a) of Figure
1 between the number of votes a deputy receives in a particular municipality and the amount
of funds he provided to the municipality during the term. This relationship appears linear,
which is consistent with politicians targeting larger projects to more populated municipalities.
Consistent with this explanation, we do see some concavity when we instead plot on the y-axis
the share of votes received in the municipality (see Panle (b) of Figure 1). Larger projects may
do little to increase one’s vote share within a municipality, but can increase one’s vote total if
targeted to a more populated municipality. In Panel (c) of Figure 1, we indeed see that larger
projects are targeted to more populated places.
    In Table A.3 in the on-line appendix, we explore the robustness of these correlations to
unobserved deputy and municipal characteristics. Because each state is a multi-member district,
   6
    As mentioned previously, federal deputies were allowed up to 20 outlays totaling up to 1.5 million per year.
The limits are in general reached. However in our analysis, we only consider outlays targeted to a municipality
and exclude the ones that are designed to benefit either the state or the country as a whole.



                                                       9
we can estimate these correlations controlling for the fixed characteristics of the deputy (e.g.
valence, education levels) as well as the fixed characteristics of the municipality (e.g. poverty
levels, party affiliation). To do so, has little impact on the estimated relationship between
electoral performance and public spending in the municipality.
    Another way to visualize the data, which will motivate how we model the voting rule, is to
first measure how deputies rank within a municipality in terms of the amount of funds they
had allocated there. We then examine how this ranking relates to their vote share within
the municipality. In Figure 2, we describe this relationship by ploting the coefficients from
a regression of the share of votes within a municipality on a set of indicators that measure
a deputy’s ranking in the municipality. The regression controls for municipal fixed-effects.
Deputies ranked first receive vote shares that are 27 percentage points higher than those ranked
above 22 (the excluded category). The electoral returns to coming in second fall considerably,
as second-place finishers only have a 7 percentage point advantage. The vote shares of deputies
ranked third and above are statistically indistinguishable from the excluded category. These
results suggest that when casting their ballots, voters prefer the candidate who provides them
with the most public funds.
    Thus far, the evidence suggests that voters do care and reward politicians who supply them
with more public funds, and that politicians in turn target more resources to places with more
voters. But this does not necessarily imply that electoral returns are the only motives when
deciding where to allocate these public works. Politicians may target more populated places
because their funds are needed more in those regions. To provide more persuasive evidence on
the relevance of electoral incentives, we compare the allocations of public funds by incumbents
who chose to participate in the elections with the allocations of those who did not. In Panel
(a) of Figure 3, we plot the distribution of public funds by poverty levels for the two groups of
deputies. Panel (b) plots a similar figure using the municipality’s human development index,
which is a commonly used composite index of a country’s (or in our case a municipality’s) life
expectancy, educational attainment, and income level. As both graphs indicate, incumbents who
do not run for reelection are, on average, much more likely to target poorer and less developed
municipalities, relative to those with electoral concerns.
    While the differences reported in Figure 3 are suggestive of electoral incentives, together
with Panel (c) of Figure 1 they also document that deputies allocate a significant fraction of
their funds to poorer regions with fewer votes. Thus, electoral incentives may not be the only
motive behind the deputies’ decisions. Politicians appears to transfer part of their budget based


                                               10
on the needs of a municipality.


4     Model
In this section, we model the politicians’ allocation decisions with three goals in mind. First,
the model should be sufficiently rich so as to perform interesting policy evaluations. Second, it
should be able to generate the empirical patterns documented in the previous section, namely
(i) deputies allocate resources to municipalities with both high and low political returns; (ii)
deputies who choose not to run for reelection allocate their resources differently from those who
do run; and (iii) residents are more likely to vote for the deputy who supplied them with the
most public funds during the term. Third, the model should incorporate strategic interaction
among politicians to take into account that the actions of an incumbent are likely to affect the
allocation decisions of other incumbents.
    Given these objectives, consider an economy in which, in term t, J deputies make two choices.
First, they decide how to allocate a fixed amount of resources Q̄ among M municipalities.
Second, they choose whether to run for reelection at the end of the term. Each municipality
is populated by N m individuals who choose for which politicians to vote at the end of the
term. Let q j,m denote the amount of resources that deputy j allocates to municipality m; q j =
 j,1                                                                                      
  q , . . . , q j,M denote the collection of allocations chosen by deputy j; q = q 1 , . . . , q J denote
the allocations of all deputies; and q −j = q 1 , . . . , q j−1 , q j+1 , . . . , q J denote the allocations of
                                                 

all deputies except j. Finally, let Qm = Jj=1 q j,m be the total amount of funds received by
                                                P

municipality m.
    Before we can characterize the optimal decisions of deputies, we have to specify the prefer-
ences of deputies and voters, the electoral rule, and how each deputy interacts with his political
rivals. This will be the subject of the next three subsections.


4.1     Preferences
Voters’ Preferences. Voters in municipality m have preferences over the total amount of
resources allocated to the municipality by the J deputies, Qm . Their preferences also depend
on a set of municipality characteristics X m and a variable K m which accounts for every other
factor that affects the residents’ welfare. We characterize an individual’s preferences with the
following welfare function:
                                        wm (Qm , X m , K m ) ,

                                                      11
where wm is increasing in Qm . The total welfare of municipality m can then be calculated by
multiplying wm by the number of people living in the municipality:

                         Wm (Qm , X m , K m ) = N m wm (Qm , X m , K m ) .

    Note that the welfare function can vary across municipalities. With this heterogeneity, we
can account for any potential productivity differences across regions in the use of public funds.
Without this feature, we would not be able to distinguish between an environment in which
politicians target regions with more voters for political reasons versus one in which politicians
target more productive places that happen to have more voters.
    The amount of public funds a municipality receives may not necessarily translate fully into
welfare gains, for at least two reasons. First, deputies may divert a fraction of the funds, and
this amount may depend on whether or not they run for reelection. Second, the public good
produced with the allocated funds may not be fully non-rival, in that the use of the good by
one individual may reduce the welfare derived by other residents of the region. Our welfare
function can account for both of these possibilities by redefining Qm as the actual value of the
public good that reaches municipality m after taking into account the diversion of resources and
rivalry concerns.
                                                                                      0       0
    Formally, we allow for diversion by including in the model the parameters φR and φN R ,
               0           0
where 1 − φR and 1 − φN R measure the fraction of resources stolen by deputies who run and
do not run for reelection, respectively. These parameters allow for the possibility that deputies
who run for reelection may have different, and generally weaker, incentives to divert funds. To
obtain the actual amount received by municipality m, we multiply the nominal amount of funds
                                                   0
transferred by deputy j to municipality m by φR , if he chooses to run for reelection, and by
  0
φN R , if he chooses not to run.
                                                                   0
    We add rivalry in the model by introducing the parameter φ , which measures the severity
of the reduction in welfare due to the use of the public good by other residents. The parameter
  0
φ takes a value equal to 1 if deputies fund the production of a good that is non-rival and a
value smaller than 1 if there is some degree of rivalry. To obtain the amount of pure public
good enjoyed by municipality m, Qm , we then multiply the actual amount of funds received by
                                     0
municipality m by the parameter φ . The variable Qm is therefore defined as follows:
                                                                    
                                       JR            JN R
                                   0       0               0
                                      X              X
                             Qm = φ      φR q j,m +      φN R q j,m  ,                      (1)
                                         j=1            j=1



                                                 12
where JR is the number of deputies who choose to run for reelection and JN R is the corresponding
number for deputies who do not participate in the election.
   At most two of the three parameters in Equation (1) can be identified. To see this, we can
rewrite Qm as follows:
                                                                                      
                             JR          JN R 0              JR          JN R
                       0 0
                            X            X   φN R j,m       X            X
                 Qm = φ φR      q j,m +        0 q
                                                       = φ     q j,m +      φN R q j,m  .             (2)
                             j=1         j=1
                                              φ R            j=1         j=1


From the last definition of Qm , we can see that only φ and φN R can be identified, which measure
the degree of rivalry relative to the amount actually transferred by incumbents who run and the
fraction of funds not diverted by incumbents who do not run relative to those who do.

Deputies’ Preferences. Deputies have different preferences depending on their decision to
run for reelection. If they choose to run, their utility function comprises four parts. First, these
deputies derive utility from the opportunity of being in power. We will refer to this component
as the egoistic motive. Second, they derive utility from the welfare of the people living in their
district. We will refer to this part of the deputies’ preferences as the altruistic motive. The
last two components of the utility function are a utility cost of running for reelection and a
preference shock.
    Specifically, let vpj be deputy j’s utility from being in power in the next term, vnp
                                                                                       j
                                                                                          the utility
                                             ¯                                      j
if he is not in power in the next term, C̄R the cost of running for reelection, ¯ the preference
shock, and αj the weight that deputy j assigns to the altruistic motive. Lastly, denote by pj the
probability that deputy j wins the election at the end of the term, which will be derived in the
next subsection. Then, for a particular allocation of resources by all deputies q = {q 1 , . . . , q J },
incumbent j’s utility can be written in the following form:

                                                             M
                                                               Wm (Qm , X m , K m ) − C̄¯R + ¯j q j .
                                                             X
        ŪRj             j
                             (q) vpj           j
                                                   j      j
                                                                                                    
               (q) = p                 + 1 − p (q) vnp + α
                                                              m=1


The first part of the utility function, pj (q) vpj + (1 − pj (q)) vnp
                                                                   j
                                                                      , measures the expected utility of
running for reelection and represents the egoistic motive of politician j. Provided that vpj ≥ vnp   j
                                                                                                       ,
which is the only case in which the deputy will choose to compete in the next election, with this
part we can account for the fact that politicians tend to allocate more resources to municipalities
with higher electoral returns. The second part of the utility, αj m Wm , describes the altruistic
                                                                        P



                                                            13
motive of a politician and it allows us to explain why politicians might transfer part of their
funds to municipalities with limited political returns.
     To allow for sufficient heterogeneity, we will assume that the preference shock ¯j comprises
two parts. The first part depends on the allocation chosen by deputy j, which we will denote by
ε̄j (q). The second part, which we will denote by ν̄R , does not vary by allocation, but is specific
to the decision of running for reelection.
     We can rewrite deputy j’s utility in the following form:

                                                                            M
                                                                            X
                   ŪRj          j
                                           vpj            j             j
                                                                                  Wm − C̄R + ε̄j q j + ν̄R ,
                                                                                                   
                          (q) = p (q)            −       vnp       +α
                                                                            m=1


where C̄R = C̄¯R − vnp
                    j                   j
                       . Since vpj and vnp do not vary with the allocation chosen by deputy j, we
                                                   j
can divide the politician’s utility by α + vpj − vnp
                                         j
                                                     and obtain

                                                                        M
                                                                        X
                    URj                              j              j
                                                                              W m − C R + εj q j + νR .
                                                                                                
                           (q) = (1 − βj ) p (q) + β
                                                                        m=1


From this alternative formulation of the politician’s utility, we can see clearly the tradeoff
deputies face when choosing how to allocate their budget across municipalities. They can
allocate their resources either to increase their probability of remaining in power or to increase
the welfare of the people residing in a region. How much a deputy is willing to trade off between
                                                                     j
these two considerations depends on the parameter β j = αj +vαj −vj . We interpret β j as the
                                                                    p  np
degree of altruism of deputy j, and we will refer to it as deputy j’s type.
    If deputy j decides not to run for reelection, his utility function is identical to the utility of
an incumbent who chooses to run except that the probability of winning and the cost of running
are now equal to zero. It therefore takes the following form:

                                                     M
                                                     X
                   ŪNj R             j          j
                                                           Wm (Qm , X m , K m ) + ε̄j q j + ν̄N R .
                                                                                         
                            (q) =    vnp   +α
                                                     m=1


If we divide the utility by the same value used for a deputy who participates in the election,
αj + vpj − vnp
            j
               , we have a utility function that depends on the type β j :

                                                     M
                                                     X
                   ŪNj R (q) = v̄np
                                  j
                                     + βj                  Wm (Qm , X m , K m ) + εj q j + νN R .
                                                                                        
                                                     m=1



                                                                    14
We can see from this utility function that political incentives do not play a role, and only
welfare considerations affect the allocation decisions of deputies who do not run. This feature of
the model allows us to generate the observed pattern that deputies who choose not to run are
more likely to allocate resources to poorer municipalities with fewer votes. The fact that these
incumbents care only about welfare does not imply, however, that they will maximize aggregate
municipal welfare. They can always divert part of their funds.
    Note that diverted funds only enter a deputy’s utility through the welfare function. This
simplification is without loss of generality. Because the fraction diverted does not vary across re-
                                                         0                                   0   
gions, the amount stolen is the constant fraction 1 − φR Q̄ for deputies who run and 1 − φN R Q̄
for deputies who do not. Therefore, the diversion of resources only affects the deputies’ decisions
through Wm .


4.2     Residents’ Voting Decisions and Deputies’ Strategic Interactions
The probability that politician j wins the election depends both on the number of available
seats, S, and his total number of votes. Residents vote based on two factors – the amount of
future resources they expect to receive from a given politician, and a voting preference shock,
ξ i,j,m . How voters form expectations over the level of future public funds depends on whether the
politicians is an incumbent or a challenger. For incumbents, voters form expectations using the
following three variables: the amount of funds the deputy transferred to their municipality during
the current term; the amount of funds the other incumbents transferred to the municipality;
                                                                         0
and the deputy’s characteristics X j .7 Specifically, the amount q j,m a voter in municipality m
expects to receive from deputy j in the next term takes the following form:
                                        0
                                                                            
                                                            −j,m
                                   j,m           j,m                    j
                                                                                = f q j,m , q −j,m , X j .
                                                                                                        
                            E q              q         ,q          ,X

    Voters must also form expectations over the amount of public funds they will receive from
the JC challengers participating in the elections. Because challengers were not in power during
the previous term, voters cannot condition their expectations on previous allocations. Instead,
we assume that voters believe that, if a challenger is elected, he will select one of the feasible
allocations with a probability that corresponds to the probability with which incumbents choose
that allocation in the current term. This assumption guarantees consistency of the deputies’
   7
    The data support this assumption. Conditional on legislator fixed-effects, a region that received public
funds in the previous term is 45.8 (robust standard error = 0.011) percentage points more likely to receive public
resources in the next term.


                                                                    15
choices across terms.
    We can now formalize the voter’s decision. Let JE = JR +JC denote the number of politicians
taking part in the elections. Then, individual i in municipality m votes for politician j, if the
following condition is satisfied:

       j = argmaxj∈J f q 1,m , q −1,m , X 1 + ξ i,1,m , . . . , f q JE ,m , q −JE ,m , X JE + ξ i,JE ,m .
                                                                                         
                                                                                                            (3)

Note that this voting decision is consistent with residents’ preferences. Because voters’ welfare
increases with the amount of public funds received, conditional on the shock it is optimal for
the district residents to vote for the politician who is expected to transfer the largest amount
of resources. With this voting rule, we can rationalize the relationship observed in the data
between the ranking of a deputy within a municipality in terms of the amount of public funds
provided and his share of votes.
    Using Equation (3) we can determine the total number of votes received by politician j in
the district. Let dij be a variable equal to 1 if resident i plans to vote for candidate j and 0
otherwise and denote by N = M            m
                                 P
                                   m=1 N    the number of voters in the district. Lastly, let θj a
district-level voting shock that determines the share of residents planning to vote for politician
j who abstain from voting, with 0 ≤ θj ≤ 1. This shock can be interpreted as news about the
candidate arriving just before the election. The total number of votes politician j receives in
the district can then be computed as follows:

                                                              N
                                                              X
                                         nv (j) = (1 − θj )         dij .
                                                              i=1


The probability that deputy j wins an election with S seats is:

                   Pwin (j) = P (nv (j) > nv (k) for all k except at most S − 1) .

    In our model the utility and therefore the choices of deputy j clearly depend on the decisions
of all other deputies. To deal with these strategic interactions, we make two assumptions. First,
deputies make simultaneous decisions. Second, deputies do not know the type of the other
legislators, where the type represents the degree of altruism β. Deputies know, however, the
distribution function π (β) from which the types are independently drawn.
    Given these assumptions, when deputy j chooses his optimal allocation and whether to run,
he does not know and cannot calculate the optimal decisions of the other incumbents. Deputy j

                                                      16
can only compute, given the opponents’ characteristics, the probability that his political rivals
will choose whether to run and one of the possible allocations. Let djR be deputy j’s decision
                                                                              
to compete in the next election. We will denote by σ q h , dhR X h the probability that deputy
j assigns to incumbent h choosing whether to run and allocation q h given characteristics X h .
Under the assumption that types are drawn independently from the same distribution, the
probability that j’s rivals choose the sequence of choices q −j = q 1 , . . . , q j−1 , q j+1 , . . . , q J and
                                                                            

the sequence of decisions to participate d−j                          j−1 j+1
                                                          1                            J
                                                    R = dR , . . . , dR , dR , . . . , dR can then be written
in the following form
                               σ−j (q −j , d−j       −j               h h    h
                                                                               
                                             R |X ) = Πh6=j σ q , dR X           ,

where X −j = X 1 , . . . , X j−1 , X j+1 , . . . , X J .
               



4.3     Deputies’ Optimal Decisions
Now that the politicians’ and residents’ preferences, the voting decisions, and the strategic
interactions have all been specified, we can describe the deputies’ choices. We will do this in
two steps. Conditional on the decision to run for reelection, we first discuss how deputies choose
the optimal allocation of resources. We then determine whether it is optimal for them to run.
    Consider first the case in which it is optimal for deputy j to participate in the election.
Conditional on running, he chooses the allocation that maximizes the expected value of his
utility, where the expectation is taken over the decisions of his political rivals. Specifically,
                                     
deputy j selects the allocation q j = q j,1 , . . . , q j,M that solves the following problem:

                                   Z "                                  M
                                                                        X
                                                                                 #
VRj X m , X −j , β   j                         j
                                                     pj (q) + β j             Wm dσ−j (q −j , d−j  −j         j  j
                                                                                                                 
                           = max
                              j
                                         1−β                                                   R |X ) − CR + ε q     + νR
                             q
                                                                        m=1
                                                             M
                                                             X
                                                      s.t.         q j,m ≤ Q̄,                                     (4)
                                                             m=1


where VRj (X m , X −j , β j ) is the value of competing in the election.
   Consider now the case in which it is optimal for deputy j not to run for reelection. In this
case, his utility does not depend on the political incentives, and the optimal allocation solves




                                                                   17
the following problem:
                                          Z "                   M
                                                                X
                                                                        #
      VNi R    m     −j   j                       j         j
                                                                     Wm dσ−j (q −j , d−j  −j    j  j
                                                                                                    
              X ,X ,β             = max
                                     j
                                                v̄np   +β                             R |X ) + ε q     + νN R
                                     q
                                                           m=1
                                                          M
                                                          X
                                                             j,m
                                                   s.t.         q      ≤ Q̄,                                    (5)
                                                          m=1


where VNj R (X m , X −j , β j ) denotes the value of not running.
  We can now determine whether deputy j will compete in the election. He will if

                                   VRj X m , X −j , β j ≥ VNj R X m , X −j , β j .
                                                                               


    We conclude the description of the model by outlining the timing of the game played by the
politicians and by providing a definition of its equilibrium. It is straightforward to describe the
timing. First, nature reveals β j to the politicians. The deputies’ preference shocks are then
realized, and the politicians simultaneously decide how much to transfer to each municipality
subject to their resource constraint and whether to run for reelection. Lastly, the voting pref-
erence and district-level shocks are realized and residents cast their vote. The equilibrium that
characterizes our model is a Bayesian-Nash equilibrium, which can be defined as follows.

Definition 1 Allocations q 1∗ , . . . , q J∗ and the deputies’ decisions to run for reelection d1∗           J∗
                                                                                                R , . . . , dR
are a Bayesian-Nash equilibrium if, for each deputy j, conditional on q −j∗ and d−j∗    R , the decisions
          j∗
q j∗ and dR maximize deputy j’s expected utility.

We will show that an equilibrium exists in the next section, after we introduce the assumptions
required for estimating the model.


4.4     The Social Planner’s Problem
Before we discuss how we estimate our model, it is useful to define the benchmark we will
use to measure the size of the distortions. We define our benchmark as the allocation Qsp =




                                                                18

    Q1 , . . . , QM   of aggregate funds, J × Q̄, that maximizes aggregate welfare, i.e.

                                                               M
                                                               X
                                             sp
                                           Q       = arg max         Wm
                                                    Q1 ,...,QM m=1
                                                   M
                                                   X
                                                         m
                                            s.t.        Q ≤ J × Q̄.
                                                    m


We will then use deviations from this benchmark in the allocation of public funds as our measure
of distortions.


5        Econometric Implementation
In this section, we discuss functional form assumptions and the estimation method. To estimate
the proposed model, we need to make functional form assumptions for the probability that
deputy j wins an election, the welfare function, and the distribution of the shocks.

Probability of Winning an Election. For the probability of winning an election, we
make the following assumptions. First, we assume that the expected allocation function
f (q j,m , q −j,m , X j ) is linear in its arguments and independent of q −j,m . While these assump-
tions might seem strong, it turns out that they are not overly restrictive. We have explored
more flexible functional forms, and have allowed f (·) to be a function of the maximum amount
of resources allocated by deputy j’s opponents. However, once we control for q j,m , these other
terms have no significant effect on the results. Second, we allow the constant in f (q j,m , q −j,m , X j )
to vary between incumbents and challengers, but not within incumbents and challengers. The
difference between the two constant terms can be interpreted as a measure of the incumbency
effect. Third, we allow the coefficient on the current allocation q j,m to vary across municipalities.
Consequently, conditional on q j,m , voters will have different expectations about future alloca-
tions depending on which municipality they live in. These assumptions imply the following form
for f (q j,m , q −j,m , X j ):
                                      f q j,m , q −j,m , X j = γ0,j + γ1,m q j,m .
                                                            

Finally, we assume that the voting preference shocks ξ i,j,m are drawn from a type I extreme-
value distribution and the district-level voting shocks θj from a uniform distribution with support
[0, σθ ], with σθ ≤ 1.


                                                         19
    Given these assumptions, we can compute the probability that a deputy wins an election
in a way that approximates the electoral system used in Brazil. At the time incumbents make
decisions, they do not know which challengers will enter the electoral race or the realization of
the district-level shocks θj . They therefore choose the optimal allocation and whether to partic-
ipate in the election using the expected probabilities of winning the election that correspond to
different choices, where the expectation is taken over the probability distribution of challengers’
allocations and district-level shocks.8
    The expected probabilities of winning corresponding to particular choices by incumbents
is calculated as follows. For a particular set of deputies’ choices q and dR , we draw a set of
district-level shocks and a set of allocations voters and incumbents believe will be selected in
the subsequent term by challengers. Using Equation (3) and the assumption that the voting
preference shocks are distributed according to an extreme value distribution, we then compute
the total number of residents who plan to vote for each candidate. The district-level shocks are
then used to determine the actual number of votes received by each politician. The candidates
ranked within the top S vote totals win the election for this particular set of challengers’ choices
and district-level shocks, where S is the number of available seats. We then draw a new set of
challengers’ allocations and district-level shocks and re-compute who wins the elections. These
steps are repeated 1000 times to calculate the conditional expected probabilities of winning the
election. This process must be repeated for each set of possible deputies’ choices.

Welfare Function. We specify the welfare function to meet several objectives. It should be
concave to account for the decreasing returns to public funds. It should be flexible enough to
accommodate the effects of other goods and services that are not financed by the deputies (e.g.
projects funded by other public offices, public goods generated by private organizations, private
projects, and private consumption). Finally, it should allow for the possibility that the funds
are more productive and valued more in some municipalities than in others, thus generating
higher welfare in those municipalities.
   Based on these objectives, we assume the following welfare function:

                                         wm = ρm log (y m + Qm ) ,
   8
    We can determine the incumbents’ optimal decisions using the deputies’ expected probabilities of winning
the election because their utility is linear in those probabilities. Without linearity, we would have to compute
the expectation over challengers and shocks of their entire utility function.




                                                      20
where ym is per-capita income of municipality m and Qm is the actual amount of non-rival public
good received by municipality m as defined in Equation (2). With the logarithmic specification
we can allow for decreasing returns. The municipality per-capita income ym enables us to
account for the existence of other goods and services that may affect the individual welfare and
for the possibility that their value varies by municipality. Finally, with the coefficient ρm we can
allow for two types of heterogeneity across municipalities. First, we can introduce productivity
differences across municipalities. Second, we can account for possible differences in the weights a
deputy assigns to the welfare of different municipalities. Notice that we can only identify the joint
effect of productivity differences and differences in weights. This identification issue is a general
result and does not depend on the functional form we have assumed. Indeed, to separately
identify the effect of productivity differences from the effect of differences in preferences, one
would need to observe data on productivity of projects located in different municipalities, which
is not available for the regions we consider.

Preference Shocks. Along with the voting preference shocks and the district-level shocks,
which were discussed earlier, our model is characterized by the two preference shocks we in-
troduced when describing the deputies’ preferences. The first shock νR is independent of the
allocation chosen by the deputy and only affects the decision to run. It is drawn from a normal
distribution with mean 0 and variance σν . The second shock εj (q j ) depends on the allocation
selected by the deputy. To add flexibility to the model we allow the allocation-specific shock to
have a different distribution depending on whether the deputy chooses to compete in the next
election. Specifically, we assume that the shock is drawn from a normal distribution with mean
0, but with variance σε,R if the deputy chooses to run for reelection and with variance σε,N R if
he decides not to run.

Model Estimation. Together with our functional form assumptions, we impose the following
assumptions to make the estimation computationally tractable. First, we assume that the
number of types is discrete. In the estimation, we experimented with two and three types and
the data are consistent with two types of deputies: egoistic types (low β) and altruistic types
(high β). Second, we discretize the provision of public goods into four choices. Specifically, a
deputy can choose to give 0 percent, 33.33 percent, 66.66 percent, or 100 percent of the budget
to a given municipality subject to the constraint that the allocations must add up to BRL$1.5
million. Third, as it is standard in the estimation of games, we will assume that only one
equilibrium is observed in the data (Draganska et al. 2008).

                                                 21
    Lastly, we estimate the model for the state of Roraima. This state, which is located in
the northwestern part of Brazil, comprises 15 municipalities, which we aggregate into 4 macro-
regions. We do this for two reasons. First, public projects assigned to one municipality are likely
to benefit the surrounding municipalities as well. Typical examples include hospitals and schools.
The aggregation of municipalities into macro-regions allows us to mitigate the effects of these
spillovers. The second reason is that computationally the estimation becomes manageable. Each
term Roraima elects 8 deputies to the Chamber. With four regions and four possible choices for
each region, each of the 8 deputies can select among 20 feasible allocations. To construct the
deputy’s expected utility for one of the allocations he may choose, we have to consider all possible
combinations that can be selected by the deputy’s rivals. This implies that to solve the deputy’s
problem we have to consider 208 = 2.56e10 combinations. Even with the use of Message Passing
Interface (MPI), which allows us to use simultaneously multiple processors in the estimation, and
the aggregation of municipalities into macro regions, our model is computationally demanding.
Without the aggregation, the estimation would be extremely difficult.
    Now that we have outlined all the assumptions of the model, we are in position to prove that
a Bayesian-Nash Equilibrium exists.

Proposition 1 The model estimated in this paper has a Bayesian-Nash equilibrium in mixed
strategies. Moreover, for every  > 0, the model is consistent with a pure-strategy -equilibrium.

Proof. In the Appendix.
     Given our assumptions, we estimate 18 parameters, which we separate into five sets. The
first set includes the three parameters related to the politician’s type: βL , βH , and π. The second
set characterizes the voting decisions. This includes the voting function parameters γ0 , γ1,1 , γ1,2 ,
γ1,3 , γ1,4 , and the district-level shock parameter σθ . The third set consists of the productivity
parameters ρ1 , ρ2 , ρ3 , and ρ4 . Since each deputy’s allocation to the different localities must add
up to BRL$1.5 million, we can only identify three out of the four parameters. We therefore
normalize their sum to 1 and estimate three of them. The fourth set is composed of the two
parameters that determine the actual amount of non-rival public good enjoyed by a municipality:
φ and φN R . The last set includes the cost of competing in the elections ν, and the variances of
the preference shocks σν , σε,R , and σε,N R .
     We estimate these parameters by simulated method of moments (SMM) using data on allo-
cation choices, decisions to run for reelection, and electoral outcomes. Specifically, for one set of
parameters we consider an initial set of beliefs and simulate the deputies’ decisions. Given the
deputies’ decisions, we compute the beliefs generated by the model and compare them with the

                                                  22
initial beliefs. If the distance between the two sets of beliefs is large, we re-simulate the model
using as initial beliefs the beliefs generated by the model. When the distance between the initial
and the simulated beliefs is sufficiently small, we compute the simulated moments used in the
estimation and compare them with the corresponding data moments. We compute the standard
errors using the asymptotic distribution of the estimated parameters.


6    Identification Discussion and Moments Selection
In this section, we discuss the identification of the model’s parameters. The model is sufficiently
complex that a mathematical proof of their identification is not possible. Instead, we provide a
heuristic argument for the variation we use to identify each one of them.


Productivity Parameters
Identification. Four productivity parameters characterize the welfare function: ρ1 , ρ2 , ρ3 ,
and ρ4 . As discussed in the previous section, we normalize their sum to one and estimate only
ρ2 , ρ3 , and ρ4 . To identify these parameters, we exploit the fact that, in our model, deputies
who do not run for reelection allocate resources based only on welfare considerations. Under
this assumption, the allocation decisions of these deputies identify the productivity parameters.
Specifically, we use the difference between their average allocation to region 1 and their average
allocation to region i to identify ρi , for i = 2, 3, 4.
     In principle, incumbents who do not run may still have other electoral motives that affect
their allocation decisions. In practice, for the state of Roraima, these motives are limited.
Among the deputies who do not run for reelection, 65 percent have remained out of politics.
The electoral motives for these deputies are likely to be nonexistent, or at best minimal. Of the
remaining 35 percent, 85 percent sought an elected office in the capital city, such as vice mayor
or vice governor, and 15 percent ran for the State Legislator or for a federal seat in the Senate.
These politicians do have electoral motives and, given their career choices, have an incentive to
target region 1, because it has a majority of the voters and is where the capital city resides. In
these cases, we will estimate a lower bounds for the distortions.
     Another possibility to consider is that deputies who choose not to run for reelection allocate
more resources to their hometown for personal reasons, such as funding projects that will benefit
themselves and their neighbors. The deputies from Roraima all come from region 1. Thus, if
these hometown motives are present, our estimates of the distortions will again represent lower

                                                23
bounds.

Moments. To estimate the welfare parameters ρ2 , ρ3 , and ρ4 , we follow the previous discussion
and use as moments the average share of resources allocated to regions 1, 2, and 3 by incumbents
who choose not to run for office. The corresponding share for region 4 cannot be used because
it is equal to one minus the sum of the shares for the other regions.


Altruism Parameters
Identification. Given the productivity parameters, we can then identify the altruism param-
eters βL , βH , and π using the difference in allocations between incumbents who compete in the
elections and those who do not. To see why, first consider the case in which there is only one
type of deputy. The difference in allocations between those who run and those who do not iden-
tifies the parameter β. If there is no difference, the degree of altruism will be identified to be 1.
If deputies who compete in the election transfer a larger fraction of resources to municipalities
with higher political gains, β will be less than 1 and will approach 0 as this difference increases.
     With two types, the model can account for situations in which there are two distinct groups of
deputies who run for reelection. The first allocates a larger fraction of their funds to regions with
high political gains when compared to deputies who do not run. The second group also targets
their funds to regions with high political gains, but to a lesser extent, again when compared to
deputies who do not participate.

Moments. In addition to the three moments used to identify the welfare parameters, we also
use the average share of resources allocated to regions 1, 2, and 3 by incumbents who decide to
run for reelection.


Voting Function Parameters
Identification. To identify the incumbency effect γ0 , we compare the average probability of
getting elected between incumbents and challengers. For the parameters that measure the effect
of public funds on the number of votes γ1,m , m = 1, . . . , 4, we use the following sources of
variation: the probability that an incumbent wins the elections conditional on transferring a
large share of funds to region m and the share of resources allocated to region m by deputies
who were reelected and by deputies who lost reelection. Conditional on the number of voters
in region m, a high probability of winning if a large budget share is transferred to that locality

                                                 24
indicates that funds allocated there translates into a high number of votes. Thus, γ1,m must
be large. Similarly, a large difference between the share of resources allocated to region m by
deputies who were reelected and deputies who lost reelection indicates that in that locality
public funds transform easily into votes and, hence, γ1,m must be large. Finally, to identify the
support of the district-specific shock σθ , we compare the probability of winning the election if a
large budget share is allocated to the region with most voters with the corresponding probability
for the region with the smallest number of voters. If the distance is small, the probability of
winning the election is determined predominantly by district-specific shocks. If the distance is
large, the probability is determined mostly by deputies’ transfers and σθ must be small.

Moments. To estimate the voting function parameters we add to the set of moments (i) the
difference in the average probability of election between incumbents and challengers, (ii) the
difference in the average share of resources allocated to region m between politicians who won
reelection and those who lost, for m = 1, . . . , 4, and (iii) the average probability with which
an incumbent is reelected conditional on transferring to municipality m at least 2/3 of their
resources for m = 1, . . . , 4.


Rivalry and Diversion of Resource Parameters
Identification. To identify the rivalry parameter φ, we use the correlation between the dif-
ference in per-capita GDP between two municipalities and the corresponding difference in the
amount of funds received. To understand why this variation identifies this parameter, consider
two regions with different per-capita GDP. Deputies without electoral incentives but some degree
of altruism will transfer public funds to the region with lower per-capita GDP until its residents’
marginal welfare is equal to the marginal welfare of the residents’ of the region with higher per-
capita GDP. The same argument holds for deputies with electoral incentive and some degree of
altruism, except that these deputies will only narrow the distance between the marginal welfare
of the two regions without equating it, where the distance depends on the relevance of the elec-
toral incentives and the degree of altruism. Now consider the case in which φ is low, and hence
there is a high degree of rivalry in Qm . In this environment, conditional on the productivity
parameters, the transfers to the region with lower per-capita GDP have to be significantly larger
to reduce the difference between the regions’ marginal welfare. If instead, φ is high, a smaller
difference in transfers is sufficient to generate the required outcome. We can therefore pin down
the parameter φ using the described variation in per-capita GDP and allocated funds.


                                                25
    The identification of the diversion parameter φN R requires a similar type of variation for
incumbents who do not run. If these deputies divert more funds than incumbents who run, a
small difference in per-capita GDP requires bigger differences in funds transferred to the two
regions to equate marginal welfare. Therefore, we can identify φN R using the correlation between
differences in per-capita GDP and differences in the amount transferred by deputies who forgo
reelection.
    It is important to remark that the only requirement for the described variation to provide
identification of φ and φN R is the concavity of the welfare function. The functional form we
have selected helps us reduce the number of parameters accounting for rivalry and diversion to
two. But the same argument applies to more general concave functions.

Moments. Following the previous discussion, we use two moments to estimate φ and φN R .
To construct the first moment, for deputies who run, we first compute the difference between
the public funds allocated to the region with the highest per-capita GDP, region 1, and the
public funds allocated to any other region. We then calculate the difference in per-capita GDP
between region 1 and any other region. Finally, we compute the ratio of the two differences
described above and take the average," where the average# is taken over regions and terms. We
                                       Qn,k
                                         R − QR
                                                 n,highGDP
therefore use as our first moment E                        , where Qn,mR   is the amount of funds
                                         y highGDP − y k
allocated to region m according to the data. The second moment
                                                            "       is constructed# using the same
                                                              QN R − Qn,highGDP
                                                               n,k
                                                                         NR
procedure for deputies who do not run, which produces E                            .
                                                               y highGDP − y k

Cost of Running Parameter and Variance Parameters
Identification. The last four parameters of the model are the cost of running, ν, the variance
of the shocks to the decision to run σν , and the variances of the preference shocks σε,R and
σε,N R . We identify the cost of running using the fraction of deputies who choose to run for
reelection. We identify σν using the difference in the probability of running between deputies
who transferred most of their resources to the region with the highest political gains and deputies
who allocated most of their funds to the region with the lowest political gains. If σν is low, the
described difference should be large. To understand why, notice that only incumbents for whom
the benefits of being reelected outweigh the cost of participation will chose to run in the election.
This group is composed of deputies with a probability of being reelected that is sufficiently large:
if the probability is low, it is not worth paying the cost of participation. With a low σν , the

                                                 26
probability of winning will be sufficiently high predominantly for deputies who allocated funds
to the region with high political gains. The difference between our two variables will therefore
be large. Using the same line of reasoning, if σν is high, the decision to run is mostly based
on individual shocks. As a consequence, the described difference will be small. Finally, the
variances of the preference shocks σε,R and σε,N R can be identified using the variance of the
allocations chosen by deputies who ran for reelection and the variance for those who did not,
respectively.

Moments. Following the previous discussion, the cost of running parameter and the variance
of the shock to the decision to run are estimated by using the fraction of incumbents who
choose to participate in the election and the probability of running conditional on transferring
to municipality m at least 2/3 of the budget for m = 1, 2, 3. The variances of the preference
shocks are estimated by using the following two moments: the variance across regions of the
allocation of resources conditional on running and the same variance conditional on not running.


7     Results
In this section, we present the estimates of our structural model and our policy simulations.
As mentioned above, the model is estimated for the state of Roraima. We focus on this state
because it is representative of a group of states that are poorer and less populated. For example,
in Roraima 56 percent of households live below the poverty line, and average per-capita income is
only R$133 per month. For these states it is particularly important to understand how resources
are allocated and how to reduce the effect of political distortions since it could lead to large and
positive effects on individual welfare.
    Of the four macro regions that compose the state, region 1, which contains the capital city,
is the wealthiest and most populated. It has a population of 80,293 inhabitants and its GDP
per capita is BRL$5,833. In contrast, the other three regions are much less populated and much
poorer. Region 2 is the least populated with 9,658 inhabitants, followed by region 4 (10,495)
and region 3 (10,820). These regions have a similar ranking in terms of per-capita GDP.


7.1    Parameter Estimates
Productivity Parameters: As we discussed in Section 6, the allocation decisions of deputies
who chose to forgo reelection identify the productivity parameters ρ1 , . . . , ρ4 . To get a sense

                                                27
for how this variation identifies these parameters, in Panel (a) of Figure 4 we plot the average
allocations by incumbents who did not run (denoted by the darker bars). We see that region 1
receives only 10% of the available funds, regions 2 and 3 receive more than twice that amount,
and region 4 receives the largest proportion of funds at 40%. Our model will estimate produc-
tivity parameters to match this pattern in the data, which is precisely what we see in Table
1. Region 1 has the lowest productivity level at 0.03, regions 2 and 3 have similar estimated
productivity parameters at 0.260 and 0.238, and region 4 has by far the highest estimated pro-
ductivity with a coefficient equal to 0.472. The lighter bars in Panel (a) of Figure 4 and the first
three rows of Table 2 show that, with these parameter estimates, our model can match almost
perfectly the observed allocation pattern for deputies who forgo reelection. The simulated data
deviates from the actual data by at most 1.2 percentage points.
    To interpret the magnitude of these welfare parameters, we compute the change in welfare
after reallocating one dollar from the lowest productivity region (region 1) to one of the other
three regions. The welfare effect of reallocating one dollar is 3.05 times larger for region 4 than
for region 2 and 4.3 times larger for region 4 than for region 3.

Altruism Parameters: The altruism parameters are identified by the difference in allocations
between incumbents who ran versus those who did not. The darker bars in Panel (b) of Figure
4 depict the average allocations of incumbents who ran for reelection. The allocations display a
clear U-shaped pattern: region 1 receives the largest fraction of resources, followed by region 4
which receives 2% less than region 1. Region 2 receives 24% of the funds, and region 3 receives
the least with only 17% of the funds. To match this pattern in the data, the model needs two
types of deputies with different degrees of altruism. We need one who cares almost exclusively
about reelection incentives to explain the large fraction allocated to region 1, and a second,
who cares both about altruism and electoral incentives, to explain why deputies who run for
reelection transfer such a large fraction of resources to region 4, which has limited political gains
but high productivity. Consistent with this argument, we estimate β = 0.038 for the egoistic
type, and a much higher β of 0.173 for the altruistic type. Based on these estimates, an altruistic
type is willing to substitute 1 vote for 44.3 dollars of welfare, whereas an egoistic type would
require a welfare improvement of 232 dollars in order to trade off a vote.
    To get a better sense for how this unobserved heterogeneity affects the allocation of public
funds, in Figure 5 we compute the simulated share of funds allocated to the various regions
distinguishing between the two types of politicians. The differences across politicians are quite
stark: egoistic deputies allocate more than 36 percent of their funds to region 1, where the

                                                 28
electoral incentives are the strongest. Altruistic deputies instead target region 4 relatively more,
where the productivity of an extra dollar is the highest. They also give a substantial share of
their funds to regions 2 and 3, which are also significantly more productive than region 1. The
combination of these two types of politicians allows the model to explain the U-shaped pattern.
    The proportion of types in the pool of politicians is estimated by matching the difference in
allocations at the two ends of the U-shaped distribution. If the difference is large and positive
then the model requires a larger fraction of egoistic deputies to rationalize the data. If, instead,
the difference is large and negative, the model needs a large fraction of altruistic types. In the
data the difference is positive but small, with region 1 receiving only 2% more funds than region
4. We therefore need a fraction of altruistic types that is slightly lower than 0.5, and we estimate
π = 0.404.
    With these parameter estimates we match the average allocations of deputies who compete
in the elections well. Table 2 indicates that the largest difference between the simulated and
actual data is quite small at 2.3 percentage points for region 1.

Voting Parameters: The incumbency parameter γ0 is identified by the difference in the
average probability of winning an election between incumbents and challengers. Table 2 reports
that incumbents have on average a 51 percentage point advantage over challengers. Our model
matches this difference well with γ0 = 0.032. Based on this estimated parameter, we can
compute the incumbency advantage by calculating the average probability that a deputy wins
reelection over all possible allocations, and compare it to the same probability when γ0 = 0. The
incumbency effect is substantial. The average probability of winning the elections increases from
27.7 percent without incumbency advantage to 63.2 percent with the advantage, an increase of
35.5 percentage points.
    Two sets of moments identify the parameters that measure the effects of public funds on
vote shares, γ1,1 , . . . , γ1,4 . The first set comprises the probabilities that an incumbent wins the
election conditional on transferring at least 2/3 of his budget to a given region. The second set
consists of the differences in the fraction of resources allocated to a given region between an
incumbent who won reelection versus one who ran but did not win. We report these moments
in Table 2. Region 1 has the highest probability of winning conditional on allocating at least
2/3 of one’s budget, followed by region 2, region 4, and region 3. To see how these moments
affect our parameter estimates, consider the coefficient γ3,1 . In the data, the incumbents who
allocate 2/3 of their budget to region 3 win only 50 percent of the time. Given that a deputy can
achieve that probability of winning simply by virtue of his incumbency advantage, the model

                                                  29
will want to estimate γ1,3 close to zero. This is precisely what we get, with γ1,3 = 0.00001 and
statistically indistinguishable from zero. The low estimate for γ1,3 is also consistent with the
small difference in fraction of resources allocated to region 3 between incumbents who won and
lost the elections.
    The argument for the identification of the parameters γ1,1 , γ1,2 , and γ1,4 is similar once we
account for the number of voters in the regions. As we documented above, region 1 has the
highest number of voters, so the model does not need a large coefficient for region 1 (γ1,1 = 0.035)
in order to explain the high electoral return to allocating there. In contrast, region 2 has only 1/8
of the population of region 1. And yet, if a deputy allocates 2/3 of his budget to that region,
he wins with a probability of 63.4 percent, which is significantly higher than the probability
generated by the incumbency advantage. Similarly, the difference between winners and losers in
the fraction of the budget allocated to region 2 is just 1/3 of the difference for region 1 – quite
smaller than the difference in population size. In order to match these moments, our model
requires γ1,2 to be three times the size of γ1,1 (0.103). A similar logic applies to region 4, and
given its data moments, we estimate γ1,4 = 0.030.
    A direct interpretation of the parameters γ1,1 , . . . , γ1,4 is difficult for two reasons. First,
because of the budget constraint, a deputy cannot increase the amount of transfers he allocates to
one region without reducing transfers to the other regions. Second, the reallocation of resources
from one region to another triggers general equilibrium responses by other deputies. To provide
an economic interpretation of these parameters, we therefore calculate how much the probability
of getting reelected changes as an incumbent shifts his resources out of one region and into
another. Based on our estimates, Region 1 is the most attractive region in terms of electoral
returns: if a deputy were to shift all of his resources from Region 3 (the least attractive) to
Region 1, his probability of reelection would increase by 52 percentage points. By comparison,
transferring those resources to Region 2 or Region 4 would increase the likelihood of reelection
by 18 and 7 percentage points, respectively.
    The last parameter affecting the voting decisions is the upper bound of the district-level
shock, σθ . As we discussed, we use the difference between two probabilities to identify this
parameter: the probability of winning conditional on allocating at least 2/3 of one’s budget to
region 1 and the probability of winning conditional on allocating at least 2/3 of one’s budget to
region 3. In the data, this difference is quite large and equal to 37.5 percentage points, suggesting
that the allocations have large effects on voters’ decisions and that the model does not need
large district-level shocks to explain the observed patterns. Consistent with this observation,


                                                 30
we estimated σθ = 0.066, which implies that politicians lose at most 6.6% of the votes because
of the arrival of district-level shocks.
    With our estimated voting parameters we can match extremely well the probability a deputy
wins the election conditional on transferring at least 2/3 of his funds to a region. According to
Table 2, the largest difference between the simulated and data moments is only 0.9 percentage
points for region 2. With regard to the differences between the allocations of deputies who win
and those who do not, we can match the ranking, but are slightly off on the levels.

Rivalry and Diversion Parameters: We identify the diversion parameter φ using the cor-
relation between the following two variables for deputies who run for reelection: the difference
in per-capita GDP between region 1 and any other region, and the corresponding difference in
allocated funds. In the data, this moment is equal to −0.190, indicating that incumbents who
choose to run for reelection transfer more funds to the region with the highest per-capita GDP.
This is to be expected since these deputies care about being elected and the region with the
highest per-capita GDP also has the most votes. At the same time, this number is substantially
smaller than what it would be absent welfare considerations. To match this relatively small
number, our model requires a φ = 0.008, suggesting that for each dollar that is spent in a mu-
nicipality slightly less than one cent of it represents a pure public good. This estimate implies
that the allocated resources fund projects that are not pure public goods, but still have a high
degree of non-rivalry. To see this note that the average population across municipalities in the
state of Roraima is 27,817. For the funded projects to be a private good, the rivalry parameter φ
would therefore have to be equal to 0.00004. With the estimated φ, we match the data moment
well: the simulated moment is −0.171 – just below the level observed in the data.
    To identify the diversion parameter φN R , we use the same correlation used to identify φ,
but for deputies who forgo reelection. In the data, the corresponding moment is equal to 0.158.
Given that these incumbents have no electoral incentives, a positive moment indicates that the
region with the highest per-capita GDP receives fewer funds from them than poorer regions.
The moment is also not large, suggesting that the model needs a relatively small fraction of
diverted funds to explain the data. We estimate a φN R = 0.852, which implies that incumbents
who forgo reelection divert 15% more funds than those who run. Overall, the estimated φN R
highlights an important tradeoff: although deputies who do not run place more weight on welfare
considerations, they also divert more resources. We will explore this tradeoff further when we
consider a policy of a one-term limit.



                                               31
Cost of Running: We estimate the cost of running parameter and the variances as a fraction
of the value of running to simplify their interpretation. The cost of running parameter is
identified using the fraction of deputies who run for reelection. In the data, 71% of incumbents
run for reelection. To match this moment our model needs a relatively small utility cost of
running, which is estimated to be 0.019, or about 2% of the total utility value of running.
With this estimated parameter we can match well the data moment: our simulated fraction of
incumbents who choose to run is 70%.
    As a specification test of our model, Figure 6 examines how our model matches other mo-
ments of the data not used in the estimation. In Panel (a), we plot the probability an incumbent
runs for office conditional on allocating 1/3 of his budget to a particular region. Similarly in
Panel (b), we plot the probability an incumbent is reelected conditional on allocating 1/3 of
his budget to a particular region. For the probability of running, the model matches these
additional moments extremely well. For the probability of winning, however, the model consis-
tently overestimates the probability of winning in all regions except 1. Given the incumbency
advantage that deputies enjoy, the model cannot reduce the probability of winning in regions 2-4
without further lowering the probability of winning in region 1, which the model underestimates
relative to the data. Although the model does not match the levels well, it is able to capture
the ordering across regions.


7.2    Political Distortions
Having estimated our model, we can answer the first question of the paper: To what extent do
political incentives affect the allocation of public funds? To address this question, we compare
the distribution of public funds generated by the model to the social planner’s allocation, which
is defined in Section (4.4) as the allocation that maximizes the total welfare of the state based
on our estimated welfare functions. Note that this allocation differs from the allocations of
deputies who do not run for two important reasons: unlike the social planner’s allocation, both
stealing and the beliefs over the actions of the other incumbents affect the decisions of deputies
who decide not to run.
     Figure 7 plots the allocation of public funds relative to the social planner’s allocation. Elec-
toral incentives distort 26% of the public funds, with all of the distortions occurring towards
region 1, and away from the less populated and poorer regions. Given our estimates, aggregate
welfare is therefore maximized by allocating relatively more funds to regions 2, 3, and 4. Po-
litical distortions arise because politicians cannot afford to ignore region 1, which is the region


                                                 32
with the most votes. This of course raises the question as to whether changes to the electoral
rules can help reduce these distortions, which is the second aim of the paper.


7.3     Policy Evaluations
In this section, we investigate how different electoral rules affect the distribution of public funds.
We focus on two potential changes to the electoral rules: adoption of rank-score voting and term
limits. In addition to these two specific policy changes, we also simulate the effects of an increase
in the number of challengers. For each policy simulation, it is necessary to recalculate the set of
beliefs deputies have so that they are consistent under the new environment. We do this using
fixed-point iterations.

Rank-Score Voting

Rank-score voting is an important class of voting rules that allows voters to rank all or a subset
of the candidates. Specifically, suppose J candidates compete in the elections. Rank-score
voting is defined by a vector of scores (s1 , . . . , sJ ) , with s1 ≥ . . . ≥ sJ , that assigns points to
politicians according to a voter’s ranking: s1 points are assigned to the candidate ranked at
the top by the voter, s2 points are assigned to the second-ranked candidate, and so forth. The
S seats in the election are won by the politicians with the S highest total number of points.
Rank-score voting is believed to be a more expressive form of voting and to encourage residents
to vote sincerely. Here, we evaluate whether it also has the benefit of reducing the distortions
created by electoral incentives.
    Under Brazil’s current system residents can only vote for a single candidate, which corre-
sponds to the scoring rule (1, 0, . . . , 0) and is commonly referred to as plurality voting. We
will compare it to the following set of N-person scoring rules, which is commonly referred
to as approval voting: (1, 1, 0, . . . , 0), (1, 1, 1, 1, 0, . . . , 0), (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, . . . , 0), and
(1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, . . . , 0).
    Figure 8 presents the results from simulating the 2-person, 4-person, 6-person, and 8-person
scoring rules, along with the original results (the base case).9 As before, we plot the allocation
of public funds across the four regions generated by the N-person scoring rules relative to the
   9
    For each simulation, in addition to finding a fix point, we also need to compute an exploded logit in order to
determine the total number of points each candidate receives. As we increase the number of candidates a voter
can list, the computation becomes increasingly more expensive. Thus, due to these computational constraints,
we linearly extrapolate the results for the 8-person rule.



                                                       33
social planner’s allocation. Based on these simulations, we find that the deviations from the
social planner decrease as we allow voters to rank increasingly more candidates. For instance,
if the government was to adopt a 6-person rule, our model indicates that the distortions in the
allocation of public funds will decrease by 5.1 percent. The adoption of an 8-person rule would
reduce the distortions even further to 7.5 percent.
    Although these reductions are sizable, it does raise the question as to why rank scoring
does not reduce the distortions even further, or perhaps even eliminate them. The reason is
straightforward: there are two countervailing forces at play. On the one hand, this policy
provides an incentive for politicians to reallocate their funds away from region 1. Because of the
winner-take-all nature of the original voting rule, politicians have a strong political incentive to
target region 1, where a majority of the voters reside. With score voting, as politicians receive
points even if voters do not rank them at the top, the necessity to come in first in region 1
diminishes, allowing politicians to allocate more funds to other regions.
    On the other hand, this policy makes elections more competitive, which can be seen in Panel
(a) of Figure 9. As we increase the number of candidates voters can rank, the probability that
a challenger wins a seat increases substantially. Under the current system, the probability that
a challenger wins an election is only 14 percent. But going from a 1-person scoring rule to an
8-person scoring rule increases the probability that a challenger wins by 29 percent. As the
election becomes more competitive, incumbents want to target region 1 more, which increases
distortions. This second effect limits the efficacy of rank scoring to further reduce distortions in
the allocation of public funds.
    The results depicted in Panel (a) of Figure 9 illustrate another important effect of rank-score
voting. In our model, voters believe that challengers will distribute public funds similarly to
the current incumbents. Because of this consistency, the major difference between incumbents
and challengers in the probability of winning the elections is the incumbency advantage. The
fact that challengers win more often as residents can rank an increasing number of candidates,
indicates that rank-score voting can be effective in reducing incumbency advantage.

Candidate Entry

For the same reason why rank score voting cannot completely eliminate distortions, policies
aimed at increasing candidate entry will not be effective. In Panel (b) of Figure 9, we plot
the results of a series of policy simulations in which we double the number of challengers in
combination with rank-score voting. Independent of the number of candidates that can be


                                                34
ranked, the distortions in the allocation of public funds are larger when the number of challengers
has been doubled. As the figure also depicts, the difference in distortion levels increases as we
move from a 1-person scoring rule to an 8-person scoring rule. The effects of these simulations
are consistent with the effects from the previous policy. As elections become more competitive
due to the increase in the number of challengers, incumbents have a greater incentive to target
region 1, thus increasing distortions. This incentive becomes even stronger as we allow voters
to rank more candidates, since it increases the probability that a challenger gets elected.

Term Limits

The final policy that we consider is to limit incumbents to a single term. Brazil currently allows
deputies to be elected an indefinite number of times, but several countries have argued for, and
in some cases implemented, term limits as a way to improve representation. It is also a policy
that the Chambers of Deputy recently voted in favor of for Brazil’s executive branches.10
    In our model the advantage of the policy is that electoral incentives would no longer influence
the way public funds are allocated. The disadvantage is that deputies who do not run divert
significantly more of the funds than deputies who still face reelection incentives. The ability to
determine which of these two effects dominates is an important contribution of our model. When
we compare the results of our model to a counterfactual situation in which deputies cannot run
for reelection, we find that political distortions decrease from 26 to 16 percent. However, because
of the increase in corruption, welfare as a whole actually goes down by 2 percent, indicating
that this policy is not welfare improving. Observe that, even without electoral incentives, the
distortions do not go to zero because incumbents form beliefs about their rivals’ allocations.


8     Conclusions
A central question in distributive politics is how politicians target public funds. In this paper,
we present a novel approach to the empirical analysis of how politicians allocate public funds
in an environment in which other politicians are behaving strategically. This approach allows
us, among other things, to compute the extent to which political incentives distort the transfer
of these public funds away from the social planner’s allocation, and to investigate the effects of
electoral rules and political competition in mitigating these distortions.
  10
     On 5/27/2015, the Chamber of Deputies voted to eliminate reelection for the office of President, Governor,
and Mayor. For more information see: http://noticias.uol.com.br/politica/ultimas-noticias/2015/05/27/camara-
vota-o-fim-da-reeleicao.htm

                                                      35
     Using data from Brazil’s federal legislature, we find that at least 26 percent of the value of
the budget amendments that legislators can allocate are distorted relative to the social planner’s
allocation. These distortions are driven by the behavior of non-altruistic politicians, who put
little weight on the welfare of the municipalities, and thus target regions that have more voters,
but are less productive. We also explore the effects of approval voting on the allocation of public
funds. We find that while approval voting does reduce the distortions associated with political
incentives, the effects can be muted because of two countervailing forces. Although approval
voting reduces the incentives politicians have to target regions with more voters, it also reduces
their incumbency advantage, which in turn exacerbates the electoral incentive effects.
     Overall our study highlights the importance of political institutions for the allocation of
public expenditures, and in particular the type of distortion that can arise when the incentives
between the politicians and a social planner are not aligned. But how much we can change
institutions to align incentives is still an open question, and in this case our results suggest
that perhaps more emphasis should be placed on attracting better types of politicians (Dal Bó,
Finan, and Rossi (2013); Ferraz and Finan (2009)).
     Although our model fits the data well, it is quite parsimonious and can be extended and
generalized in several directions that represent exciting possibilities of future research. One
possible extension would be to make the game dynamic. As Diermeier, Keane, and Merlo (2005)
correctly emphasize, politicians are forward-looking agents whose career choices are dynamic in
nature. Although our model captures this behavior to some degree in the decision to run for
reelection, it would be interesting to model these decisions more explicitly, such as the decision to
enter higher offices. Another extension would be to add political parties into the model. While we
do not think that this is an important feature of Brazilian politics, one could potentially exploit
a nested structure to extend the model in this direction for other countries. Other directions
of future research will ultimately depend on the collection of new data. For instance, with
data on campaign spending, one could easily extend our model to examine whether budgetary
amendment complement or substitute campaigning. One could then investigate the impact of
campaigning financing laws on not only electoral performance but also public funds allocation.


References
 Ames, Barry. 1995. “Electoral Strategy under Open-List Proportional Representation.” Amer-
   ican Journal of Political Science 39 (2): 406–433 (May).
 Aruoba, S. Boragan, Allan Drazen, and Razvan Vlaicu. 2015, May. “A Structural Model


                                                 36
   of Electoral Accountability.” Nber working papers 21151, National Bureau of Economic
   Research, Inc.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, Georgy Egorov, and Ruben Enikolopov. 2014, May. “Electoral
   Rules and the Quality of Politicians: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment in
   Afghanistan.” Nber working papers 20082, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case. 1995. “Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy
   Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   110 (3): 769–98 (August).
      . 2003. “Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence from the United States.”
   Journal of Economic Literature 41 (1): 7–73.
Cary M. Atlas, Thomas W. Gilligan, Robert J. Hendershott Mark A. Zupan. 1995. “Slicing the
   Federal Government Net Spending Pie: Who Wins, Who Loses, and Why.” The American
   Economic Review 85 (3): 624–629.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, and Martı́n A. Rossi. 2013. “Strengthening State Capa-
   bilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service*.” The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics.
Da Silveira, Bernardo S. 2012. “Bargaining with Asymmetric Information: An Empirical Study
   of Plea Negotiations.” Manuscript.
Diermeier, Daniel, Michael Keane, and Antonio Merlo. 2005. “A Political Economy Model of
   Congressional Careers.” American Economic Review 95 (1): 347–373.
Draganska, Michaela, Sanjog Misra, Victor Aguirregabiria, Pat Bajari, Liran Einav, Paul El-
   lickson, Dan Horsky, Sridhar Narayanan, Yesim Orhun, Peter Reiss, Katja Seim, Vishal
   Singh, and Raphael. 2008. “Discrete choice models of firms’ strategic decisions.” Marketing
   Letters 19 (3): 399–416 (December).
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. 2009, April. “Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of
   Monetary Incentives on Quality and Performance.” Nber working papers 14906, National
   Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
     . 2011. “Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the Audits of Local
   Governments.” American Economic Review 101 (4): 1274–1311.
Firpo, Sergio, Vladimir Ponczek, and Viviane Sanfelice. 2012. “The relationship between
   budget amendments and electoral performance.” Unpublished Manuscript.
Golden, Miriam, and Brian Min. 2013. “Distributive Politics Around the World.” Annual
   Review of Political Science 16 (1): 73–99.
Kang, Karam. 2015. “Policy Influence and Private Returns from Lobbying in the Energy
  Sector.” The Review of Economic Studies.
Knight, Brian. 2008. “Legislative Representation, Bargaining Power and The Distribution of
   Federal Funds: Evidence From The Us Congress.” Economic Journal 118 (532): 1785–1803
   (October).

                                             37
Levin, Jonathan, and Barry Nalebuff. 1995. “An Introduction to Vote-Counting Schemes.”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (1): 3–26.
Levitt, Steven D, and Jr Snyder, James M. 1997. “The Impact of Federal Spending on House
   Election Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy 105 (1): 30–53 (February).
Lim, Claire S. H. 2013. “Preferences and Incentives of Appointed and Elected Public Officials:
   Evidence from State Trial Court Judges.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1360–97.
List, John A, and Daniel M Sturm. 2006. “How Elections Matter: Theory and Evidence
    from Environmental Policy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (4): 1249–1281
    (November).
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico. 2001. “The Provision of Public Goods under Alterna-
   tive Electoral Incentives.” The American Economic Review 91 (1): pp. 225–239.
Mainwaring, Scott. 2002. “Presidentialism in Brazil: The Impact of Strong Constitutional
  Powers, Weak Partisan Powers, and Robust Federalism.” The Latin American Program
  Working Paper Series.
Manacorda, Marco, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito. 2011. “Government Transfers and
  Political Support.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (3): 1–28 (July).
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, Roberto Perotti, and Massimo Rostagno. 2002. “Electoral Systems
   And Public Spending.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2): 609–657 (May).
Milgrom, Paul R., and Robert J. Weber. 1985. “Distributional Strategies for Games with
   Incomplete Information.” Mathematics of Operations Research 10 (4): pp. 619–632.
Myerson, Roger B. 1993. “Incentives to Cultivate Favored Minorities Under Alternative Elec-
  toral Systems.” The American Political Science Review 87 (4): 856–869 (December).
Pereira, Carlos, and Lucio Renno. 2003. “Successful re-election strategies in Brazil: the
   electoral impact of distinct institutional incentives.” Electoral Studies 22 (3): 425 – 448.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
   Cambridge, Massachussets: MIT Press.
     . 2005, July. The Economic Effects of Constitutions. Volume 1 of MIT Press Books.
   The MIT Press.
Rodden, Jonathan. 2002. “The Dilemma of Fiscal Federalism: Grants and Fiscal Performance
  around the World.” American Journal of Political Science 46 (3): 670–687.
Samuels, David. 2003. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stromberg, David. 2008. “How the Electoral College Influences Campaigns and Policy: The
   Probability of Being Florida.” American Economic Review 98 (3): 769–807.




                                             38
9       Tables and Figures

                                            Table 1: Parameter Estimates


                                                                         Parameter            Estimate           Std Err
                                                           Welfare
    Productivity      in   region   1                                          ρ1                0.030            0.006
    Productivity      in   region   2                                          ρ2                0.268            0.003
    Productivity      in   region   3                                          ρ3                0.230            0.003
    Productivity      in   region   4                                          ρ4                0.472            0.004
                                                          Altruism
    Egoistic type                                                             βH                 0.038            0.001
    Altruistic type                                                           βL                 0.173            0.008
    Proportion of altruistic types                                             π                 0.404            0.006

                                                     Voting Decisions
    Incumbency advantage                                                       γ0               0.032              0.000
    Effects of public funds on          vote   shares,   region   1           γ1,1              0.035              0.001
    Effects of public funds on          vote   shares,   region   2           γ1,2              0.103              0.004
    Effects of public funds on          vote   shares,   region   3           γ1,3             0.00001            0.0001
    Effects of public funds on          vote   shares,   region   4           γ1,4              0.030              0.002

    Degree of rivalry                                                          φ                 0.008            0.001
    Diversion of funds if not running                                         φN R               0.852            0.057

    Upper bound of support of district-level shock                             σθ                0.066            0.0008

                                   Decision to Run and Shocks
    Cost of running                                        νL                                    0.019             0.001
    Variance of shocks on decision to run                  σν                                    0.010            0.0005
    Variance of preference shocks if running              σε,R                                   0.016            0.0007
    Variance of preference shocks if not running         σε,N R                                  0.015            0.0002
    Notes: This table presents the model’s parameter estimates. The standard errors are computed using the asymptotic distri-
    bution of the estimated parameters.




                                                              39
                                Table 2: Moments Used in the Estimation


Moments                                                                                      Model            Data
                                                                                              (1)              (2)
                                          Welfare
Avg. share allocated if not running, region 1                                                 0.116           0.104
Avg. share allocated if not running, region 2                                                 0.229           0.229
Avg. share allocated if not running, region 3                                                 0.261           0.250

                                         Altruism
Avg. share allocated if running, region 1                                                     0.323           0.300
Avg. share allocated if running, region 2                                                     0.233           0.242
Avg. share allocated if running, region 3                                                     0.155           0.167

                                      Voting Function
Pr(Winning) for incumbents - Pr(Winning) for challengers                                       0.492          0.508
Pr(Winning) if at least 2/3 of budget given to region 1                                        0.854          0.857
Pr(Winning) if at least 2/3 of budget given to region 2                                        0.634          0.625
Pr(Winning) if at least 2/3 of budget given to region 3                                        0.499          0.500
Pr(Winning) if at least 2/3 of budget given to region 4                                        0.543          0.546
Difference in avg. share allocated: winners versus losers, region 1                            0.197         0.200
Difference in avg. share allocated: winners versus losers, region 2                            0.071         0.008
Difference in avg. share allocated: winners versus losers, region 3                            0.022         -0.033
Difference in avg. share allocated: winners versus losers, region 4                            0.050         -0.025
Covariance bet. difference in allocations and GDP if running                                  -0.171         -0.190
Covariance bet. difference in allocations and GDP if not running                               0.122          0.158

                                  Cost of Running and Variances
Probability    of running                                                                     0.701           0.714
Probability    of running if at least 2/3 given to region 1                                   0.921           0.875
Probability    of running if at least 2/3 given to region 2                                   0.708           0.727
Probability    of running if at least 2/3 given to region 3                                   0.504           0.500
Variance of    allocation shocks if running                                                   0.004           0.003
Variance of    allocation shocks if not running                                               0.010           0.012
Notes: This table presents the moments used to estimate the model’s parameter. Column 1 reports simulated moments based
on 5,000 simulations. Column 2 reports the data moments.




                                                         40
                                                10000
                            Number of votes within a municipality
                             2000     4000      6000
                                                0         8000


                                                                    0         20         40             60            80   100
                                                                                   Value of Public Work (10,000s)



                                                                    (a) Public Funds and Number of Votes
                                                .4
                            Vote share within a municipality
                             .1           .2    0      .3




                                                                    0         20         40             60            80   100
                                                                                   Value of Public Work (10,000s)



                                                                        (b) Public Funds and Share of Votes
                                                600000
                              Value of Public Works
                            200000        4000000




                                                                    0               50                          100        150
                                                                                         Population (10,000s)



                                                                        (c) Public Funds and Population Size

                                 Figure 1: Public Expenditures and Outcomes

Notes: This figure depicts the unadjusted relationship between the amount of public funds a deputy allocated
to the municipality during the 1996-1999 term and the number of votes (panel A) or share of votes (panel B)
he received from the municipality during the subsequent election. Panel C depicts the unadjusted relationship
between population size and the amount of public funds a deputy allocated to the municipality during the
1996-1999 term. The solid line was computed using lowess. The dashed lines are the corresponding 95 percent
confidence intervals. Each dot represents the mean of the dependent variable computed based on equally-sized
bins.                                                 41
                                                   0.35


                                                    0.3

              Share of Votes within Municipality
                                                   0.25


                                                    0.2


                                                   0.15


                                                    0.1


                                                   0.05


                                                      0
                                                           1    2     3   4   5      6        7   8    9      10   11   12   13     14   15   16     17   18    19    20   21   22
                                                   -0.05
                                                                                                           Rank within Municipality

                                                                                  Effects of Rank on Vote Share              95% CI            95% CI




                                                           Figure 2: Vote Share and Rank by Amount of Public Funds

Notes: This figure plots coefficient estimates from a regression that regressed the share of votes an incumbent
received in a particular municipality on a set of dummies indicating the incumbent’s rank within the municipality.
An incumbent’s rank was determined by the amount of public funds he allocated to that municipality. Incumbents
ranked above 22 are the excluded category. The dashed lines correspond to the 95 percent confidence interval of
each estimated coefficient.


                                                   Distribution of Public Works                                                               Distribution of Public Works
  .02




                                                                                                                        6
  .015




                                                                                                                        4
  .01




                                                                                                                        2
  .005
  0




                                                                                                                        0




         0    20                                           40            60              80            100                     .5               .6              .7               .8                  .9
                                                            Poverty Rates                                                                            Human Development Index

             Did not Run for Reelection                                           Ran for Reelection                                     Did not Run for Reelection             Ran for Reelection



                                                                (a)                                                                                         (b)

                                                               Figure 3: Distribution of Public Funds by Welfare Levels

Notes: The Figure in Panel (a) depicts kernel density plots of the allocation public funds by poverty level of
the municipality. The Figure in Panel (b) depicts kernel density plots of the allocation public funds by the
municipality’s Human Development Index. These density plots are estimated separately for incumbents who ran
for reelection and those that did not. These figures were computed based on a sample of 5,550 municipalities.


                                                                                                               42
 0.45
                                                                      0.35
  0.4
                                                                       0.3
 0.35

  0.3                                                                 0.25

 0.25                                                                  0.2
  0.2
                                                                      0.15
 0.15
                                                                       0.1
  0.1

 0.05                                                                 0.05

   0                                                                    0
           1          2                        3        4                      1          2                        3   4
                             Regions                                                             Regions

                      Simulations       Data                                              Simulations       Data


          (a) Did not run for reelection                                            (b) Ran for reelection

               Figure 4: Comparison Between Model’s Prediction and Actual Allocations

Notes: This figure compares the allocation of public funds as predicted from our model to the actual data. In
Panel (a), we compute the allocations for incumbents who did not run for reelection. In Panel (b), we compute
the allocations for incumbents who ran reelection. The share of public funds is computed by region and averaged
over 5,000 simulations.




               0.45
                0.4
               0.35
                0.3
               0.25
                0.2
               0.15
                0.1
               0.05
                 0
                                    1                       2                  3                        4
                                                                  Regions

                                                   Altruistic types     Egoistic types




                          Figure 5: Distribution of Allocations By Politician Type

Notes: This figure plots the allocation of public funds by politician type. The share of public funds is computed
by region and averaged over 5,000 simulations.



                                                                 43
  1                                                                   0.9

 0.9                                                                  0.8

 0.8
                                                                      0.7
 0.7
                                                                      0.6
 0.6
                                                                      0.5
 0.5
                                                                      0.4
 0.4
                                                                      0.3
 0.3
                                                                      0.2
 0.2

 0.1                                                                  0.1

  0                                                                    0
         1            2                            3     4                   1          2                        3   4
                                Regions                                                       Regions

                          Simulations       Data                                        Simulations       Data


        (a) P r(Running|Allocation > 1/3)                                   (b) P r(Winning|Allocation > 1/3)

Figure 6: Comparison Between Model’s Prediction and Actual Allocations - Moments not Matched

Notes: Panel (a) plots the probability of running conditional on allocating more than 1/3 of one’s budget to
a particular region, as predicted by the model and in the data. Panel (b) plots the probability of winning
conditional on allocating more than 1/3 of one’s budget to a particular region, as predicted by the model and in
the data.




               0.3
              0.25
               0.2
              0.15
               0.1
              0.05
                0
             ‐0.05                      1                    2                3                       4

              ‐0.1
             ‐0 15
             ‐0.15
              ‐0.2
                                                                 Regions




                                            Figure 7: Deviation from the Social Planner

Notes: This figure plots the allocation of public funds relative to the social planner allocation for each of the
policy simulations. The share of public funds is computed by region and averaged over 5,000 simulations.



                                                                 44
                                               03
                                               0.3



                                              0.25



                                               0.2



                                              0.15



                                               0.1



                                              0.05



                                                 0
                                                              1                                2                                                                           3                                    4

                                              ‐0.05



                                               ‐0.1



                                              ‐0.15



                                               ‐0.2
                                                                                                                 Regions

                                                                                         Base Case   2 Person
                                                                                                     2‐Person   4 Person
                                                                                                                4‐Person                                   6 Person
                                                                                                                                                           6‐Person   8 Person
                                                                                                                                                                      8‐Person




                                                              Figure 8: Policy Simulations: N-Person Electoral Rules

Notes: This figure plots the allocation of public funds relative to the social planner allocation for each of the policy
simulations. The share of public funds is computed by region and averaged over 5,000 simulations. The 2-person
policy refers to the scoring rule: (1, 1, 0, . . . , 0). The 4-person policy refers to the scoring rule: (1, 1, 1, 1, 0, . . . , 0).
The 6-person policy refers to the scoring rule: (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, . . . , 0), The 8-person policy refers to the scoring
rule: (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, . . . , 0), etc. The base case policy refers to our original results.


                                                                                                                                                            0.27
                                  02
                                  0.2
                                 0.19
                          Wins




                                                                                                                                                           0.265
                 allenger W




                                                                                                                           Deviation from Social Planner




                                 0 18
                                 0.18
                                                                                                                                                            0.26
                                 0.17
       ability Cha




                                 0 16
                                 0.16                                                                                                                      0.255


                                 0.15                                                                                                                       0.25

                                 0 14
                                 0.14
   Proba




                                                                                                                           D




                                                                                                                                                           0.245
                                 0.13
                                 0 12
                                 0.12                                                                                                                       0.24
                                                                                                                                                                       1         2    3            4                5          6   7   8
                                          1           2   3        4        5     6       7          8                                                                                                 Scoring Rules
                                                                  Scoring Rules
                                                                                                                                                                                      40 Challengers          20 Challengers


                                        (a) Probability a Challenger Wins                                                                                                      (b) Challenger Competition


                                                                                      Figure 9: Policy Simulations

                                                                                        Notes: See note in Figure 8.


                                                                                                                45
                                  On-line Appendix

A   Appendix: Tables and Figures

                           Table A.1: Budgetary Amendments

                               Average per        Average Amount Standard
          Year      Total        Deputy             per Deputy    Deviation
          1996       3859         16.82              1,370,380    380,295.4
          1997       4955         16.72              1,335,346    200,642.7
          1998       6106         14.35              1,300,812    194,080.3
          1999       5275         13.28              1,266,827    229,759.3
          Total     20195         15.12              1,313,702   253048.100
         Notes: These data are available online at: http://www2.camara.leg.br/




                                                 46
                                                Table A.2: Summary Statistics the 1998 Elections for Federal Deputies

                                                                                               Share      Average Votes   Average             Share
                                      Number of Number of          Number of    Reelection    ran for        Among      Votes Among   Share   college
                                      legislators Candidates        Parties       Rates      reelection    Non-elected    Elected     male    degree
      Acre                                 8          51              13          0.33          0.40          2,095        11,185      0.82    0.47
      Alagoas                               9         52              20          0.54          0.86          5,549        49,648      0.88    0.71
      Amazonas                             8          48              15          0.58          0.57          6,538        62,900      0.90    0.54
      Amapá                                8         63              17          0.80          0.38          1,690         8,180      0.90    0.52
      Bahia                                39        118              23          0.77          0.76          8,293        76,461      0.96    0.65
      Ceará                               22         99              20          0.64          0.72          7,810        79,824      0.90    0.58
      Espı́rito Santo                      10         72              17          0.64          0.56          8,325        55,960      0.86    0.58
      Goias                                17         89              20          0.62          0.69          6,470        68,159      0.88    0.56
      Maranhão                            18         79              20          0.64          0.81          5,346        59,167      0.92    0.51
      Minas Gerais                         53        352              26          0.83          0.64          7,333        80,671      0.92    0.55
      Mato Grosso do Sul                   8          53              20          0.62          0.50          6,837        49,380      0.87    0.68
      Mato Grosso                           8         48              15          0.58          0.71          5,919        58,555      0.85    0.58
47




      Pará                                17        102              16          0.68          0.60          7,600        51,443      0.93    0.52
      Paraı́ba                             12         55              14          0.56          0.67          9,043        56,390      0.89    0.84
      Pernambuco                           25        110              23          0.69          0.64          8,024        71,696      0.89    0.65
      Piauı́                               10         62              16          0.54          0.86          3,223        67,905      0.84    0.58
      Paraná                              30        195              24          0.70          0.69          8,997        70,444      0.95    0.58
      Rio de Janeiro                      46         434              29          0.75          0.59          5,600        78,009      0.88    0.57
      Rio Grande do Norte                   8         47              15          0.64          0.71          6,783        81,350      0.89    0.68
      Rondônia e                          8          59              13          0.54          0.71          4,187        24,294      0.90    0.42
      Roraima                              8          38              14          0.80          0.75          1,228         9,305      0.92    0.63
      Rio Grande do Sul                   31         194              20          0.67          0.62         11,934        74,606      0.92    0.68
      Santa Catarina                       16        104              17          0.40          0.60         12,724        62,713      0.85    0.63
      Sergipe                               8         50              23          0.45          0.80          3,392        46,154      0.96    0.42
      São Paulo                           70        656              29          0.77          0.59          8,885       105,326      0.90    0.60
      Tocantins                             8         44              10          0.67          0.75          3,878        30,028      0.70    0.61
      Brazil                              513        284              23          0.68          0.65          7,437        70,709      0.90    0.59
     Notes: Data are available: http://www.tse.jus.br/
     Table A.3: Relationship between Electoral Performance and Allocation of Public Funds

 Dependent variable                               Number of Votes                                Vote Share
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)                    (4)         (5)            (6)
 Public Funds ($100,000s)                   677.491 679.28                              0.028       0.028
                                            [50.198] [49.705]                          [0.001]     [0.001]
 Rank within the municipality                                 -452.763                                           -0.027
                                                               [35.468]                                          [0.001]

 Municipal intercepts                           N            Y             Y             N            Y             Y
 Deputy intercepts                              N            Y             Y             N            Y             Y
 Observations                                154,139      154,139       154,139       154,139      154,139       154,139
 R-squared                                     0.47         0.47          0.36          0.2          0.16          0.12
Notes: Column 1 reports the unadjusted correlation between the amount of public funds a deputy allocated to the municipality
during the 1996-1999 term and the number of votes he received from the municipality during the subsequent election. Column
2 reports the same relationship as in Column 1 but adjusts for both deputy and municipal fixed-effects. Column 3 reports the
relationship between the number of votes a deputy received and his ranking in the municipality with respect to the amount of
public goods he provided. Columns 4-6 replicate the regressions in columns 1-3 but use the deputy’s vote share in the munici-
pality as the dependent variable. The estimation has been restricted to only those incumbents that ran for reelection. Robust
standard errors in brackets.




                                                            48
               Public Funds (per capita)

                    0.000000000 - 8.7
                    8.8 - 19
                    20 - 32
                    33 - 55
                    56 - 1400




                   Figure A.1: Distribution of Budgetary Amendments Per Capita

Notes: The map depicts the distribution of public funds per capita during the 1996-1999 term by municipality.




                                                     49
B             Appendix: Proof of Proposition 1
The proof is based on the existence results established in Milgrom and Weber (1985). To use
their results is helpful to rewrite our model in the following way. Let

                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                                                    X
                              URj               j
                                                    , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j                                j        j                        j
                                                                                                                 
                                            q                       R ;β ,β                   = 1−β                   p (q, dR ) + β                      Wm
                                                                                                                                                    m=1


and
                                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                                                     X
                                                    UNj R           j
                                                                        , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j                   j           j
                                                                                                         
                                                                q                       R ;β ,β              =     v̄np    +β              Wm .
                                                                                                                                     m=1

Then, deputy j chooses the optimal allocation and whether to run according to the following
problem:
                   Z                                                                                                 Z                                                                           
                          URj           j
                                            , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j                              −j
                                                                                                                               UNj R       j
                                                                                                                                               , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j                  −j
                                                                                                                                                                                             
max
 j
    max
     j
                                    q                       R ;β ,β                       σ dβ               , max
                                                                                                                j
                                                                                                                                       q                       R ;β ,β              σ dβ
 dR             q                                                                                              q



The problem can alternatively be written in the following form:
                Z                                                                                                          Z
          djR       URj       j
                                  , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j                               −j
                                                                                                               djR             UNj R q j , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j
                                                                                                                                                                      σ dβ −j .
                                                                                                                                                                         
max
  j
                          q                       R ;β ,β                           σ dβ            + 1−                                                 R ;β ,β
q j ,dR


Or equivalently,
                Z
                    djR URj q j , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j
                                                             + 1 − djR UNj R q j , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j
                                                                                                              dσ β −j .
                                                                                                                  
     max
       j                                        R ;β ,β                                          R ;β ,β
     q j ,dR


We can therefore redefine the utility of deputy j as


U j q j , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j
                                     = djR URj q j , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j
                                                                                + 1 − djR UNj R q j , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j
                                                                                                                            
                        R ;β ,β                                    R ;β ,β                                          R ;β ,β      .


Deputy j’s problem can therefore be written as follows:
                                                                    Z
                                                                          U j q j , djR , q −j , d−j  j   −j
                                                                                                               σ dβ −j .
                                                                                                                     
                                                      max
                                                        j                                         R ;β ,β
                                                      q j ,dR



                                                                                                50
    We can now define a pure-strategy and a mixed-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium for this
setting.
                                                                                                                                       
Definition 2 A pure-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium is a vector of strategies s = s1 , . . . , sJ
such that for every j ∈ J:
                                                           Z
                         j       j
                                                                   U j q j , djR , s−j β −j ; β j , β −j σ dβ −j .
                                                                                                             
                     s β                 = arg max
                                              q j ,djR



To define a mixed-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium, for every type β j , let mj (sj ; β j ) be a
probability measure over the strategy space S j , and M j player j’s set of such mixed strategies.
Then, we can extend the deputy j’s utility to the set of mixed strategies by an expected utility
calculation:
                                                  Z            Z
                    −j               −j
           j    j            j
                                                                     U j sj , s−j ; β j , β −j m1 ds1 ; β 1 . . . mJ dsJ ; β J .
                                                                                                                           
       U       m ,m ;β ,β                     =          ...
                                                   S1          SJ


                                                                                                                                   J
We can now introduce the mixed extension of the initial game in pure strategy G = (S j , U j )j=1
                    J
as Ḡ = (M j , U j )j=1 .

Definition 3 A mixed-strategy m∗ is a mixed-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the initial
game G if m∗ is a pure-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the extended game Ḡ.

    Theorem 1, Propostion 1, and Proposition 3 in Milgrom and Weber (1985) establish that
a game of incomplete information of the type considered in this paper has a mixed-strategy
Bayesian Nash equilibrium if two conditions are satisfied: (i) the set of actions available to each
player S j is finite and (ii) the types of the players, β 1 , . . . , β J , are drawn from independent
distributions. In the model we estimate, each player has a finite set of actions since she can
choose among four possible allocations of resources. Moreover, by assumption, types are drawn
independently from the same distribution. Hence, a mixed-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium
exists.
                                                                                              
    Let a pure-strategy -equilibrium is defined as a vector of strategies m = m1 , . . . , mJ such

                                                                            51
                                                                                         0
that for every player j and every alternative pure strategy mj ,
          Z                                                        Z                                      
                           −j       −j              −j                              j0       −j       −j
                  j    j        j                                          j                      j
                                                                                                               σ dβ −j .
                                                                                                                    
              U       m ,m ;β ,β             σ dβ            +≥       U           m ,m ;β ,β


A Corollary to Theorem 1 in Milgrom and Weber (1985) establishes that a pure-strategy -
equilibrium exists in a game of incomplete information if, in addition to the two conditions
required for the existence of a mixed-strategy Bayesian Nash equilibrium, the players’ beliefs
over types are atomless. In the model we estimate, we do not need to make specific assumptions
on the beliefs over types. Moreover, in the data we only observe the actions played by the
deputies. Hence, we cannot make inference over the distribution of types. Our estimated model
is therefore consistent with distributions over types that are atomless and distributions that are
not atomless. It is therefore also consistent with a pure-strategy -equilibrium.




                                                              52
