                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           AMERICA'S FIRST GREAT MODERATION

                                            Joseph Davis
                                         Marc D. Weidenmier

                                        Working Paper 21856
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21856


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




We wish to thank Christopher Hanes, Joseph Ferrie, Lou Cain, and Marcelle Chauvet as well as seminar
participants at UC-Riverside, Northwestern University, and the NBER for helpful comments and suggestions.
We thank Ryan Shaffer for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or of
the Vanguard Group.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Joseph Davis and Marc D. Weidenmier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
America's First Great Moderation
Joseph Davis and Marc D. Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 21856
January 2016
JEL No. E01,E32,N1,N11

                                               ABSTRACT

We identify America’s First Great Moderation, a recession-free 16-year period from 1841 until 1856,
that represents the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. Occurring in the wake of the debt-deleveraging
cycle of the late 1830s, this “take-off” period’s high rates of economic growth and relatively-low volatility
enabled the U.S. economy to escape downturns despite the absence of a central bank. Using new high
frequency data on industrial production, we show that America’s First Great Moderation was primarily
driven by a boom in transportation-goods investment, attributable to both the wider adoption of steam
railroads and river boats and the high expected returns for massive wooden clipper ships following
the discovery of gold in California. We do not find evidence that agriculture (i.e., cotton), domestic
textile production, or British economic conditions played any significant role in this moderation. The
First Great Moderation ended with a sharp decline in transportation investment and bank credit during
the downturn of 1857-8 and the coming American Civil War. Our empirical analyses indicate that
the low-volatility states derived for both annual industrial production and monthly stock prices during
the First Great Moderation are similar to those estimated for the Second Great Moderation (1984-2007).


Joseph Davis
The Vanguard Group
P.O. Box 2600, MS V13
Valley Forge, PA 19482-2600
joseph_davis@vanguard.com

Marc D. Weidenmier
Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
Claremont McKenna College
500 East Ninth Street
Claremont, CA 91711
and NBER
marc_weidenmier@claremontmckenna.edu
I. INTRODUCTION


       The Great Moderation is a term frequently used to describe the period of low macroeconomic
volatility observed in the United States from 1984 until the onset of the global financial crisis beginning
in 2007. The significant reduction in the volatility of real output over this period is also associated with
less frequent and less severe U.S. recessions. Indeed, according to the National Bureau of Economic
Research's monthly business cycle chronology, three of the four longest U.S. expansions following
World War II occurred during the Great Moderation, including the 120-month expansion of the 1990s,
commonly viewed to-date as the longest expansion in U.S. history.
       Economists have generally offered one of three types of explanations for the marked decline in
macroeconomic volatility between the mid-1980s and the late 2000s. Some have argued that improved
monetary policy is a primary reason for the large drop in macroeconomic volatility (Stock and Watson,
2002; Bernanke, 2004). Other research has pointed to structural change that has made the economy less
sensitive to shocks, including the shift of economic production from goods to services, improved
management of inventory investment through information technology, and innovations in financial
markets that promote intertemporal smoothing of consumption and investment (Blanchard and Simon,
2001; McConnell and Perez-Quiros, 2000). Several studies have also pointed to “good luck,” or the
absence of large shocks (i.e. oil shocks or limited large technology shocks) as important factors that help
explain this period of unusually low business cycle volatility. While the sources of the Great Moderation
certainly remain open to debate and require future research, the conventional wisdom is that there has
only been “one” Great Moderation in U.S. history.
       We break new ground in this paper by identifying America’s First Great Moderation. From 1841
until 1856, the United States experienced a 16-year economic expansion that was characterized by high
economic growth rates (especially for investment goods such as transportation machinery) similar in
magnitude to that of modern-day China. The U.S. economy escaped downturns during this period in part
because economic growth was so high. Trend growth during the 1840s and 1850s in both Gallman’s real
GNP series and Davis’ industrial production index were the highest of the nineteenth century. Economic
and financial market volatility was significantly lower, too. We consult newer, high-frequency series in
our statistical analyses, including annual industrial production (the most reliable indicator of business
cycles for this period) and monthly stock prices (as an even higher-frequency indicator of financial
conditions and panics).


                                                      2
        We test a number of hypotheses that could explain America’s First Great Moderation. Our
empirical results suggest that the moderation was the result of the wider adoption and diffusion of
transportation-oriented general purpose technologies (i.e., clipper and steam ships, locomotives and
railroads). Through both Markov-switching models and Granger-causality tests, we show that the Great
Moderation would not have occurred without transportation-related activity. Indeed, the reduction in the
volatility of industrial production excluding transportation-intensive industries is less economically and
statistically meaningful. In particular, America’s longest economic expansion may well have ended by
1850 had it not been for the discovery of gold in California, which significantly increased the expected
returns for massive clipper ships that could sail to San Francisco in as little as one hundred days and
from there circumnavigate the globe via the China trade. The spillover effects of this transportation
boom were meaningful; indeed, the 1841-1856 period was unique in the pre-WWI era for transportation-
related output to lead the rest of the industrial sector.
        Furthermore, we fail to find compelling evidence that agriculture (i.e., cotton), the weather,
domestic textile production, immigration, or British economic conditions played any important role in
causing America’s First Great Moderation. While we cannot rule out that certain other factors—
including western expansion, increased financial market integration, lower and stable tariffs, and state
constitutional reforms—may have played some role during this time, they likely would have had to have
worked through the transportation sector and stock prices.
        The paper begins with a brief history of the pre-Civil War economy of the 1840s and 1850s,
especially in the context of early American business cycles. We then compare the First Great
Moderation in economic and financial performance with other periods in the pre-World War I period.
We employ Markov-switching models to assess the statistical significance of the decline in
macroeconomic and financial market volatility that we observe during the First Great Moderation period
relative to the fuller pre-WWI period.
        Using similar IP and stock-price data, we then conduct an apples-to-apples comparison of our
First Great Moderation to the modern-day Great Moderation that ran from the mid-1980s until the onset
of the global financial crisis in 2007. Notably, our Markov-switching models reveal that the low-
volatility, high-growth states derived for the First Great Moderation (when America was truly an
emerging-market economy) are of similar magnitude and statistical significance to those estimated for
the contemporary one using comparable economic and stock-market data. Finally, we contemplate
various factors—both structural and fortunate—that help explain the First Great Moderation.

                                                        3
II. THE ANTEBELLUM U.S. ECONOMY & THE FIRST GREAT MODERATION


A. THE U.S. ECONOMY OF THE 1840s AND 1850s


       In the two decades prior to its Civil War, the American economy grew rapidly by nearly any
measure in the Historical Statistics of the United States (U.S. Census Bureau, 1970). Between 1840 and
1860, the rates of immigration and the size of the U.S. labor force doubled, while the urban population
tripled. Federal land sales and westward migration led to significant farmland development and growing
transportation networks beyond the large eastern coastal cities. Agricultural output, such as for cotton,
more than doubled over this time period.
       While agricultural output accounted for more than one-half of economic output in 1840, the
following two decades witnessed high rates of industrialization for the emerging-market economy.
Annual growth in the Davis (2004) industrial production index averaged more than 6% between 1840
and 1860, at least a full percentage point higher than the average growth rates in the twenty-year periods
prior (1820-40) or after (1860-80).
       The financial sector also expanded rapidly, leading to a notable increase in the number of banks,
publicly-traded securities, and volume of bank loans outstanding. Investment in transportation networks
was both high and widespread for turnpikes, canals, railroads and maritime shipping routes.


A1: High trend growth
       Some researchers consider this unique period in American economic history as its “take-off”
period. Such high rates of economic growth are clearly evident in Table 1, which presents Gallman’s
(1966) estimates for trend U.S. real GNP. The Gallman GNP data are arguably the most comprehensive
and reliable estimates of trend growth for the antebellum U.S economy (Rhode, 2002). Gallman
assembled his national product estimates from Census and other sources in the mid-1960s to provide a
clearer picture of the long-run performance of the U.S. economy.
       As illustrated in Table 1, U.S. real GNP grew at more than a 5% annualized rate between the
mid-1840s and late 1850s, versus still-high yet lower rates of growth during the development of the U.S.
economy in the late 1800s. In short, the decades of the 1840s and 1850s witnessed the most robust rates
of economic growth of the nineteenth century. Indeed, per capita GNP rose more than 30%.



                                                     4
A2: Integration of financial and labor markets
        The high rates of economic growth during the 1840s and 1850s were also accompanied by more
integrated financial and labor markets. Financial integration improved markedly as illustrated by
differences in interest rates across major U.S. cities (Table 2). Bodenhorn (1992, 2000) shows that while
interest rates were high and volatile at the beginning of the Free Banking Period (1837-1862), regional
interest rates converged over the course of the 1840s. Comparing New York City and Charleston,
Bodenhorn demonstrates that interest-rate differentials for the two cities hovered around zero from
1844-1857 (before the panic), despite the geographic distance.
        Increased financial market integration could also have played a role in the high rates of capital
investment during the 1840s and 1850s by reducing business uncertainty and raising confidence. Davis
(1960), for example, finds that more stable credit markets (i.e., smaller fluctuations in short-term interest
rates) promoted growth in New England textile mills in the two decades prior to the Civil War.
        Labor markets became increasingly integrated during the 1840s and 1850s as well. Partly aided
by western migration and increased intra-regional capital and goods flows, real wages converged across
the country and became less volatile, forming the beginnings of a more efficient and integrated “national
labor market” (Margo 1998, 1). Margo (1999), for instance, shows that while in the 1830s Midwestern
real wages for common labor were 30.5 percent higher than in the East, this value had dropped to 10.1
percent and 11.4 percent in the 1840s and 1850s, respectively. 1


A3: Business cycles between the 1830s and the Civil War
        A fast-growing and more-integrated economy with advancing capital markets would seem to
suggest the U.S. experienced less frequent and less violent downturns during the 1840s and 1850s.
Qualitatively, however, the early foundations of today’s official NBER business-cycle chronology
suggest a volatile economy. According to Thorp’s Business Annals (1926) and Burns and Mitchell’s
Measuring Business Cycles (1946)—two seminal NBER studies that laid the groundwork for the official
monthly NBER business-cycle dates before 1920—the U.S. economy spent nearly every other year in
recession between the late 1830s (following the Panic of 1837) and the onset of the Civil War. The
depression of 1839 is believed to not have ended until at least 1843 and perhaps as late as 1845.
Recessions and panics are noted for 1846, 1848, and 1854. Based more on anecdotal newspaper reports


1
 In addition Vandenbroucke (2008) demonstrates that western/eastern real wage ratios, which had widely varied prior to the
early-to-mid 1840s, declined and remained relatively stable for the remainder of the antebellum period.
                                                             5
than economic data, the Annals tend to reflect financial market conditions and price corrections rather
than business cycles. 1
        Other classic treatments of the nineteenth-century financial markets, such as Kindleberger
(2000), refer to a number of financial panics during the late 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s that were believed
to have led to significant recessions, deflation, and, at times, depressions. Indeed, we would argue that
such characterizations are taken as “fact” in contemporary economic and history textbooks. At first
glance, such descriptions would seem inconsistent with a great moderation, and appear to run counter to
a period of high trend growth.
        The reliability of these qualitative accounts of pre-Civil War business cycles and volatility is, of
course, debatable given the paucity of economic data that previous researchers had access to. Today, the
NBER does not officially record monthly business cycle peaks and troughs in U.S. economic activity
prior to December 1854 for precisely this reason. 2
        To be sure, subsequent research strongly suggests that some of the perceived business-cycle
properties for the post-Civil War American economy are inaccurate. Romer (1994) demonstrates that,
contrary to modern NBER practices, the monthly peaks and troughs between 1884 and 1927 were
derived using detrended data that dated peaks earlier and troughs later vis-à-vis post-WWII turning
points. Davis (2006) concludes that some post-bellum NBER recessions did not occur at all. Watson
(1994) shows that when post–WWII cycles are based solely upon nominal price data for commodities
and financial variables, one finds only marginal differences between postbellum pre–WWI and post-
WWII cyclical variations. Naturally, these studies raise questions regarding the perceived high level of
business-cycle volatility and high frequency of recessions during the pre-Civil War period, whose
accounts were based on even scantier data.


B. DATA


        In this study, we consult newer, high-frequency series in our statistical analyses on the early
American business cycle, including annual industrial production and monthly stock prices. With access
to better data, we locate America’s First Great Moderation.


1
  By consulting contemporary newspaper accounts and fluctuations in commodity and stock prices, Thorp’s Business Annals
for instance summarizes business conditions in 1845 as “prosperity; brief recession,” 1846 as “recession, mild depression,”
1847 as “revival; prosperity; panic; recession,” and 1848 as “mild depression; revival.”
2
  See, for instance, Moore and Zarnowitz (1986).
                                                             6
B1: Annual U.S. industrial production
         Our primary measure of the business cycle during America’s First Great Moderation is the Davis
(2004) quantity-based industrial production (IP) index, the most reliable broad measure of U.S. real
output for the pre-Civil War period. The Davis IP index is comprised of 43 annual components in the
manufacturing and mining industries that are consistently defined from 1790 until World War I. It is a
comprehensive industrial output measure in so far as its components directly or indirectly represent
close to 90 percent of the value added produced by the U.S. industrial sector during the nineteenth
century. Changes in the Davis IP index reflect only fluctuations in real output.
         While the Gallman real GNP data shown in Table 1 are somewhat more comprehensive than the
Davis IP index, the annual estimates themselves are far less reliable. Gallman himself did not trust the
accuracy of his annual time series, declining to ever publish them and instead using them to infer trends
in antebellum growth. As Rhode (2002) notes, Gallman was adamant to fellow researchers when using
his provisional and unpublished estimates that they cite verbatim the statement “that these data were not
constructed for analysis as annual series,” and even stressing in a 1963 mimeo “NOTE: These figures
should not be regarded as reliable, annual estimates.” 1
         Figure 1 charts logarithmic growth rates in the Davis IP index from 1790 through 1915. In the
figure we highlight the 1841-1856 period, which we will call America’s First Great Moderation. Table 3
compares the average growth rate in real output (as defined by the annual Davis IP index) during the
First Great Moderation (1841-1856) with the sample periods before and after its occurrence.
         Based on the annual Davis IP series, we find that economic growth averaged nearly 8 percent per
annum during the First Great Moderation, compared to an average growth rate of approximately five
percent for the rest of the 1792-1914 period. Overall, the growth rate of IP was sixty percent higher on
average during the First Great Moderation than in either of the preceding or subsequent sample periods.
This acceleration in industrial growth parallels and corroborates the acceleration in growth of Gallman’s
real GNP series in Table 1.
         During the antebellum period, the differences in average growth rates between the Great
Moderation and other years are statistically significant (p=0.04), compared to insignificant differentials
between the antebellum and post-bellum periods (see bottom of Table 3). One would expect average



1
 As discussed in Rhode (2002) and Davis (2002), other provisional GNP estimates for the pre-Civil War economy (such as
Berry’s series) are even less reliable and are inappropriate to date business cycles. By contrast, the Davis index incorporates
new source data across a host of sectors that had direct ties to the agricultural and export markets of the early U.S. economy.
                                                               7
economic growth to be higher during the First Great Moderation since there were no absolute annual
declines in industrial production between 1841 and 1856.
       The high rate of economic growth in industrial production was accompanied by low economic
volatility. The standard deviation of economic growth was 5 percent between 1841 and 1856. For the
antebellum period before the start of the First Great Moderation, the standard deviation of industrial
production growth averaged 6.7 percent. The standard deviation of IP growth averaged 7.5 percent in the
post-bellum period. The volatility of economic production was at least 20 percent lower during the First
Great Moderation. As is the case with mean growth rates, volatility differences in IP growth between the
Great Moderation and pre-GM antebellum years are statistically significant (p=0.098), compared to
insignificant differentials between the antebellum and post-bellum eras.
         We also employ the coefficient of variation (standard deviation divided by the mean) to control
for the fact that the average growth rate in IP was higher during the First Great Moderation. Table 3
shows that the coefficient of variation for industrial production during the First Great Moderation, at
0.65, was notably lower when compared to 1.45 for the antebellum period and 1.63 for the post-bellum
period. This suggests that macroeconomic volatility was at least 25-30 percent lower during the First
Great Moderation than other periods. The basic summary statistics suggest that economic growth was
higher and macroeconomic volatility significantly lower during the First Great Moderation.


B2: Monthly U.S. stock prices
       Importantly, we corroborate our annual IP-based results using a monthly series on stock prices,
which should afford an even higher-frequency indicator of financial conditions and “panics” sometimes
cited in the qualitative characterizations of the contemporary economy.
       Specifically, we employ Goetzmann, Ibbotson, and Peng’s (2005, hereafter GIP) pre-CRSP era
stock index from 1815-1914 to examine stock returns and stock volatility during the First Great
Moderation. The GIP pre-CRSP era NYSE series is among most comprehensive monthly stock market
series for the nineteenth century. While other city-level stock price series exist for the antebellum period
(Schwert, 1990), we focus on the GIP series since it spans the entire nineteenth century and tends to
include more securities than other stock indices, such as Smith and Cole’s price index.
       Figure 2 shows monthly stock returns before, during and after the First Great Moderation, which
is shaded. During the 1840s and 1850s, the securities in the GIP index pertained primarily to financial
companies (insurance companies, banks) and railroad companies.

                                                     8
        Table 4 shows that average (arithmetic) stock returns averaged 0.3 percent per month during the
Great Moderation. Average stock returns for the GIP Index were negative in the antebellum period
before the Great Moderation, and averaged 0.17 percent per month in the post-bellum period. Stock
volatility, as measured by the standard deviation of monthly price returns, averaged 3.5 percent during
the First Great Moderation, compared to 3.9 percent and 4.0 percent in the antebellum and post-bellum
periods, respectively. The lower stock-market volatility for the Great Moderation is statistically
significant and is more than 20 percent lower than the non-Great Moderation antebellum period and
more than 10 percent lower than the post-bellum period.
        The coefficient of variation for stock returns during the First Great Moderation, 11.44, is
approximately one-half that of the coefficient of variation for either the earlier antebellum period (-
25.78) or post-bellum period (23.35). Overall, we find that stock returns were both higher and
significantly less volatile than the rest of the pre-World War I period. This result is clearly visible when
examining the monthly NYSE returns in Figure 2.


C: IDENTIFYING BUSINESS CYCLES


C1: IP versus GDP
        Focusing on industrial production—rather than broad GDP or even nonagricultural GDP—could
be a potential limitation of our study if (and only if) IP was not reflective of the broader economy during
this era. We argue that this was not the case, for at least four reasons.
        First, as discussed in Davis (2004), IP is appropriate to define the historical evolution of U.S.
business cycles, if for no other reason than the fact that America’s emergence as an economic power is
commonly equated with its industrialization. While more than one-half of national output in the
antebellum United States was agricultural, the Davis IP index should broadly indicative of the nation’s
broader economic conditions because the industrial sector has historically derived demand directly from
nonindustrial occupations, particularly farmers, merchants, and the construction trades. 1 The processing
of foodstuffs, the demand for agricultural machinery, and the capital equipment required to transport
agricultural commodities to market are all intimately tied to farm output and the relative price of
agricultural goods, even though agricultural production is often characterized as acyclical. Likewise, the


1
 The contemporary equivalent would be to acknowledge that a major oil-producing economy’s non-energy sectors will be
negatively impacted when its domestic energy production contracts.
                                                          9
manufacture of lumber products and transportation equipment were acutely sensitive to business
conditions in the construction trades, the railroad industry, and inland transportation sectors.
        Second, some of the most severe contractions in the Davis IP index (such as 1808) were the
result of a significant shock originally to the non-industrial sector that could have benefitted IP if IP was
not so reliant upon (and reflective of) broader economic conditions. A prime example is the deep
recession of 1808, when the Davis IP index contracted nearly 19% (!) given the collapse of the
shipbuilding and foodstuff industries that were heavily dependent upon the health of the maritime trades
and Britain’s export market. Indeed, the nonintercourse period following the Embargo of 1807 had a
devastating impact on the economy (despite temporarily stimulating some infant industries) and led to
the largest annual decline in the Davis IP index in the pre-Civil War era.
        Third, the NBER today includes industrial production (and not GDP) as one of the four primary
coincident indicators to identify and date U.S. business cycles. While IP is less comprehensive than
GDP, it is both valuable and accurate in identifying turning points today since manufacturing is a
highly-cyclical sector, in the same way it was for the antebellum period. This is important considering
that the economy’s share of output in the industrial sector over the past three decades (roughly 20%) was
similar to its share between the 1840 and 1860.
        Finally and perhaps most persuasively, every downturn in annual real GDP since WWII has been
accompanied by an annual decline in IP. Put another way, we view a downturn in IP as both a necessary
and sufficient condition for a recession during the nineteenth century.


C2: Longest expansion in U.S. history
        We employ the Davis IP index to evaluate the reliability of Thorp’s annual business cycle dates
during the First Great Moderation. Specifically, we construct an alternative set of annual peaks and
troughs between 1796 and 1914 as defined by absolute rises and declines in the annual IP index. A
comparison of the NBER annual business-cycle chronology with this alternative set of peaks and
troughs for the entire 1800s is reproduced from Davis (2006) in Table 5.
        The resulting Davis chronology alters more than 40 percent of the peaks and troughs, and
removes those cycles long considered the most questionable by various economists, including Friedman
and Schwartz (1963), Temin (1969), and Zarnowitz (1992). 1 As a result, the new annual peaks and


1
  We confirm Temin’s (1969, 156) suspicion that the downturn following the Panic of 1839 was neither long nor severe in
terms of real output since the sharp decline in prices and wages “may have substituted for falling production in the early
                                                             10
troughs reduce the average frequency of nineteenth-century recessions from nearly every other year in
the NBER set, to one out of five years. The years 1846, 1847 and 1848 that Thorp classified as
potentially brief recessions saw, instead, industrial production grow at double-digit rates. No recessions
occurred during these years.
         Most notably, the alternative chronology in Table 5 reveals that the period from 1841 until 1856
was a 16-year, recession-free period, the longest U.S. economic expansion in American history. This
alone would seem to qualify the years between 1841 and 1856, inclusive, as America’s First Great
Moderation.


D. COMPARING TWO GREAT MODERATIONS


         Given the importance of our result, we examine its robustness in two (related) ways. First, we
judge how America’s Second (modern-day) Great Moderation looks using comparable annual IP
fluctuations. Second, we estimate Markov regime-switching models to assess the statistical significance
of America’s First Great Moderation, and again compare those estimated results to same-frequency IP
and stock-price data observed for the Second Great Moderation.


D1. Recessions, output gaps and growth recessions
         We can get a general sense of the magnitudes of the two Great Moderations by creating trailing
growth-to-volatility ratios in an annual IP index that spans both. We accomplish this by creating one
extended annual IP series from 1790 through 2010 according to the procedures recommended in Davis
(2004). Specifically, we can ratio-splice the annual Davis IP index to the Miron-Romer IP index in 1916
before ratio-splicing to annual values of the Federal Reserve IP index beginning in 1919. While we
stress that we cannot conduct a formal statistical volatility break-point test on this long series given
changes in series comparability and reliability over time, the signal-to-noise ratio in Figure 3 allows us
to visually gauge changes over rolling 20-year periods.
         Clearly, Figure 3 suggests that the combination of high IP growth and lower IP volatility during
America’s first Great Moderation—expressed as a trailing growth-to-volatility ratio (or, signal-to-noise
ratio)—appears to have been as impressive in scale as America’s second (modern-day) Great
Moderation when measured against similar annual IP index data from the Federal Reserve.

nineteenth century.” In fact, the “depression” of 1839 lasted only 1 year despite deflation and the need for parts of the
economy to deleverage following the speculative activity of the mid-1830s.
                                                               11
          We can also examine the business-cycle properties in the Second Great Moderation by dating
recessions in a similar manner as was done in Table 5—that is, simply by declines in the annual IP index
over the 1980-2010 period. As can be seen in Table 6, the recessions of 1991, 2001, and 2008-2009
clearly show up in the Federal Reserve’s annual IP data.
          We can also identify so-called “growth recessions” in either of the Great Moderation periods by
calculating deviations from the trend in the annual log IP series (i.e., an “IP gap”) of the Davis and
Federal Reserve series, respectively. To span most definitions of fluctuations versus trends, we estimate
trends two ways: (1) a one-sided, backward-looking Hodrick–Prescott (HP) filter, and (2) a two-sided
HP filter that possesses look-ahead bias.
          Table 6 shows that while America’s First Great Moderation did not involve an outright decline in
real output, the U.S. economy did experience several so-called “growth recessions” at times when real
output increased at a below-trend pace. Important examples during the First Great Moderation include
the early 1840s following the Panic of 1839, as well as respites from otherwise strong growth in the late
1840s and the mid-1850s, periods that Thorp misclassified as recessions (see also Davis (2006)).
          For the Second Great Moderation, similar growth recessions persist through roughly half of the
1984-2007 period. Using a one-sided real-time measure of deviation from trend, the U.S. economy did
not grow above trend in any year between 2001 and 2010.


D2. Markov regime-switching models for annual IP
          In this section, we estimate Markov regime-switching models to assess the statistical significance
of changes in real economic volatility (high vol, low vol) before, during, and after the First Great
Moderation using logarithmic growth rates in annual IP growth (1792-1914). We then compare our
results to America’s Second Great Moderation using similar data and techniques for the post-WWII
period.
          Our primary specification is a univariate autoregressive non-linear Markov-switching model with
two regimes. In particular, we assume that annual IP growth, ∆𝑦𝑡 , depends on two underlying and
unobserved states, 𝑉𝑡 , 𝑡 = 1, 2, such that:
(1)                      ∆𝑦𝑡 = 𝜇𝑉𝑡 + 𝜙𝑉𝑡 ∆𝑦𝑡−1 + 𝜀𝑡 ,      𝜀𝑡 ∼ 𝑁�0, 𝜎𝑉𝑡 �.
At first pass, we allow the means, variances and autoregressive parameters to all vary between two
states. We then also impose a constant-mean restriction based on the equality-of-means tests in Table 2,
still allowing the variance and autoregressive parameters to vary between two states.

                                                      12
        The Markov-model results for annual IP growth over the entire pre-WWI, 1792-1914 sample are
reported in Table 7 for both constant mean (Panel A) and switching mean (Panel B) specifications. In
each panel, all estimated parameters are statistically significant at the 10 percent significance level or
better, with significant differences in volatility between the high-volatility and low-volatility states.
Annual IP volatility in low-volatility regimes was approximately one-fourth that of high-volatility
regimes, which on average had a modestly longer duration of approximately 4 years. The differences in
average switching mean growth rates in Panel B are not economically or statistically meaningful and
close to the constant mean growth rate of 4.29 percent per annum in Panel A. For this reason, we chose a
constant mean as our baseline Markov-switching specification for the remainder of this paper.
        Table 8 compares the constant-mean results for the 1792-1914 period (Panel A, Table 7) with
those for annual IP data for the 1950-2010 sample. The results for the modern-day period using annual
IP data are listed in Panel B. While the estimated standard deviation in the low-volatility state is
marginally significant (p=0.12), the expected duration of low-volatility regimes is longer in the post-
1950 sample (6.65 years) and the standard deviation of the low-volatility state is almost 1/25th the size of
the high-volatility state.
        Panels A and B of Figure 4 shows the smooth low-volatility state probabilities from the Markov
models for the annual growth rates for the Davis and Federal Reserve Board indices. Clearly, our
constant-mean specification is not restrictive for either period, as the estimated probabilities are nearly
identical under either a constant-mean or switching-mean model.
        Panel A in Figure 4 confirms that the First Great Moderation began in the early 1840s and ended
in 1857, with the probability of a low-volatility state rising to nearly 90 percent in the late 1840s and
early 1850s. This peak during the First Great Moderation is higher than at any other time during the
1792-1914 period. In a similar fashion, the probability of a low volatility state is highest during
America’s Second Great Moderation. Again, the probability of a low-volatility state peaks during the
mid to late 1990s and early 2000s.
        Figure 4 compares the First Great Moderation with the Second Great Moderation by plotting the
ratio of the conditional mean to the conditional standard deviation for the growth rate of the two
industrial production series. The growth rate of the two IP series shows a spike in the ratio that coincides
with a Great Moderation in the pre-WWI era as well as one in the modern era. By this metric, the First
and Great Moderations were very similar in relative magnitudes.



                                                      13
D3. Markov regime-switching models for monthly stock returns
        Table 9 reports the results of the Markov-Switching models using equation (1) for monthly stock
returns in the pre-WWI (Panel A) and post-WWII (Panel B) periods. The average stock return for the
GIP Index was 0.18 percent for the entire sample period. The probability of remaining in the low
volatility state is 91 percent, versus 71 percent in the high volatility state. The standard deviation of
stock returns in the low volatility state (0.06) was 88 percent lower than in the high volatility state
(0.51). The differences of the standard deviations are statistically significant at the one percent level.
The expected duration of the low-volatility state is 11.65 months compared to 3.4 months for the high
volatility state.      As for the modern period, the average stock return is 0.69 percent. The standard
deviation of stock returns in the high volatility state is more than four times higher than the low
volatility state. Both the high and low volatility states are highly persistent. The expected duration of the
low-volatility regime is almost 20 months compared to seven months for the high-volatility state.
        Figure 6 shows the smoothed probabilities from the Markov-switching models on monthly stock
returns. Panel A clearly shows that the probability of a low-volatility state was quite high during the
First Great Moderation. The smoothed state probability is nearly 90 percent for the long economic
expansion. This stands in contrast to the post-bellum period, where smoothed low-volatility state
probabilities rarely exceeded 80 percent for almost the entire period after the end of the Civil War.
Finally, the post-WW II sample suggests that there were two periods of low volatility in stock returns:
(a) 1950s-1960s and (b) most of the 1990s that coincides with the Second Great Moderation.


III. EXPLAINING THE FIRST GREAT MODERATION


A. GREATER ADOPTION OF GENERAL PURPOSE TECHNOLOGIES


        We hypothesize that a primary factor for the Great Moderation in both manufacturing and in the
U.S. stock market was the diffusion of general purpose technologies centered in the transportation
sector. Such technological diffusion would have generated spillovers in the form of increased
investment, larger and more integrated product and labor markets, and increased western migration
within the United States. Indeed, the First Great Moderation was characterized by the accelerated
adoption of three important transportation and communication technologies: (1) the steam locomotive
and railroad, (2) faster clipper and steam ships, and (3) the telegraph.

                                                      14
       Such high rates of productivity growth, which indeed did appear to occur during the First Great
Moderation as illustrated in Figure 7, would also be consistent with endogenous growth models that
account for the diffusion of such broad-based technologies.
       General purpose technology (GPT) is defined as technological innovation that can have large and
wide-ranging macroeconomic impacts, such as the steam engine, electricity, or the computer (David,
1991; Helpman, ed., 1998). While the initial emergence of a general purpose technology (GPT) can be
associated with lower and more volatile productivity growth via creative destruction and increased
R&D, Helpman and Trajtenberg (1996) show that the eventual wider adoption of a GPT across
economic sectors can culminate in a “second wave” of investment and bringing about a spell of
sustained growth, similar to that seen in Figure 7. Aghion and Howitt (1998) extend the Helpman-
Trajtenberg model where to account for stages of component building and network spillovers in the
technology diffusion process. In the Aghion-Howitt model, cyclical fluctuations and the magnitude of
slumps in economic growth can decline markedly for an extended period if either intermediate inputs
become more substitutable and profitable, or if the productivity (and real income) gains from such new
technologies are sufficiently “large.”
B. TRANSPORTATION REVOLUTION OF THE 1840s AND 1850s
       According to Taylor (1951), the 1840s and 1850s marked a “transportation revolution” in the
antebellum U.S. economy that witnessed strong gains in productivity and high levels of investment.
Trend economic growth was high in part due to high rates of both public and private investment in
expanding transportation networks for roads, canals, railroads, and global shipping routes.


B1. The shipbuilding boom
       During the 1840s and 1850s, American shipyards built more merchant tonnage than what was
built in the previous four decades combined. Indeed, the zenith in merchant tonnage constructed in 1854
and 1855 would not be surpassed until World War I.
       A primary factor in this surge in shipbuilding investment was the clipper ship, an extremely fast
ship that possessed flatter hulls, sharper bows and could routinely accommodate more than two thousand
tons in cargo. The discovery of gold in California in 1848 led to an immediate jump in the expected rates
of return on fast ships that could expediently carry large cargoes to San Francisco and, rather than carry
ballast back home could rather circumnavigate the globe by sailing from the Pacific on toward China
(for its valuable tea) or even Hawaii (for whaling). The fastest clipper ships built in the 1850s in the

                                                     15
shipyards of New York, Boston, Philadelphia and Maine could cost nearly $100,000 or more to
construct at the time, but they could sail from the eastern coast to San Francisco via the Cape Horn in as
little as 90 days. One round-trip could net a profit for ship owners equal to the entire cost of construction
(Howe and Matthews, 1986).
       The period from the late-1840s through the mid-1850s is generally known as the “Clipper Ship
Era.” The production of clipper ships increased from an index value of 58 in 1841 to a value of more
than 158 in 1856. The period 1850 until 1856 represented the high point period –an index value of 266
in 1854--for the clipper ship which benefitted from the gold rush in California and the China trade.
Clipper ship production started to wane in 1857 as the clipper ship gradually gave way to steam powered
ships that could carry heavier loads across the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The boom in clipper-ship
construction had a significant stimulative impact on the U.S. lumber industry, with many coastal timber
fields being exhausted during the 1850s given the incredible demand for lumber products to construct
the large wooden ships.
       Steam ship trade also experienced a take-off during the First Great Moderation. The number of
steamships involved in the Atlantic trade increased from 5,631 tons in 1847 to 97,296 tons in 1860
(Taylor, 1951, p. 116). Steamships garnered the bulk of the Atlantic trade by the end of the antebellum
period. Steamship construction also accelerated for the trade along the Mississippi River as western
migration expanded Midwestern markets. American merchants, on the other hand, generally continued
to use sailing ships in the antebellum period.


B2. Steam locomotives and expanding railroad networks
       Steam power was also used to power rolling stock during the antebellum period. Although steam
engines were introduced to the United States with the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad in 1828, the railroad
took approximately two decades of innovation and capital investment to have a significant impact on the
antebellum economy. Prior to the 1840s, canals served as the primary means of transportation for
shipping commodities, especially from the West. The creation of the Erie Canal in 1817 posed the first
serious challenge to previous transportation systems such as turnpikes, and allowed greater access to
western hubs from New York and New England. Freight rates over the Erie Canal quickly decreased to
an average of 1.68 cents per ton-mile for eastbound freight and 3.35 cents for westbound (Taylor, 1951).
By comparison, freight rates for railroads in the mid-1830s were often 7-10 cents per ton-mile (Fishlow,
1965). Rail mileage accelerated through the 1830s and 1840s, reaching 3,328 miles in 1840 and 8,879

                                                     16
by 1850. Railroad mileage by 1850 had also outpaced canals in 25 states, including major production
hubs like New York and Massachusetts. Both experienced an increase in tonnage in the West, but for
water routes this was largely the result of massive Western migration, which increased demand across
the board. This technological-diffusion process accelerated with the construction of almost 22,000 miles
of track built in the 1850s. By the eve of the Civil War, railroads had replaced canals as the predominant
means of transportation.
        Railroads had a major impact on agricultural productivity in the 1850s (Fishlow, 1965). Atack
and Margo (2009) determined that even under the most conservative estimates, railroads were
responsible for at least 25 percent of acreage improvements in the 1850s. Atack, Haines, and Margo
(2008) find that rail access had a significant effect on the development of factories in the 1850s.
Increased investment in locomotive and railroads during the late antebellum period may have also
further stimulated the westward migration of labor and agricultural productivity. Ferrie (1997), for
instance, found that moving to the frontier translated into a 45 percent gain in real wealth during the
1850s, indicating that it was advantageous for at least some migrants to head west.


C. SOURCES OF THE GREAT MODERATION IN INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION


        To test our hypothesis that transportation played a critical role in America’s First Great
Moderation, we create special sub-indices of the Davis IP series.


C1. Sector-specific industrial production indices
        First, we decompose the Davis IP index into two broad, mutually-exclusive sub-indices – an
investment goods IP index and a consumption goods IP index. The investment goods index consists
mostly of durable goods, including metal-producing sectors, transportation machinery, other small
machinery categories, and the lumber industry. The consumption goods index consists of the food,
textiles, printing, chemical/fuels, and leather-producing sectors. 1 In 1850, the consumption goods
industry accounted for approximately 60% of the total value added in the manufacturing and mining
sectors, while manufacture of investment goods yielded the remaining 40% of industrial production.
        We construct even finer-level IP indices from both the investment and consumption goods IP
indices. For consumption goods, we create two IP indices—an IP food products index (accounting for

1
 These sector classifications are similar to how the Federal Reserve today distinguishes between longer-term and generally
more volatile durable-goods investment, and investment in and production of nondurable goods.
                                                            17
10.9% of the value-added in the industrial sector in 1850) and an IP textiles index (21.8%), which is
primarily comprised of the cotton consumed by domestic textile mills. During this period, the textile
sector was the largest industry on both a gross and value-added basis.
           For investment goods, we create an IP metals index (accounting for 12.9% of the value added in
1850) and an IP transportation-intensive index (22.7%) comprised of locomotive production,
shipbuilding, and the primary input by far to ship construction at that time, lumber. Finally, we created
an IP index excluding transportation-intensive sectors that accounts for the remaining series in the Davis
IP index, accounting for 77.3% of that index on a value-added basis.
           We then calculate growth rates, standard deviations, and coefficients of variation for all of these
IP series as we did for the aggregate index. The summary statistics are reported in Table 10. Several
important features emerge. First, both consumption and investment goods had higher rates of average
growth during the Great Moderation than either before or after, although the boom in investment goods
during the 1841-1856 period is much stronger, with growth in the transportation IP index averaging 10
percent per annum versus only 3 percent per annum in the 1792-1840 period.
           Second, the U-shaped pattern in volatility for the Davis IP index—lower volatility during the
Great Moderation versus the periods before and after—is observed for investment goods but not for
consumption goods. The standard deviation in transportation-related production declines by one-third
between the antebellum (0.179) and Great Moderation period (0.115) before nearly doubling in the post-
bellum period (0.207). The decline in volatility in metals production is less pronounced and more
monotonic throughout the 1828-1914 period. 1
           Third, the combination of higher growth and even lower volatility for investment goods leads to
a pronounced U-shaped pattern in the coefficient of variation for the investment goods IP index. The
coefficient of variation for investment goods is 0.81 for the Great Moderation, or 80 percent lower than
that for the earlier antebellum period (4.15) and nearly one-third lower than the post-bellum period
(2.65). This U-shaped pattern in the coefficient of variation is even more striking for the transportation-
goods sector, with a ratio of 1.15 during the Great Moderation a fraction of that observed either before
(6.02) or after the Civil War (14.08). Overall, the summary statistics in the top half of Table 10 would
suggest that transportation-related investment contributed to the emergence of America’s First Great
Moderation.



1
    The IP metals index commences in 1827 given the limitations in pig-iron data.
                                                              18
C2. Markov models for sector-specific IP series
       We test our hypothesis that transportation-related investment was the primary source of the
recession-free period from 1841-1856. Again, we estimate the Markov regime-switching model on the
IP indices that exclude textiles, transportation, and investment/consumption goods, respectively. In
doing so, we can assess whether the exclusion of a primary sector (i.e., transportation or textiles)
significantly weakens the probability that the Great Moderation would have occurred.
       The estimated coefficients of the Markov models can be found in Table 11. Focusing on both the
statistical significance of the coefficients as well as the ratios in estimated standard deviations between
the low- and high-volatility states, one can see that the results for IP excluding textiles and for IP
investment goods are similar (if not stronger) when compared to the Davis IP index in Table 8.
Conversely, the model results are much weaker when one excludes transportation investment and
investment goods, more broadly. For the IP consumption goods index, the average standard deviation in
the low- and high-volatility states are very similar (0.003), while the estimate for the low-volatility state
for the IP index excluding transportation is not statistically different from zero.
       Figure 8 displays the probabilities these series where in low-volatility states over time based on
the model results in Table 11. Most notably, the Great Moderation we find for the Davis IP index is
much weaker when one excludes transportation-goods investment, with only the 1843-1849 period
possessing probabilities above 50 percent. The implication is that without transportation investment, the
U.S. economy would have only experienced a moderate expansion that ended before 1850 and would
not have experienced the high growth of the 1850s.
       Second, the Great Moderation in investment goods is clearly evident in Figure 8; before 1841 the
investment goods sector was rarely estimated to have been in a low-volatility state compared to the
broader Davis IP index. Third, the results for the IP index excluding textiles in Figure 8 suggest that the
Great Moderation may have persisted even longer had there not been more significant and negative
impacts from the volatility in cotton textile production in the late 1850s.
       Finally, Figure 9 presents the ratios of conditional mean to conditional standard deviations
(signal-to-noise ratio) as estimated by our Markov model for each of the series. The top-right panel of
the figure shows that the combination of higher growth and lower volatility during the Great Moderation
was the most pronounced for investment goods and the weakest when we exclude transportation-related
investment from the Davis IP index.



                                                     19
C3. Transportation investment led all other IP, not vice versa
       The Markov-based results strongly suggest that the boom in transportation investment was a key
contributor to America’s First Great Moderation. To better infer such investment spilled over to or led
other economic activity, we run bivariate Granger-causality tests between each of the four key sectors
(all investment goods, transportation, metals, as well as textiles) on all other IP. We run these tests for
the entire 1792-1914 sample, as well as for three sub-samples. The results are presented in Table 12.
       First, we find transportation IP led all other IP during the Great Moderation period at the 0.01
significance level, while all other IP did not lead fluctuations in transportation production.
Transportation IP statistically led growth in consumption-goods output, too, during the Great
Moderation (p=0.03). Second, the results are exactly the opposite for textiles and metals, where all other
IP led textile and metal IP during the Great Moderation at the 0.02 and 0.05 significance levels,
respectively.
       Third, growth in transportation-related IP did not lead all other IP growth during the postbellum
period; rather, the lead relationship ran in the opposite direction. Put differently, the 1841-1856 period
was unique in how the boom in transportation investment contributed to a period of higher growth and
lower volatility. To illustrate, Figure 10 presents F-statistics from Granger-causality tests between
transportation IP and all other IP over rolling 15-year windows beginning in the early 1800s through
1914. The line demarcates the observation that spans the Great Moderation period. The lines show that
the strong lead relationship from transportation goods to the broader industrial sector was somewhat
unique to the Great Moderation period.


D. INVESTIGATING AGRICULTURAL AND TRADE CHANNELS


       We can use both Markov regime-switching models and Granger-causality tests to examine
whether other candidates outside of transportation-related investment help explain the First Great
Moderation. Here, we focus on three—(1) the domestic cotton crop, (2) tariff rates, and (3) British
economic conditions.
       Despite the rapid industrialization of the American economy at this time, agriculture was still its
largest sector. Cotton was not only the nation’s most significant export, but it was also the primary input
to America’s largest industry—cotton textile mills. Shocks to demand or supply (i.e., weather) to the
cotton crop could have had important effects on the business cycle. To be sure, in the post-bellum period

                                                     20
under the gold standard, Davis et al (2009) find that most major U.S. recessions between 1880 and
World War I were caused by fluctuations in the size of the cotton harvest due to exogenous factors such
as weather.
           Another factor that may have contributed to stable economic growth during the First Great
Moderation was the sustained downward trend in U.S. import tariffs beginning during the early 1830s
and running until 1860. According to Irwin (2008), import tariffs were steadily and consistently reduced
over time due to the shifting political coalitions between the various regions of the country. Finally,
growth and fluctuations in the British economy may have played a leading role in a less-volatile U.S.
economy. Great Britain was the world’s largest economy and was America’s most important trading
partner.
        Figure 11 displays the probabilities of being in a low-volatility state for the growth rate in the
U.S. cotton crop, growth in British industrial production, and simple differences in U.S. tariff rates. The
specification of the Markov regime-switching model is identical to those used for U.S. IP and stock
prices except for in the case of the cotton crop, where we allow for three volatility states given the
extremely-high volatility levels during the Civil War. 1 As illustrated in the figure, neither the cotton
crop nor British IP display any meaningful structural breaks in volatility during America’s First Great
Moderation; rarely is the British economy in a low-volatility state at this time. Changes in tariff rates, on
the other hand, do show a significant break toward lower volatility around 1847 which persists until the
Civil War.
        Nevertheless, none of these three variables (cotton crop, tariffs, or British IP) lead changes in
overall U.S. industrial production during the First Great Moderation. Table 13 displays the statistical
results under the hypothesis that each of these three variables (individually) led fluctuations in several
U.S. industrial production indexes. Fluctuations in the cotton crop led fluctuations in U.S. textile
production, but not in either investment goods nor in overall industrial production. This is consistent
with not only our previous finding that textile production did not lead changes in overall industrial
production at this time (Table 11), but also that the First Great Moderation would have hypothetically
lasted beyond 1856 if the industrial sector had excluded textiles (Figure 8). Table 13 also shows no
meaningful relationship for either British industrial production or tariff rates on the large U.S. industrial
sectors we focus on here. Between 1840 and 1860, the contemporaneous correlation between annual
fluctuations in British and American IP was low, at 0.36.

1
 The estimated Markov regime-switching model results for these three variables available upon request. The estimated
model for British IP, in particular, is weak.
                                                           21
       Overall, these results suggest that neither America’s largest sector (agriculture), largest export
crop (cotton), its largest manufacturing industry (textile mills) nor the world’s largest economy (Britain)
played a very prominent role in generating the First Great Moderation.


E. THE END OF AMERICA’S FIRST GREAT MODERATION


America’s longest expansion ended in 1857 with a global financial crisis, a sharp reduction in bank
credit and widespread declines in real estate values and stock prices. In the United States, a prominent
cause cited by contemporaries for the 1857 financial panic was the failure of the Ohio Life Insurance
and Trust Company. The American industrial sector contracted significantly during the recession,
cumulatively falling nearly 8% between 1856 and 1858. This was the largest decline in industrial
production in the antebellum economy since the embargo of 1808.
       The deep 1858 U.S. recession witnessed a significant contraction in transportation investment,
which declined a cumulative 36% between 1856 and 1858. Railroad and shipbuilding activity
plummeted as the rates of returns of previous investment declined, inventories built, and the westward
boom collapsed. While the Dred Scott case and several other events likely contributed to the severity of
the downturn (Calomiris and Schweikart, 1991), it is apparent that more than a decade-long period of
high investment had led to a buildup of private debt tied to rising asset values. Bank loans had grown
faster than the broader economy during the expansion, rising from approximately $250 million in 1843
to more than $680 million at the end of 1857. Following the panic bank lending fell off more than 16%
in 1858, representing the most significant credit deleveraging since the early 1840s. America’s First
Great Moderation was over, with the coming onset of the American Civil War leading to a further
increase in volatility in the real economy and the stock market.


V. CONCLUSION


       The Great Moderation that commenced around 1984 is regarded by many economists as one of
the longest periods of economic growth and low business cycle volatility in American history. In this
paper, we identify another, much earlier period of high economic growth and low economic and
financial market volatility. We identify America’s First Great Moderation—a recession-free, 16-year
period from 1841 until 1856 that represents the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. Productivity

                                                    22
growth in the industrial sector was also exceedingly high; annual growth in industrial production
averaged 8 percent per annum, the fastest pace of economic growth in the 19th century.
       We identify America’s antebellum “transportation revolution” as a primary reason for the First
Great Moderation. We show that America’s First Great Moderation was primarily driven by
transportation-goods investment, which we attribute to the wider adoption of general purpose
technologies in both locomotives and shipbuilding. Our empirical results are consistent with endogenous
growth models where the diffusion of general purpose technologies can create extended periods of high
investment and minimal economic slumps as heterogeneous sectors adopt and expand on technologies
such as steam power.
       We also fail to find any compelling evidence that America’s largest sector (agriculture), largest
export crop (cotton), its largest manufacturing industry (textile mills) or the world’s largest economy
(Britain) played any important role in causing this moderation. While we cannot rule out that certain
other factors—including western expansion, increased financial market integration, lower and stable
tariffs, and state constitutional reforms (Wallis, 2005)—may have played some role during this time,
they would have had to have worked through both the transportation sector and stock prices.
       Although the first Great Moderation occurred more than 150 years ago, our Markov-switching
models reveal that the low-volatility regime derived for the First Great Moderation are of similar relative
magnitude and statistical significance to those estimated for the Second Great Moderation using
comparable economic and stock-market data. This may not be terribly surprising given several
similarities between the 1841-1856 and 1984-2006 periods.
       First, both moderations experienced a change in the structure of the economy. The First Great
Moderation witnessed the widespread adoption of important general purpose technologies—clipper and
steam ships, railroads, and the telegraph—that helped contribute to significantly larger markets for
goods, labor and exports. The modern Great Moderation saw structural change in terms of the
movement of production from goods to services, the IT revolution that led to better inventory
management, and financial innovations that allowed households and firms to better smooth consumption
and investment. Second, the first and second moderations have been characterized by improved
economic policymaking. Many states during the first Great Moderation wrote new constitutions that
redefined the rules of the game for business and the government, while tariff rates during this time were
generally significantly lower and less volatile, especially in the 1850s. As for the modern period, many
scholars have argued that good monetary policy was an important factor in the Great Moderation from

                                                    23
1984-2007. Finally, both periods seem to have benefitted to some extent from good luck. While we do
not observe significant changes in weather shocks or commodity prices during this period, the first Great
Moderation did benefit from the discovery of gold in California. It also occurred during the era of Pax
Brittanica—a period of global peace (Brown et al, 2005) and no major armed conflict in the United
States. The second Great Moderation, on the other hand, appears to have been a period of generally low
and stable oil prices coupled with few negative productivity shocks, at least up until 2007.
       In summary, our analysis suggests that the First Great Moderation is an unparalleled period in
the history of U.S. business cycles characterized by high economic growth rates and low business cycle
volatility. Like the modern-day Great Moderation, the end of America’s First Great Moderation was
abrupt, pronounced, and notable for its magnitude following years of relative stability. Unlike the
modern-day Great Moderation, however, America’s First Great Moderation occurred despite a low level
of government spending, the absence of a central bank, and no marked improvement in price stability.
       Ultimately, the findings in our paper may help alter not only how economic textbooks
characterize the nineteenth-century economy, but today’s business cycle as well.




                                                    24
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aghion, Philippe, George-Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee, and Kalina Manova. “Volatility
       and Growth: Credit Constraints and Productivity-Enhancing Investment,” NBER
       Working Paper 11349. 2005.
Aghion P and Howitt P. (1998) On the Macroeconomic Effects of Major Technological Change,
       in General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, E. Helpman, ed., Cambridge,
       MA: MIT Press, pp 121-144.
Aghion, Philippe, and Gilles Saint-Paul. (1998), “Virtues of Bad Times: Interaction Between
       Productivity Growth and Economic Fluctuations,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 2, 322-344.
Atack, Jeremy, Michael R. Haines, and Robert A. Margo. “Railroads and the Rise of the Factory:
       Evidence for the United States, 1850-1870.” NBER Working Paper 14410. 2008.
Atack, Jeremy and Robert A. Margo. “Agricultural Improvements and Access to Rail
       Transportation: The American Midwest as a Test Case, 1850-1860.” NBER Working
       Paper 15520. 2009.
Bodenhorn, Howard. “Capital Mobility and Financial Integration in Antebellum America.” The
       Journal of Economic History, Vol. 52 No. 3 (Sep. 1992), pp. 585-610.
_____. A History of Banking in Antebellum America: Financial Markets and Economic
       Development in an Era of Nation-Building. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
       University Press. 2000.
Bernanke, Ben (2004). "The Great Moderation," remarks given at the meetings of the meetings
       of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, DC, February 20.
Brown, William O., Richard C.K. Burdekin, and Marc D. Weidenmier. “Volatility in an era of
       reduced uncertainty: Lessons from Pax Brittanica.” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
       79 (2006), pp. 693-707.
Burns, Arthur F. and Wesley C. Mitchell. Measuring Business Cycles. NBER. 1946. Electronic
       version found at http://www.nber.org/books/burn46-1.
Calomiris, Charles and Christopher Hanes. “Consistent Output Series for the Antebellum and
       Postbellum Periods: Issues and Preliminary Results.” The Journal of Economic History,
       Vol. 54 No. 2 (June 1994), pp. 409-422.
_____, and Larry Schweikart. "The Panic of 1857: Origins, Transmission, and Containment".
       The Journal of Economic History 51 (1991): pp. 808–810.

                                              25
Davis, Joseph. “A Quantity-Based Annual Index of US Industrial Production, 1790-1915: An
       Empirical Appraisal of Historical Business-Cycle Fluctuations”. Ph.D. dissertation, Duke
       University. 2002.
_____. “An Annual Index of US Industrial Production, 1790-1915.” The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 119, No. 4 (Nov. 2004), pp. 1177-1215.
_____. “An Improved Annual Chronology of U.S. Business Cycles,” Journal of
Economic History, 66 (2006), 103–121.
_____, Christopher Hanes, and Paul W. Rhode. “Harvests and Business Cycles in Nineteenth-
       Century America.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 124 no. 4 (2009), pp. 1675-
       1727.
Davis, Lance E. “The New England Textile Mills and the Capital Markets: A Study of Industrial
       Borrowing 1840-1860.” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 20 No. 1 (Mar. 1960),
       pp. 1-30.
Ferrie, Joseph P. “Migration to the Frontier in Mid-Nineteenth Century America: A Re-
       Examination of Turner’s ‘Safety Valve’.” Department of Economics, Northwestern
       University manuscript. 1997.
Fishlow, Albert. American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-bellum Economy.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 1965.
Gallman Robert E. “Gross National Product in the United States, 1834-1909,”in Dorothy S.
       Brady [ed.] Output, Employment, and Productivity in the United States after 1800,
       Studies in Income and Wealth Vol. 30 (New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1966) pp. 3-
       76.
Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo. “Wages, Prices, and Labor Markets Before the Civil
       War.” NBER Working Paper No. 3198, 1989.
Goetzmann, William N., Roger G. Ibbotson, and Liang Peng. NYSE History Research Project.
       http://icf.som.yale.edu/nyse/index.shtml
Historical Statistics of the United States. Cambridge University Press. 2000.
Irwin, Douglas A. “Antebellum Tariff Politics: Regional Coalitions and Shifting Economic
       Interests,” Journal of Law and Economics, 51(November 2008): 715-742.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 2000. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. 4th
       ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

                                               26
Margo, Robert A. “Labor Market Integration Before the Civil War.” NBER Working Paper
       6643. 1998.
_____. “Regional Wage Gaps and the Settlement of the Midwest.” Explorations in Economic
       History, Vol. 36 (1999), pp. 128-143.
McConnell, Margaret, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros (2000). "Output Fluctuations in the United
       States: What Has Changed since the Early 1980s?" American Economic Review, 90, pp.
       1464-76.
Miron, Jeffrey A., and Christina D. Romer, “A New Monthly Index of Industrial Production,
       1884–1940,” Journal of Economic History, 50 (1990), 321–332.
Moore, Geoffrey H. and Victor Zarnowitz. 1986. The development and role of the National
       Bureau of Economic Research’s business cycle chronologies. In The American Business
       Cycle: Continuity and Change, ed. Robert J. Gordon, 735–79. NBER Studies in Business
       Cycles, vol. 25. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rhode, Paul W. “Gallman’s Annual Output Series for the United States, 1834-1909.” NBER
       Working Paper No. 8860, 2002.
Romer, Christina D. “Remeasuring Business Cycles.” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 54
       (1994), pp. 573-609.
Rostow, W. W. The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto. 3rd Edition.
       Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. 1990.
Rousseau, Peter L. “Jacksonian Monetary Policy, Specie Flows, and the Panic of 1837.” The
       Journal of Economic History, Vol. 62 No. 2 (Jun. 2002), pp. 457-488.
Schwert, 1990. “Indexes of United States stock prices from 1802 to 1987,” Journal of Business,
       63 (July), 399-426.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 17 (2002), pp. 159-218.
Taylor, George R. The Transportation Revolution 1815-1860. New York: Rinehart & Co. 1951.
Temin, Peter. The Jacksonian Economy. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 1969.
Thorp, William L. Business Annals. NBER, 1926. Electronic version found at
       http://www.nber.org/books/thor26-1




                                               27
Turner, Frederick J. The Frontier in American History. New York: Henry Holt and Company,
       1921. Hypertext version, ed. Michael W. Kidd, University of Virginia.
       http://xroads.virginia.edu/~hyper/turner/
Vandenbroucke, Guillame. “The US Westward Expansion.” International Economic Review,
       Vol. 49 No. 1 (Feb. 2008), pp. 81-110.
Watson, Mark W. “Business-Cycle Durations and Postwar Stabilization of the U.S. Economy.”
       American Economic Review 84, no. 1 (1994): 24–46.
Zarnowitz, Victor. Business Cycles: Theory, History, Indicators, and Forecasting. NBER
       Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 27. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.




                                                28
Figure 1: Growth rates in annual Davis IP index, 1791-1915




Notes: Gray areas represent declines in the Davis IP index, which we associate here with recessions, as in Davis (2006). The yellow area
represents the First Great Moderation.
Sources: Davis (2002, 2004, 2006); authors’ calculations.

                                                                       29
Figure 2: Monthly U.S. stock market returns, January 1826–December 1899


                                                                                                                                   30
                                         First Great                                     Nominal U.S. stock returns
                                                                                                                                   20
                                         M oderation
                                                                                                                                   10

                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                   -10
       30
                                                                                                                                   -20
       20
                                                                                                                                   -30
       10

         0

      -10

      -20
                                                                                 Real (PPI-adjusted) stock returns
      -30
                1830            1840           1850           1860            1870           1880           1890            1900


Sources and notes: Nominal returns reflect logarithmic percentage changes in the GIP-NYSE price-weighted capital appreciation index from the
NYSE History Research Project. Observations for the calendar year 1867 are missing in the monthly GIP-NYSE index. Real returns were deflated
by the wholesale price index. The GIP-NYSE index before 1826 is judged less reliable as the number of securities in the index often totals less
than 30. For details, see Goetzmann, Ibbotson, and Peng (2000).


                                                                      30
Figure 3: Growth-to-Volatility Ratio in Industrial Production, 1810-2010
Line represents trailing 20-year averages in annual IP data

1.4                                                                                                1.4


1.2                                                                                                1.2


1.0                                                                                                1.0


0.8                                                                                                0.8


0.6                                                                                                0.6


0.4                                                                                                0.4


0.2                                                                                                0.2


0.0                                                                                                0.0
  1800       1825       1850       1875      1900       1925       1950       1975       2000

Notes: An annual IP index from 1790 through 2010 was created according to the procedures
recommended in Davis (2004). Specifically, the annual Davis IP index was ratio-spliced to the Miron-
Romer index in 1916 before ratio-splicing to the Federal Reserve IP index beginning in 1919. The
resulting line above is a signal-to-noise ratio on this spliced series; a similar (and mirror-image) result is
generally obtained using a coefficient of variation (CV), although the near-zero average IP growth during
the 1930s distorts the CV scale. We stress that one should not attempt to conduct statistical volatility
break-point tests on this spliced series before and after 1915 given changes in series comparability and
reliability over time. For details, see Davis (2004, pp.1991-92).
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on Davis (2002, 2004), Miron and Romer (1990), and U.S. Federal
Reserve Board.




                                                      31
Figure 4: Low-volatility state probabilities for annual U.S. IP growth rates

Panel A: Davis IP Index, 1792-1914, for Markov switching-variance, switching AR(1) model

      1.0                                                                                                 1.0



      0.8                                                                                                 0.8



      0.6                                                                                                 0.6



      0.4                                                                                                 0.4



      0.2                                                                                                 0.2



      0.0                                                                                                 0.0
        1790   1800    1810   1820   1830   1840   1850   1860    1870    1880    1890    1900    1910


                       Markov model with constant IP mean growth
                       Markov model with state-switching IP mean growth


Panel B: FRB IP Index, 1950-2010 for Markov switching-variance, switching AR(1) model

      1.0                                                                                                 1.0



      0.8                                                                                                 0.8



      0.6                                                                                                 0.6



      0.4                                                                                                 0.4



      0.2                                                                                                 0.2



      0.0                                                                                                 0.0
        1950   1955    1960   1965   1970   1975   1980    1985    1990    1995    2000    2005    2010


                      Markov model with constant IP mean growth rate
                      Markov mode with state-switching IP mean growth rate


Sources: Authors’ calculations. Probabilities are smoothed state probabilities.

                                                     32
Figure 5: Ratio of conditional mean to conditional standard deviation in annual IP
As estimated from a Markov regime-switching model for different periods


     1.0                                                                                         1.0

                                                               Markov model B:
                                                    Post-WWII sample, 1950-2010
     0.9                                                                                         0.9



     0.8                                                                                         0.8



     0.7                                                                                         0.7

             Markov model A:
             Pre-WWI sample, 1792-1914
     0.6                                                                                         0.6



     0.5                                                                                         0.5
             1800    1825      1850     1875      1900     1925      1950      1975     2000


Note: Conditional means and standard deviations in each Markov regime-switching model were
calculated based only on the filtered probabilities prior to time t. The Markov model was specified with
switching volatilities and AR(1) terms but a constant mean; results are nearly identical with a switching-
mean specification. Shaded regions demarcate America’s First and Second Great Moderations. Lines
reflect centered 10-year moving averages in the ratio of conditional mean to conditional standard
deviation.




                                                    33
Figure 6: Low-volatility state probabilities for monthly U.S. stock returns
Panel A: NYSE returns, January 1826 – December 1914 for switching-variance, switching AR(1) model

        1.0                                                                                                                                   1.0



        0.8                                                                                                                                   0.8



        0.6                                                                                                                                   0.6



        0.4                                                                                                                                   0.4



        0.2                                                                                                                                   0.2



        0.0                                                                                                                                   0.0
          1825    1830    1835     1840     1845    1850   1855   1860     1865        1870     1875    1880   1885   1890    1895     1900

               Markov model with constant NYSE mean growth                     Markov model with state-switching NYSE mean growth



Panel B: S&P500 returns, January 1950 – December 2010 for switching-variance, switching AR(1) model

        1.0                                                                                                                               1.0



        0.8                                                                                                                               0.8



        0.6                                                                                                                               0.6



        0.4                                                                                                                               0.4



        0.2                                                                                                                               0.2



        0.0                                                                                                                               0.0
          1950     1955     1960          1965     1970    1975    1980         1985          1990     1995    2000    2005     2010

              Markov model with constant NYSE mean growth                      Markov model with state-switching NYSE mean growth



Sources: Authors’ calculations. The Markov model in Panel A was fit over the January 1826-December 1914 period, excluding the missing NYSE
observations for 1867

                                                                          34
Figure 7: ‘Second-wave’ productivity boom during America’s First Great Moderation




Source: Taken directly from Davis (2004, 1197).




                                             35
Figure 8: Probabilities of low-volatility states for IP with and without key sectors
1.0                                                                                                     1.0



0.8                                                                                                     0.8



0.6                                                                                                     0.6



0.4                                                                                                     0.4



0.2                                                                                                     0.2



0.0                                                                                                     0.0
 1830     1835    1840     1845       1850         1855          1860       1865       1870   1875   1880

                                           Dav is IP index
                                           IP, excluding transportation


1.0                                                                                                     1.0



0.8                                                                                                     0.8



0.6                                                                                                     0.6



0.4                                                                                                     0.4



0.2                                                                                                     0.2



0.0                                                                                                     0.0
 1830     1835    1840     1845       1850         1855          1860       1865       1870   1875   1880

                              Dav is IP index
                              IP, excluding consumption goods (IP inv estment goods)


1.0                                                                                                     1.0



0.8                                                                                                     0.8



0.6                                                                                                     0.6



0.4                                                                                                     0.4



0.2                                                                                                     0.2



0.0                                                                                                     0.0
 1830     1835    1840     1845       1850         1855          1860       1865       1870   1875   1880

                                          Dav is IP index
                                          IP excluding textile production

Notes: Smoothed low-volatility probabilities from Markov regime-switching model shown in
Table 9. Figure does not show the entire 1792-1914 period simply to enhance clarity.


                                                     36
Figure 9: Ratio of Markov conditional mean to standard deviation, various IP indexes
                    Davis IP index                                  Davis IP index, ex transportation
1.0                                             1.0        1.0                                               1.0



0.9                                             0.9        0.9                                               0.9


                                                           0.8                                               0.8
0.8                                             0.8

                                                           0.7                                               0.7
0.7                                             0.7

                                                           0.6                                               0.6
0.6                                             0.6

                                                           0.5                                               0.5
      1800   1825       1850    1875    1900                     1800    1825     1850     1875       1900



      Davis IP index, investment goods only                             Davis IP index, ex textiles
 .7                                             .7         1.0                                               1.0


                                                           0.9                                               0.9
 .6                                             .6

                                                           0.8                                               0.8

 .5                                             .5
                                                           0.7                                               0.7


 .4                                             .4         0.6                                               0.6


                                                           0.5                                               0.5
 .3                                             .3

                                                           0.4                                               0.4
      1800   1825       1850    1875    1900                     1800    1825     1850     1875       1900


Note: Conditional means and standard deviations in each Markov regime-switching model were
calculated based only on the filtered probabilities prior to time t. The Markov model was specified with
switching volatilities and AR(1) terms but a constant mean; results are nearly identical with a switching-
mean specification. Shaded regions demarcate America’s First Great Moderations. Lines reflect centered
10-year moving averages in the ratio of conditional mean to conditional standard deviation.




                                                      37
Figure 10: Transportation Granger-caused all other IP during the Great Moderation
Rolling 15-year F-statistics
10
                                       Great
                                     Moderation
 8                                    period



 6



 4



 2



 0
 1810       1820     1830      1840      1850      1860      1870      1880      1890      1900     1910

                          IP ex transportation Granger-causes transportation IP
                          Transportation IP Granger-causes IP ex transportation
Notes: Figure displays rolling 15-year Granger-causality tests between annual growth rates in IP
transportation index and all other IP. Years along the axis represent the end of the 15-year rolling period.
The shaded region shows F-statistics below 2.8, the value for significance at the 10 percent level.

Figure 11: Estimated Low-Volatility States for Cotton Crop, British IP and Tariffs
1.0                                                                                                     1.0



0.8                                                                                                     0.8



0.6                                                                                                     0.6



0.4                                                                                                     0.4



0.2                                                                                                     0.2



0.0                                                                                                     0.0
         1800                1825               1850                1875                1900

                              U.S. tariff rates
                              U.K. industrial production
                              U.S. cotton crop (lowest-vol state of 3 states)
Figures reflect smoothed probabilities from Markov model, as described in text. See also Figure 9.



                                                     38
Table 1: Estimates of Trend Growth in U.S. Real GNP, 1834-1909


                                                               Annualized growth rates
                    Gallman real GNP, in levels                  between successive
                     (Millions of 1860 dollars)                    periods using:


                                          Decade                                    Decade
                    Single year           average              Single year          average

Census year

     1834                   1,403                       --                  --                  --

     1839                   1,623                1,560                2.95%                     --

     1844                   1,974                1,941                4.00%                4.5%

     1849                   2,429                2,549                4.24%                5.6%

     1854                   3,366                3,296                6.74%                5.3%

     1859                   4,100                       --            4.03%                     --

                   Gallman estimates do not exist for Civil War
Calendar year

     1869                   5,347                       --                  --                  --

     1879                   8,336                8,417                4.54%                     --

     1889                  12,426              12,604                 4.07%                4.1%

     1899                  17,527              17,353                 3.50%                3.2%

     1909                  25,800                       --            3.94%                     --


Sources: Gallman data reported in Rhode (2002), especially Table 5 and authors’ calculations.



                                                   39
Table 2: Summary Statistics of Interest Rates in Major Cities, 1836-1856

                         Boston   Boston   New                                     New
                         (1)      (2)      York        Philadelphia   Charleston   Orleans

                 1836-
Mean Rate        1842    11.069   11.198    9.194           10.605        11.937    13.274

                 1843-
                 1856     8.653    8.764    6.774             8.323        7.339     8.489

Standard         1836-
Deviation        1842     6.477    7.542    3.744             4.527        5.074     5.766

                 1843-
                 1856     3.085    3.530    2.080             3.051        2.181     3.111

Coefficient of   1836-
Variation        1842     0.585    0.674    0.407             0.427        0.425     0.434

                 1843-
                 1856     0.357    0.403    0.307             0.367        0.297     0.366

Sources: Bodenhorn (1992), authors’ calculations




                                                  40
Table 3: Summary Statistics for U.S. Industrial Production, 1792-1914

                                                          Davis IP index, log growth rates


                                                                Mean           Standard      Coefficient
 Period                                      Dates            growth (%)       deviation     of variation


 Full sample                                 1792-1914              0.049          0.069           1.41


 Antebellum, pre-Great Moderation            1792-1840              0.047          0.067           1.45

 Great Moderation                            1841-1856              0.077          0.050           0.65

 Postbellum, pre-WWI                         1867-1914              0.046          0.075           1.63



 Memo: Statistical equivalence tests of mean and standard deviation

                                             Satterthwaite-Welch mean          Equality of variance F-
      Period                                   equality t-test, p-value            test, p-value

      GM vs non-GM antebellum                         0.04   **                    0.098     *

      Across all 3 sub-samples                        0.12                         0.193

      Antebellum vs postbellum                        0.65                         0.355



Notes: *denotes significance at the 10 percent level; **denotes significance at the 5 percent level;
***denotes significance at the 1 percent level.
Sources: Davis (2004); authors’ calculations.




                                                     41
Table 4: Summary Statistics for Early U.S. Stock Returns, 1826-1914


                                                           U.S. stock prices, monthly price returns


                                                                          Mean        Standard     Coefficient
 Period                                       Dates                     growth (%)    deviation    of variation


 Full sample                                  1826M1 - 1914M12              0.002          0.040            21.21


 Antebellum, pre-Great Moderation             1826M1 - 1840M12             (0.002)         0.039            (25.78)

 Great Moderation                             1841M1 - 1856M12              0.003          0.035            11.44

 Postbellum, pre-WWI                          1868M1 - 1914M12              0.002          0.040            23.35



 Memo: Statistical equivalence tests of mean and standard deviation

                                             Satterthwaite-Welch mean equality         Equality of variance F-
      Period                                           t-test, p-value                     test, p-value
      GM vs non-GM antebellum                                    0.19                      0.008      ***
      Across all 3 sub-samples                                   0.47                      0.052      *
      Antebellum vs postbellum                                   0.60                      0.651



Notes: *denotes significance at the 10 percent level; **denotes significance at the 5 percent level;
***denotes significance at the 1 percent level.
Sources: NYSE History Research Project; authors’ calculations.




                                                      42
Table 5: NBER Recession Chronology vs. Davis (2005) Recession Chronology

      NBER Chronology                  Davis (2005) Chronology            Net change
                                                                        to NBER phase
       Pe ak         Trough                Pe ak         Trough        duration (in yrs.)


                              Ante be llum industrial cycle s

       1802           1804                 1802           1803               less 1
       1807           1810                 1807           1808               less 2
       1811           1812                 1811           1812
       1815           1821                 1815           1816               less 5
       1822           1823                 1822           1823
       1825           1826                                              no re ce ssion*
       1828           1829                 1828           1829
       1833           1834                 1833           1834
       1836           1838                 1836           1837              less 1
       1839           1843                 1839           1840              less 3
       1845           1846                                              no re ce ssion
                                           America's First Great
       1847           1848                                              no re ce ssion
                                              Moderation
       1853           1855                                              no re ce ssion*
       1856           1858                 1856            1858

                               Civil War industrial cycle s

       1860           1861                 1860           1861
       1864           1867                 1864           1865               less 2

                              Postbe llum industrial cycle s

       1869           1870                                              no re ce ssion*
       1873           1878                 1873           1875              less 3
       1882           1885                 1883           1885              less 1
       1887           1888                                              no re ce ssion*
       1890           1891                                              no re ce ssion*
       1892           1894                 1892            1894
       1895           1896                 1895            1896
       1899           1900                                              no re ce ssion*

Notes: All reference dates are calendar-year cycles. Bolded text reflects deviation from current NBER
record. No recession* indicates a “growth recession,” or a slowdown in the rate of economic growth
based upon detrended values of the IP index. Victor Zarnowitz (1992) summarized the annual NBER
peak-trough chronology. For the pre-WWI era, the annual chronology ultimately corresponds to Thorp’s
verbal assessment (1926, 113–45) later summarized in Burns and Mitchell (1946, 78, table 16) and Moore
and Zarnowitz (1986, 746, table A.2).
Source: Davis (2006), Table 1.


                                                   43
Table 6: Comparing the two Great Moderations using annual IP data

                        Davis IP index (annual frequency)                                   Federal Reserve IP index (annual frequency)


   Year      Log growth rate (%)    1-sided HP filter   2-sided HP filter      Year    Log growth rate (%)    1-sided HP filter   2-sided HP filter
   1830                    16.81                3.27               (6.89)      1980                  (2.58)              (2.70)               1.18
   1831                    16.55               10.24                2.96       1981                   1.33               (2.67)               0.75
   1832                    11.58               10.70                7.80       1982                  (5.30)              (6.66)              (6.31)
   1833                    10.85                9.67               12.10       1983                   2.71               (3.56)              (5.48)
   1834                    (4.57)              (1.60)               1.26       1984                   8.53                2.41                1.01
   1835                    11.24                1.42                6.52       1985                   1.20                1.35                0.04
   1836                     6.88                0.46                7.69       1986                   1.00                0.44               (1.25)
   1837                    (1.43)              (5.50)               0.74       1987                   5.04                2.40                1.37
   1838                     2.53               (6.33)              (2.21)      1988                   5.03                3.46                3.90
   1839                    12.37               (0.08)               4.55       1989                   0.88                1.21                2.18
   1840                    (4.84)              (7.06)              (6.18)      1990                   0.95               (0.29)               0.41
   1841                     5.47               (4.38)              (7.06)      1991                  (1.56)              (2.82)              (4.03)
   1842                     2.78               (4.03)             (11.22)      1992                   2.79               (1.43)              (4.36)
   1843                    10.82                1.64               (7.98)      1993                   3.21               (0.16)              (4.51)
   1844                    11.29                5.43               (4.86)      1994                   5.15                1.90               (2.95)
   1845                     9.47                6.26               (4.02)      1995                   4.64                2.73               (2.05)
   1846                    14.99                9.80                2.07       1996                   4.35                2.86               (1.48)
   1847                    14.03               10.67                7.17       1997                   6.96                4.39                1.77
   1848                     8.26                6.69                6.65       1998                   5.65                4.17                3.92
   1849                     3.56                0.62                1.73       1999                   4.20                2.77                4.95
   1850                     4.04               (3.00)              (2.36)      2000                   3.94                1.49                6.12
   1851                     4.73               (4.64)              (5.36)      2001                  (3.47)              (4.17)               0.33
   1852                    15.92                1.84                3.32       2002                   0.21               (5.10)              (1.38)
   1853                    14.21                4.73               10.90       2003                   1.26               (4.62)              (1.67)
   1854                     3.41               (0.70)               8.37       2004                   2.30               (3.28)              (0.56)
   1855                     1.59               (5.27)               4.70       2005                   3.19               (1.60)               1.77
   1856                     4.90               (5.65)               4.92       2006                   2.17               (1.04)               3.44
   1857                    (1.48)              (9.51)              (0.80)      2007                   2.63               (0.31)               5.89
   1858                    (5.54)             (13.81)             (10.34)      2008                  (3.78)              (3.91)               2.22
   1859                    13.51               (3.29)              (0.79)      2009                 (11.83)             (11.04)              (9.33)
   1860                     1.73               (3.84)              (3.05)      2010                   5.15               (3.86)              (3.86)

Notes: Hodrick-Prescott filters used lambda=100. Sources: Authors’ calculations based on data from Davis (2004) and U.S. Federal Reserve.
Table 7: Markov Regime-Switching Models, Annual IP Growth, 1792-1914

Both panels employ Markov model with switching variances and AR(1) terms

                            Panel A: Constant mean growth                                               Panel B: Switching mean growth


                           State V₁                     State V₂                                        State V₁                  State V₂
                        (Low Volatility)             (High Volatility)                               (Low Volatility)          (High Volatility)

                           Estimate                      Estimate                                       Estimate                  Estimate
                           std error                     std error                                      std error                 std error
     Parameter             [p-value]                     [p-value]                Parameter             [p-value]                 [p-value]


                    µ                      0.0429                        ***                     µ            0.0483 ***                 0.0400 ***
                                           0.0074                                                             0.0150                     0.0113
                                           [0.00]                                                              [0.00]                     [0.00]


                    ф             0.4111 ***                   (0.2605) *                        ф            0.3767 **                 (0.2375) *
                                  0.1061                       0.1380                                         0.1469                     0.1376
                                  [0.00]                        [0.06]                                         [0.01]                     [0.09]


                    σ             0.0016 ***                   0.0057 ***                        σ            0.0014 ***                 0.0057 ***
                                  0.0005                       0.0011                                         0.0005                     0.0011
                                  [0.00]                        [0.00]                                         [0.01]                     [0.00]


   Log-likelihood                 158.25            Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂)      0.27   Log-likelihood                158.32         Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂)       0.25

   Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):                      Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):
                       0.67 (0.13,0.00)          0.24 (0.11,0.03)                                   0.66 (0.12,0.00)          0.23 (0.10,0.02)
                       0.33 (0.14,0.02)          0.76 (0.11,0.00)                                   0.34 (0.13,0.01)          0.77 (0.10,0.00)

   Expected duration of Regime #1: 3.02 time periods                            Expected duration of Regime #1: 2.91 time periods
   Expected duration of Regime #2: 4.13 time periods                            Expected duration of Regime #2: 4.27 time periods


*denotes significance at the 10 percent level;
**denotes significance at the 5 percent level;
***denotes significance at the 1 percent level.
Table 8: Markov Regime-Switching Models, Annual IP Growth in Different Eras

Specification: Constant mean, switching variance, and switching AR(1) Markov model

                         Panel A: Annual Sample, 1792-1914                                             Panel B: Annual Sample, 1950-2010


                           State V₁                     State V₂                                        State V₁                     State V₂
                        (Low Volatility)             (High Volatility)                               (Low Volatility)             (High Volatility)

                           Estimate                      Estimate                                       Estimate                     Estimate
                           std error                     std error                                      std error                    std error
     Parameter             [p-value]                     [p-value]                Parameter             [p-value]                    [p-value]


                    µ                      0.0429                        ***                     µ                      0.0226                        ***
                                           0.0074                                                                       0.0051
                                           [0.00]                                                                       [0.00]


                    ф             0.4111 ***                   (0.2605) *                        ф            0.4772 ***                    0.0113
                                  0.1061                       0.1380                                         0.1024                        0.1669
                                  [0.00]                        [0.06]                                         [0.00]                        [0.95]


                    σ             0.0016 ***                   0.0057 ***                        σ            0.0001                        0.0030 ***
                                  0.0005                       0.0011                                         0.0001                        0.0006
                                  [0.00]                        [0.00]                                         [0.12]                        [0.00]


   Log-likelihood                 158.25            Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂)      0.27   Log-likelihood                103.88             Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂)       0.04

   Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):                      Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):
                       0.67 (0.13,0.00)          0.24 (0.11,0.03)                                   0.63 (0.24,0.01)          0.15 (0.10,0.15)
                       0.33 (0.14,0.02)          0.76 (0.11,0.00)                                   0.37 (0.25,0.14)          0.85 (0.18,0.00)

   Expected duration of Regime #1: 3.02 time periods                            Expected duration of Regime #1: 2.70 time periods
   Expected duration of Regime #2: 4.13 time periods                            Expected duration of Regime #2: 6.65 time periods


*denotes significance at the 10 percent level;
**denotes significance at the 5 percent level;
***denotes significance at the 1 percent level.
Table 9: Markov Regime-Switching Models, Monthly U.S. Stock Returns

Specification: Constant mean, switching variance, and switching AR(1) Markov model

                       Sample A: Monthly Data, 1826M1-1914M12                                            Sample B: Monthly Data, 1950M1-2010M12


                           State V₁                      State V₂                                              State V₁                       State V₂
                         (Low Volatility)            (High Volatility)                                      (Low Volatility)               (High Volatility)

                            Estimate                     Estimate                                              Estimate                       Estimate
                            std error                    std error                                             std error                      std error
    Parameter               [p-value]                    [p-value]                     Parameter               [p-value]                      [p-value]


                   µ                        0.0018                       *                           µ                          0.0069                          ***
                                            0.0009                                                                              0.0012
                                            [0.06]                                                                              [0.00]


                   ф              0.0324                       0.0774                                ф                0.2036 ***                      0.2648 ***
                                  0.0369                       0.0766                                                 0.0456                          0.0793
                                   [0.38]                       [0.31]                                                 [0.00]                          [0.00]


                   σ              0.0006 ***                   0.0051 ***                            σ                0.0006 ***                      0.0028 ***
                                  0.0000                       0.0004                                                 0.0000                          0.0003
                                   [0.00]                       [0.00]                                                 [0.00]                          [0.00]



  Log-likelihood                2,032.31             Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂)         0.12   Log-likelihood                  1,474.50             Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂)        0.21

  Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):                           Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):
                        0.91 (0.03,0.00)         0.29 (0.07,0.00)                                         0.95 (0.04,0.00)           0.14 (0.05,0.00)
                        0.09 (0.02,0.00)         0.71 (0.05,0.00)                                         0.05 (0.02,0.00)           0.86 (0.05,0.00)

  Expected duration of Regime #1: 11.65 months                                      Expected duration of Regime #1: 19.83 months
  Expected duration of Regime #2: 3.40 months                                       Expected duration of Regime #2: 7.06 months



Notes: Stock return data reflect month-end values on the Yale / NYSE price-weighted capital appreciation
monthly index (excludes dividends) through December, 1925, and spliced thereafter to month-end values
of the S&P500 Index (price index, excludes dividends, not a total return index).
*denotes significance at the 10 percent level;
**denotes significance at the 5 percent level;
***denotes significance at the 1 percent level.
Table 10: Summary Statistics for IP Components and other Annual Data, 1792-1914


                                                   Antebellum, pre-GM, 1792 - 1840       Great Moderation, 1841-1856           Postbellum, 1867-1914
                                           1850
                                            VA       Mean                  Coefficient    Mean                Coefficient    Mean                 Coefficient
                                          weight    growth     Standard        of        growth   Standard        of        growth    Standard        of
All variables in log growth rates           (%)       (%)      deviation    variation      (%)    deviation    variation      (%)     deviation    variation

 Davis IP index                           100.0%      0.047       0.067         1.45      0.077      0.050         0.65      0.046       0.075         1.63

 IP, consumption goods                     60.2%      0.054       0.083         1.53      0.063      0.052         0.83      0.045       0.046         1.02
       IP, food & agricultural products    10.9%      0.043       0.252         5.80      0.042      0.158         3.72      0.044       0.067         1.53
       IP, cotton textiles                 21.8%      0.061       0.149         2.45      0.069      0.161         2.32      0.047       0.106         2.25

 IP, investment goods                      39.8%      0.037       0.154         4.15      0.097      0.078         0.81      0.048       0.127         2.65
       IP, transportation                  22.7%      0.030       0.179         6.02      0.100      0.115         1.15      0.015       0.207        14.08
       IP, metals                          12.9%      0.052       0.231         4.48      0.070      0.178         2.55      0.070       0.131         1.87

 IP index, ex food products                89.1%      0.048       0.085         1.77      0.081      0.052         0.63      0.046       0.085         1.82
 IP index, ex textiles                     78.2%      0.043       0.090         2.07      0.078      0.047         0.60      0.046       0.078         1.70
 IP index, ex transportation               77.3%      0.056       0.080         1.44      0.070      0.063         0.91      0.051       0.063         1.24


Other annual variables
     IP, U.K.                                         0.027       0.052         1.96      0.033      0.049         1.48      0.020       0.040         1.96
     Wholesale prices                                (0.008)      0.088       (11.30)     0.006      0.069        10.89     (0.012)      0.057        (4.87)
     Cotton prices                                   (0.030)      0.229        (7.75)     0.013      0.227        17.83     (0.024)      0.152        (6.41)
     Immigration rate                                 0.086       0.375         4.34      0.023      0.345        14.79      0.007       0.328        46.41
     Tariff rate (%)                                  0.317       0.486         1.53      0.238      0.034         0.14      0.282       0.071         0.25
     Cotton crop                                      0.118       0.185         1.57      0.047      0.186         3.92      0.044       0.191         4.34

Notes: All data expressed in logarithmic growth rates (except for tariffs) and are available back through 1792 except for IP metals (1828 with
introduction of pig iron) and the immigration rate (1821). The IP index for consumption goods includes the Davis (2004, Table II, p. 1188) sector
series for food products, textiles and apparel items, leather, printing & publishing, and chemical and fuel products. The IP investment goods index
constitutes the remainder of the Davis IP index and includes metals, lumber, transportation equipment, and other small machinery categories
(musical instruments, scientific equipment, and ordnance).
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on Davis (2002, 2004), Historical Statistics of the United States, and NBER Macrohistory Database.
Table 11: Markov Regime-Switching Models for Key IP Components Indexes, 1792-1914

Specification: Constant mean, switching variance, and switching AR(1) Markov model

                                                                                     Panel B: IP ex consumption goods                                  Panel C: IP ex investment goods
                     Panel A: IP ex transportation                                       (investment goods only)                                          (consumption goods only)                                             Panel D: IP ex textiles


                     State V₁                  State V₂                                State V₁                  State V₂                                State V₁                  State V₂                                State V₁                  State V₂
                     (Low Vol)                 (High Vol)                              (Low Vol)                 (High Vol)                              (Low Vol)                 (High Vol)                              (Low Vol)                 (High Vol)

                     Estimate                  Estimate                                Estimate                  Estimate                                Estimate                  Estimate                                Estimate                  Estimate
                     std error                 std error                               std error                 std error                               std error                 std error                               std error                 std error
   Parameter         [p-value]                 [p-value]            Parameter          [p-value]                 [p-value]            Parameter          [p-value]                 [p-value]            Parameter          [p-value]                 [p-value]


             µ                      0.059                    ***               µ                      0.041                     ***              µ                      0.055                    ***               µ                      0.037                     ***
                                    0.008                                                             0.013                                                             0.007                                                             0.008
                                    [0.00]                                                            [0.00]                                                            [0.00]                                                            [0.00]


             ф             0.189                    (0.360) **                 ф             0.433 **                 (0.068)                    ф             0.090                    (0.784) ***                ф             0.429 ***                (0.307)
                           0.129                     0.158                                   0.164                     0.114                                   0.155                     0.247                                   0.134                     0.339
                           [0.15]                   [0.03]                                   [0.01]                   [0.56]                                   [0.56]                   [0.00]                                   [0.00]                   [0.37]


             σ             0.001                     0.006 ***                 σ             0.008 ***                 0.021 ***                 σ             0.003 ***                 0.003 **                  σ             0.003 **                  0.008 ***
                           0.001                     0.001                                   0.003                     0.003                                   0.001                     0.001                                   0.001                     0.002
                           [0.11]                   [0.00]                                   [0.00]                   [0.00]                                   [0.00]                   [0.01]                                   [0.02]                   [0.00]


  Log-likelihood          157.60             Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂) 0.23   Log-likelihood           74.84             Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂) 0.36   Log-likelihood          167.29             Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂) 0.98   Log-likelihood          142.53             Ratio (σ₁ / σ₂) 0.31

  Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):           Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):           Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):           Transition probabilities matrix: (std. error, p-value):
                       0.69 (0.22,0.00) 0.15 (0.14,0.27)                                 0.87 (0.11,0.00) 0.05 (0.05,0.29)                                 0.75 (0.21,0.00) 0.46 (0.26,0.08)                                 0.78 (0.19,0.00) 0.26 (0.21,0.22)
                       0.31 (0.24,0.19) 0.85 (0.17,0.00)                                 0.13 (0.11,0.23) 0.95 (0.10,0.00)                                 0.25 (0.19,0.18) 0.54 (0.27,0.05)                                 0.22 (0.20,0.27) 0.74 (0.23,0.00)

  Expected duration of Regime #1: 3.02 time periods                 Expected duration of Regime #1: 7.71 time periods                 Expected duration of Regime #1: 7.71 time periods                 Expected duration of Regime #1: 12.25 time periods
  Expected duration of Regime #2: 4.13 time periods                 Expected duration of Regime #2: 18.95 time periods                Expected duration of Regime #2: 18.95 time periods                Expected duration of Regime #2: 8.45 time periods


*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and percent levels, respectively.
Table 12: Granger-causality tests—IP sectors versus all other IP, various samples


 𝑁𝑢𝑙𝑙: 𝑥𝑡 does not Granger cause 𝑦𝑡             Full sample, 1792 - 1914   Antebellum, pre-GM    Great Moderation         Postbellum, pre-WWI

                𝑥𝑡                   𝑦𝑡           F -stat     p-value      F -stat    p-value    F -stat    p-value        F -stat    p-value

IP, transportation
      Transportation IP   All other IP                0.94        0.39         0.40       0.67       6.03       0.01 **        1.64       0.21
      All other IP        Transportation IP           2.59        0.08 *       1.04       0.36       0.46       0.64           3.59       0.04 **

IP, textiles
     Textiles IP          All other IP                0.13        0.88         0.21       0.81       0.27       0.76           0.07       0.93
     All other IP         Textiles IP                 1.81        0.17         0.80       0.46       5.67       0.02 **        0.01       0.99

IP, metals
     Metals               All other IP                2.15        0.12         0.12       0.89       0.24       0.79           4.44       0.02 **
     All other IP         Metals                      0.86        0.43         2.16       0.20       3.84       0.05 **        0.27       0.77

IP investment goods vs IP consumption goods
     Consumption goods Investment goods               0.40        0.67         0.36       0.70       1.23       0.33           0.41       0.66
     Investment goods       Consumption goods         0.90        0.41         0.38       0.68       2.72       0.11           2.37       0.11
     Transportation         Consumption goods         0.46        0.64         0.06       0.95       4.75       0.03 **        0.57       0.57




Notes: VAR Granger-causality tests employ two lags for all series in all samples. “Great Moderation”
sample ends in 1858 (rather than 1856) to account for the two-year lag. The post-bellum period begins in
1870 to remove the immediate effects of the end of the Civil War. The results for IP metals in the
“Antebellum, pre-GM” sample begin in 1830 since the IP metals index begins in 1827 and the test
requires two lags. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and percent levels, respectively
Table 13: Granger-causality tests—Alternative factors on IP indexes, various samples


  𝑁𝑢𝑙𝑙: 𝑥𝑡 does not Granger cause 𝑦𝑡          Full sample, 1792 - 1914    Antebellum, pre-GM   Great Moderation       Postbellum, pre-WWI

                  𝑥𝑡              𝑦𝑡            F -stat     p-value       F -stat   p-value    F -stat   p-value       F -stat   p-value

Cotton crop
    Cotton crop        IP, textiles                 0.26        0.77         0.61       0.55      3.35       0.07 *      18.83       0.00   ***
    Cotton crop        IP, investment goods         0.02        0.98         0.85       0.43      0.30       0.75         4.82       0.01   **
    Cotton crop        IP, transportation           0.14        0.87         1.50       0.24      0.34       0.72         3.13       0.05    *
    Cotton crop        Davis IP index               0.79        0.46         1.25       0.30      1.02       0.39         8.33       0.00   ***

Tariff rate
    Tariff rate        IP, textiles                 0.76        0.47         2.39       0.10      0.85       0.45         0.93       0.40
    Tariff rate        IP, investment goods         3.73        0.03 **      1.98       0.15      0.62       0.55         0.94       0.40
    Tariff rate        IP, transportation           1.20        0.30         0.16       0.85      2.11       0.16         1.07       0.35
    Tariff rate        Davis IP index               1.10        0.34         0.46       0.64      0.58       0.57         1.00       0.38

British IP
    British IP         IP, textiles                 0.41        0.66         1.90       0.16      0.12       0.89         6.20       0.00 ***
    British IP         IP, investment goods         0.18        0.84         1.25       0.30      0.65       0.54         1.13       0.33
    British IP         IP, transportation           0.41        0.67         1.79       0.18      1.40       0.28         2.11       0.13
    British IP         Davis IP index               0.20        0.82         1.26       0.29      0.65       0.54         1.46       0.25



Notes: See Table 12.
