                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DISENTANGLING MORAL HAZARD AND ADVERSE SELECTION IN PRIVATE
                          HEALTH INSURANCE

                                           David Powell
                                           Dana Goldman

                                        Working Paper 21858
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21858


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




This paper was supported by a grant from the Agency for Healthcare Research & Quality (1R03HS023628-
01, PI: David Powell) and the National Institute on Aging (P01AG033559). Funding from the Bing
Center for Health Economics is also gratefully acknowledged. We received helpful comments from
seminar participants at the Annual Health Economics Conference, Annual Health Econometrics Workshop,
Conference of the American Society of Health Economists, Midwest Health Economics Conference,
RAND, and USC. We are especially grateful to our discussants James Marton, Frank Windmeijer,
Mireille Jacobson, and David Frisvold. We also received helpful comments from Abby Alpert, James
Burgess, Norma Coe, Peter Huckfeldt, Tim Layton, Chuck Phelps, Julian Reif, and Travis Smith. We
are especially grateful to Jean Roth for help with the data and to Dan Feenberg and Mohan Ramanujan
for their help with the NBER Unix servers. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of AHRQ, NIH, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21858.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Powell and Dana Goldman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Disentangling Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection in Private Health Insurance
David Powell and Dana Goldman
NBER Working Paper No. 21858
January 2016
JEL No. I1,I10,I11,I12,I13

                                               ABSTRACT

Moral hazard and adverse selection create inefficiencies in private health insurance markets and understanding
the relative importance of each factor is critical for policy. We use claims data from a large firm to
isolate moral hazard from plan selection. Previous studies have attempted to estimate moral hazard
in private health insurance by assuming that individuals respond only to the spot price, end-of-year
price, expected price, or a related metric. The nonlinear budget constraints generated by health insurance
plans make these assumptions especially poor and we statistically reject their appropriateness. We
study the differential impact of the health insurance plans offered by the firm on the entire distribution
of medical expenditures without assuming that individuals only respond to a parameterized price.
Our empirical strategy exploits the introduction of new plans during the sample period as a shock to
plan generosity, and we account for sample attrition over time. We use an instrumental variable quantile
estimation technique that provides quantile treatment effects for each plan, while conditioning on a
set of covariates for identification purposes. This technique allows us to map the resulting estimated
medical expenditure distributions to the nonlinear budget sets generated by each plan. We estimate
that 53% of the additional medical spending observed in the most generous plan in our data relative
to the least generous is due to moral hazard. The remainder can be attributed to adverse selection.
A policy which resulted in each person enrolling in the least generous plan would cause the annual
premium of that plan to rise by $1,000.


David Powell
RAND Corporation
1776 Main St., 4121
Santa Monica, CA 90407
powelld@nber.org

Dana Goldman
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089-3333
and NBER
dpgoldma@usc.edu
1    Introduction
Moral hazard and adverse selection create ineﬃciencies in health insurance markets and result
in a positive correlation between health insurance generosity and medical care consumption.
The policy implications are very diﬀerent, however, depending on the relative magnitudes of
each source of distortion, though isolating the independent roles of both moral hazard and
adverse selection is rare in the health insurance literature. This paper separates moral hazard
and adverse selection for the health insurance plans oﬀered by a large firm. Our method
relaxes the assumptions in the literature typically employed to estimate moral hazard in
health insurance markets.

         Rising health costs have prompted greater interest in mechanisms to reduce health
care spending. There is a large literature studying how health insurance design encourages
medical care spending and there is evidence that cost-sharing reduces health care consump-
tion (see Baicker and Goldman [2011] for a review). Many recent federal policies have
focused on increasing cost-sharing as a means to pass costs to the consumer and discourage
additional consumption of medical care. The Patient Protection and Aﬀordable Care Act
(ACA) of 2010 promotes cost-sharing in several ways, such as the introduction of a “Cadillac
Tax” in 2018 which taxes plans with high premiums and, presumably, generous cost-sharing
arrangements. Health savings accounts, established in 2003, encourage the purchase of high
deductible plans which have less generous coverage at low levels of annual medical expen-
ditures. On the other hand, policies encouraging the purchase of generous health insurance
plans have been shown to have meaningful eﬀects on medical care consumption. Cogan et al.
[2011] finds evidence that the tax subsidy - which allows individuals to purchase insurance in
pre-tax dollars - leads to more medical care consumption. As insurance rates increase due to
the ACA, it is especially important to understand how benefit design impacts spending.

         Adverse selection is another impediment to eﬃciency in health insurance markets
and the ACA’s individual mandate was motivated by the eﬃciency gains of reducing sys-
tematic selection into insurance. A large literature documents the diﬃculties in separating
adverse selection and moral hazard (Chiappori and Salanie [2000], Chiappori [2000], Finkel-
stein and Poterba [2004]). Bajari et al. [2014] estimates a structural model to separate
adverse selection and moral hazard in the context of private health insurance by fitting a
specified utility function. We use plan introduction as an exogenous shock to plan generos-
ity and then estimate the medical expenditure distribution of each plan if enrollment were


                                              2
random. The diﬀerence in the observed medical care distribution and this estimated distri-
bution driven solely by moral hazard quantifies the magnitude of selection. Our empirical
strategy does not require restrictive structural assumptions to isolate adverse selection from
moral hazard.

         In this paper, we analyze administrative health claims data from a large employer
in the United States for 2005-2007. This employer oﬀered only one insurance plan in 2005.
In 2006, they introduced three diﬀerent PPO plans to replace the 2005 plan. These plans
varied in generosity based on their deductible, stop loss, and coinsurance rate. We estimate
the impact of each plan on the entire distribution of medical care consumption. We use
the availability of new plans and the diﬀerential preferences for plan generosity based solely
on observable family characteristics. We condition on individual characteristics to account
for the independent eﬀects of the covariates and we further condition on 2005 medical ex-
penditures to control for individual heterogeneity in health care consumption. Identification
originates from the introduction of the plan choice in 2006 and the diﬀerential but predictable
eﬀect that this introduction had on diﬀerent households. This strategy allows us to estimate
the eﬀect of the plan on medical care if selection into the plan were random (i.e., everyone
were enrolled in the plan). Once we have estimated the distribution of expenditures for each
plan, we can compare the observed distribution that selected into the plan to the estimated
distribution if enrollment were random, separately identifying a useful measure of adverse
selection.

          Our empirical strategy is to estimate the medical expenditure distribution for each
plan if selection into the plan were random (i.e., the causal impact of the plan). We estimate
these distributions non-parametrically instead of assuming that individuals respond to a spe-
cific price in the plan. We map this estimated distribution directly to the non-linear budget
constraint created by the health insurance plan and observe whether the medical spending
distribution is especially responsive for annual expenditure levels above the deductible or
stop loss. This mapping provides insight into which aspects of a plan, such as the deductible
or coinsurance rate, impact health care decisions. While there many possible mechanisms
through which a plan can encourage additional consumption, a basic first step is simply to
study this mapping between the plan and the distribution.

         There is a long-standing interest in how responsive people are to the generosity
of their health insurance plan. The RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Manning et al.
[1987]) estimates are still widely considered the standard in this literature, though the va-


                                              3
lidity of results from the 1970’s to today’s health care system is questionable. More recent
studies have also estimated the relationship between insurance cost-sharing and health care
consumption. However, there is no consensus about how to parameterize a health insur-
ance plan. The RAND estimates assume that individuals respond only to the spot price
- the out-of-pocket portion of the next $1 of medical care consumed. More recent studies
have assumed that people respond to a measure of the expected end-of-year price (Eichner
[1997], Duarte [2012]) or the actual end-of-year marginal price (Eichner [1998], Kowalski
[2015]).

         Recent work has asked what the relevant price is in the presence of a non-linear
health insurance plan. This literature has studied whether the spot price is a suﬃcient
statistic or whether individuals are forward-looking in their medical care consumption de-
cisions. Research has found evidence that future prices impact current medical care con-
sumption decisions. Aron-Dine et al. [2012] finds that individuals with the same spot price
but diﬀerent expected end-of-year prices have diﬀerent consumption patterns, implying that
individuals exercise at least some foresight in health consumption decisions. Einav et al.
[2013b] finds similar evidence with prescription drugs using nonlinearities in Medicare Part
D plans. While this growing literature suggests that individuals are not entirely myopic, it
does not imply that it is reasonable to assume that individuals respond only to their end-of-
year price. Alpert [2015] provides longer-term evidence using the announcement of Part D
in 2003 that individuals may delay drug purchases when future prescription drug coverage
becomes more generous.

        In a related literature, a limited number of studies model individuals or households
as potentially responding to the entire budget set generated by a health insurance plan.
These studies (including Cardon and Hendel [2001], Einav et al. [2013a]) typically do not
use variation across plans for identification, require strong structural assumptions, and as-
sume perfect foresight. More recently, Cronin [2015] uses structural restrictions to separate
myopic behavior from responsiveness to end-of-year prices. Abaluck et al. [2015] uses the
nonlinearities in Medicare Part D to study prescription drug utilization and consumer re-
sponsiveness to spot and expected marginal prices

         While we are generally interested in how people respond to the price of medical
care, it is unclear how to define “price.” In this paper, we study the impact of diﬀerent
health insurance plans on the entire distribution of medical care consumption. This test
allows us to circumvent parameterizing plans by potentially uninformative metrics, imposing


                                             4
restrictive behavioral assumptions, or requiring individuals to solely respond to specific types
of prices. The results can be interpreted as the medical expenditure distribution that we
would observe if each person in the data were enrolled in the plan or, put diﬀerently, if there
were no systematic selection into the plan. We will be able to explicitly test the assumption
that individuals respond to the realized end-of-year marginal price.

          We see our paper as making four important contributions. First, extending a new
quantile estimation technique introduced in Powell [2015], we generate the first estimates of
the impact of the end-of-year price on the distribution of medical care expenditures. The
literature has frequently estimated a mean eﬀect or relied on conditional quantile techniques.
Conditional quantile techniques are diﬃcult to interpret in this context. By conditioning
on variables, such as age, when estimating the 90th quantile, the estimates provide the
elasticity at the 90th quantile of the distribution for a fixed age. People at the 90th quantile
of the conditional distribution, however, are possibly near the bottom of the medical care
distribution (e.g., at younger, healthier ages). It is diﬃcult to interpret the estimates from
a conditional quantile estimator as providing information about the impact of prices on the
unconditional (on covariates) distribution. We use a quantile technique which allows for
conditioning on covariates to improve identification, but the results can be interpreted as
the impact of the treatment variables on the outcome distribution.

         Second, our method allows us to be agnostic about how benefit design impacts
medical care consumption. We estimate the impact of each plan on the distribution of
medical expenditures with no parameterizations of the plans. We compare these distributions
to the estimated distributions when we impose restrictions commonly made in the literature.
We test the equality of the two distributions, allowing us to perform a straightforward test
of the usefulness and accuracy of the restrictive assumptions.

         Third, we directly account for attrition in our sample. Families opt out of health
insurance for a variety of reasons, such as job changes and changes in preferences for health
care. In the literature, it is common to select on individuals that the researchers observe
for the entire time period. Attrition in the data can often be quite severe and the sources
of attrition are potentially not random. In our empirical strategy, we predict both plan
choice and attrition. We have a separate selection instrument which statistically predicts
attrition, permitting us to condition on a selection adjustment term, comparing people with
similar probabilities of remaining in the sample for the entire period. This sample selection
adjustment is straightforward to implement and an important methodological contribution


                                               5
for consistent estimation.

          Finally, we separate adverse selection and moral hazard, providing magnitudes for
both. We observe plans that are similar but with clear ranks in terms of generosity. Because
we estimate the causal distribution for each plan, we can compare the observed distribution
- which is a function of both moral hazard and adverse selection - with the estimated dis-
tribution that we would counterfactually observe if there were no adverse selection. This
diﬀerence identifies the magnitude and distribution of selection. Note the importance of our
approach for this contribution as well. By estimating the impact of a plan non-parametrically
(i.e., without parametric restrictions on how plans aﬀect individual behavior), it is straight-
forward to compare the observed distribution with the estimated causal distribution. There
is widespread interest in adverse selection of health insurance (Bundorf et al. [2012], Car-
don and Hendel [2001], Carlin and Town [2008], Geruso [2013], Handel [2013]), and we are
able to provide plan-specific estimates of the magnitude of adverse selection and its relative
importance compared to moral hazard.

          In this paper, we estimate price elasticities of medical care which range between -0.9
and 0 throughout the distribution. However, we also can statistically reject that this price
elasticity is an appropriate parameterization of the plans. We also estimate plan elasticities
and find that the most generous plan encourages additional spending throughout the medical
care distribution. The average observed expenditures in the most generous plan are $3,969
more than the per person costs in the least generous plan. We estimate that if selection were
random, that the most generous plan would lead to $2,117 in more spending than the least
generous plan, implying that 53% of the diﬀerential can be attributed to moral hazard. We
also estimate adverse selection without restrictive structural assumptions. We find that if
everyone in the sample were enrolled in the least generous plan that the premium for that
plan would increase by over $1,000.

        In the next section, we briefly discuss the importance of estimating the roles of
adverse selection and moral hazard. We also consider the merits of an approach that does
not parameterize moral hazard by a response to a specific price with some basic economic
reasoning. Section 3 discusses the data and empirical strategy. Section 4 details the estimator
and the parameters that are estimated. Section 5 presents the results and we conclude in
Section 6.




                                               6
2     Theory

2.1    Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection

An influential theoretical literature links asymmetric information in insurance markets to
ineﬃcient outcomes. Rothschild and Stiglitz [1976] models selection into plans with diﬀerent
risk types. Pauly [1968] discusses the role of moral hazard in health insurance and mecha-
nisms to reduce medical care consumption such as coinsurance. Optimal policy depends on
the relative important of adverse selection compared to moral hazard in explaining the cor-
relation between plan generosity and medical care costs. The policy implications for moral
hazard are diﬀerent than those required to confront adverse selection. Adverse selection
typically requires risk-pooling, while distortions driven by moral hazard would motivate ad-
ditional cost-sharing. These issues are discussed in further detail in Cutler and Zeckhauser
[2000].

          Addressing the distortions induced by either moral hazard or adverse selection often
exacerbates the ineﬃciencies created by the other factor. For example, the ACA’s individual
mandate encourages healthier individuals to purchase insurance, pooling risk across a more
heterogenous population. At the same time, the mandate plus the insurance expansions
increase the number of insured individuals, driving down the price of care to consumers.
Understanding the magnitude of this tradeoﬀ is a first-order concern for health care policy.
The importance of isolating the role of these two factors has been noted in insurance markets
more generally and methods to empirically identify each have been introduced (see Abbring
et al. [2003]).

          We interpret all additional spending causally associated with plan generosity as
“moral hazard.” Nyman [1999] discusses the value of health insurance in providing access to
especially expensive forms of care. The plans that we study are relatively similar and there
is likely little scope for diﬀerential levels of access to expensive medical care. The diﬀerence
in the maximum out-of-pocket annual payment between the least and most generous plans
in our data is $2,750, which is small relative to the expensive types of care referenced in
Nyman [1999].




                                               7
2.2    Nonlinear Budget Sets

There are many reasons to believe that the entire budget constraint potentially matters when
studying the eﬀect of health insurance plans on each part of the medical care consumption
distribution. As discussed above, it is common to parameterize behavioral responses to ben-
efit design when estimating responsiveness to health insurance. We highlight three reasons
why these parameterizations are likely too restrictive.

        First, we can consider a model with a standard utility function U (c, m) where both
consumption of goods c and medical care m are valued and preferences are convex. Assume
that the person has perfect foresight and decides at the beginning of the year exactly how
much medical care to consume. We can draw the budget constraint generated by a typical
health insurance plan. In Figure 1, we include a deductible which generates a kink in the
budget constraint. A stop loss point would generate a similar kink. The shape of the
indiﬀerence curve follows directly from convex preferences. In this basic setup, it is possible
that there is not a unique optimum due to the non-convexity of the budget constraint. Say
that we observe an individual on the second segment of the budget constraint (to the right of
the kink). Given standard assumptions on preferences, we cannot rule out the possibility that
small changes in the first segment of the budget constraint would change the individual’s
optimal health care consumption. The implication is that it would be inappropriate to
assume that an individual only responds to the marginal price. While non-convexities in the
budget constraint appear in other contexts, health insurance poses a situation where they
are the norm and should not be ignored.

         Second, it is not clear that we should assume perfectly convex preferences in the
context of health care consumption. Episodes of care can generate consumption behavior
which appears inconsistent with convex preferences. Individuals may decide between not
receiving a specific treatment versus initiating an expensive set of treatments. Keeler et al.
[1977] and Keeler and Rolph [1988] include arguments that any price of care variable must
account for these episodes. Again, the implication is that changes in one segment of the
budget constraint may impact behavior on other segments.

         Third, nonlinear budgets sets generate variation in spot prices throughout the year.
Perfect foresight is a strong assumption, especially in the context of medical care consump-
tion, which is a function of unforeseen health shocks. Purely myopic behavior is also unlikely.
It is diﬃcult to model how the diﬀerent prices interact and how that relationship changes


                                              8
throughout the year.

         We believe that the policy parameters of interest are the responses to the entire
health insurance plan. A health insurance plan can encourage consumption through several
mechanisms, such as reducing the marginal cost of care, reducing the spot price of care for
part or all of the year, or reducing the price of larger episodes of care. While understanding
the role of each of the mechanisms is interesting, we are primarily concerned with estimating
the overall impact of a plan, which is an improvement upon simply assuming away possible
mechanisms. We take a necessary step back relative to the literature to understand the
role of benefit design in impacting annual medical care consumption. Furthermore, it is
diﬃcult to parameterize plans in such a way as to independently isolate the above factors.
For example, using variation in spot prices (or variation in the time exposed to a specific
spot price) within the year is typically tied to variation in the location of the kinks, making
it diﬃcult to distinguish myopia from the behavior that we would expect given Figure 1.
Conceptually, myopia and behavioral responses (with perfect foresight) to non-convex budget
constraints cannot be independently isolated without additional assumptions.

         Understanding the overall impact of benefit design is an important step within a
literature that has frequently imposed restrictive assumptions or explicitly assumed away
many of the listed mechanisms. The cost of our approach is that we are limited in the
inferences that we can make since we only observe a limited number of health insurance
plans oﬀered by our firm. However, we believe that there is little theoretical justification for
the parameterizations of plans frequently made in the literature.


3     Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1    Background

We study the impact of employer-sponsored health insurance on medical care spending.
Traditional employer-sponsored health insurance plans are defined by three characteristics:
the deductible, the coinsurance rate, and the stop loss. These parameters dictate cost-sharing
based on annual medical care expenditures. Consumers pay the full cost of their medical
care until they reach the deductible at which point they are only responsible for a fraction
of their costs, referred to as the “coinsurance rate.” In our sample, we observe plans with
coinsurance rates of 0.1 and 0.2. Finally, consumer risk is bounded by the stop loss - the
maximum annual out-of-pocket payments by the consumer. After stop loss, the consumer

                                               9
faces a marginal price of zero for additional medical care.

         These plans are defined by individual annual expenditures, but it is also common
for plans to include a family deductible and family out-of-pocket maximum. In our analysis,
we want to map the distribution of expenditures to the non-linear budget set created by
the health insurance plan and these family-level parameters obscure this mapping. Con-
sequently, we select on families with only one or two enrollees because they cannot reach
the family deductible or stop loss for the plans that we study. For example, the individual
deductible for the most generous plan is $200 and the family deductible is $400. By limiting
our analysis to families with only one or two members, we can ignore family-level param-
eters. This is beneficial because we know that a person consuming $50 of medical care is
below the deductible. If we included larger families, then this individual could be facing
the coinsurance rate or even a marginal price of 0 due to high medical care consumption of
family members.

        In our data, we study a firm that oﬀered only one plan in 2005, which we label as
Plan A. In 2006, the firm oﬀered three PPO plans of varying generosity, which we label as
Plans B, C, and D. Plan B is the most generous 2006 plan with a low deductible, coinsurance
rate, and out-of-pocket maximum. Plan C is less generous and Plan D is the least generous
plan. In 2007, the deductibles and stop loss points for Plans B and C changed. Table 1
provides the relevant parameters for each of the plans in our data.

          In Figure 2, we show the empirical non-linear budget constraints generated by our
plans. Our goal in Figure 2 is to simply illustrate the shapes of the budget constraints for
the first $18,000 of annual medical expenditures. While we do not observe premiums in our
data, we estimate premium variation across plans using spending diﬀerences. This informs
the starting point for each budget constraint. There are significant diﬀerences in the kink
points where the slopes of the respective budget constraints change.

3.2    Data

We use administrative claims data from a large firm included in the MarketScan Commercial
Claims & Encounter and Benefit Plan Design Databases. The firm is a large manufacturing
firm, and the employees reside in 44 diﬀerent states. The workers are not unionized and are
predominantly salaried (94%) and work full-time (84%). These data provide basic demo-
graphic information for each person and detailed information about inpatient and outpatient


                                             10
medical claims, including out-of-pocket and total costs. The data also provide information
about plan choice and plan structure. We observe claims from the firm for 2005-2007 and
we restrict our attention to employees for whom we observe insurance choice and spending
in 2005. We model medical expenditures for those with a full year of reported expenditures
in 2007. Because this is a selected sample, we adjust for attrition. The benefit of observing
multiple years is that we can compare the distributions of expenditures in 2005 and 2007 to
account for individual-level (and household-level) heterogeneity. We observe all individuals
enrolled in a plan even if they do not consume any medical care.

        Another benefit of this firm is that the plans are identical in all ways except for the
deductible, coinsurance rate, and stop loss. Consequently, given exogenous variation in plan
enrollment, we can attribute diﬀerences in consumption behavior to the diﬀerences in these
plan parameters. Furthermore, there was only one plan in 2005 so we can control for 2005
medical expenditures as an accurate representation of 2005 demand for medical care (as each
person is equally treated by plan generosity).1

        Summary statistics are presented in Table 2. We present the summary statistics by
2007 plan. We do this for our sample in Panel A (family sizes of 1 or 2) and, for comparison
purposes, the full sample in Panel B. As one might predict, the most generous plan attracts
an older population with higher mean medical expenditures in the previous year. The mean
age and 2005 medical expenditures decrease with plan generosity. Furthermore, the “No
Plan” group (the attriters) do not appear to be randomly-selected. Medical expenditures
are skewed and the mean potentially masks important distributional diﬀerences.

         We use the plan parameters and the individual’s annual medical expenditures to
assign end-of-year prices to each person. An individual below the deductible is assigned a
price of one. An individual above the deductible but below the stop loss is assigned the
coinsurance rate (which varies by plan). An individual above the stop loss is assigned a price
of 0.

3.3     Identification Strategy

We use 2005 medical care to account for individual heterogeneity in underlying health care
usage. Our outcome variable is 2007 medical care expenditures. We study 2007 instead of
2006 for the possibility that the change in plan options caused individuals to shift care that
  1
    While the lack of choice in 2005 is convenient, the identification strategy would work similarly given
multiple plans in 2005 as long as adjusted for the treatment eﬀects of the 2005 plans as well.


                                                   11
they otherwise would have consumed in 2005 for coverage under their 2006 plan (or vice
versa).2 In Section 5.8, we present results using 2006 medical expenditures. The results are
similar.

3.3.1    Variation in Plan Generosity

Our identification strategy relies on the introduction of plans with varying generosity and
the diﬀerential eﬀect that this introduction had on enrollees based on covariates. Our data
provide demographic information such as family size, age, sex, and relationship to employee.
We create “cells” based on the demographics - 2005 family size, age, sex, and relation-
ship to employee (employee, spouse, or dependent). The mean cell size in our data is 255
people.

         We use the changes in plan options for identification. Each person in our sample was
enrolled in Plan A in 2005. We can assume that many of these families would have preferred
a plan with diﬀerent generosity. In 2006, they were given a diﬀerent set of options and sorted
according to their preferences. We use the created cells to predict which plan each family
will enroll in. We estimate the probability of enrollment into each plan based on family
characteristics. Given that the cells are based on variables that should independently aﬀect
medical care consumption, we condition on the cells themselves to isolate the diﬀerential
eﬀect of plan availability for identification. To generate the instruments, we estimate

                                 P (Plani,2007 = k) = Φ(Ti′ Πk + T̃i′ Λk )                                (1)

where Ti is a set of indicators based on cells for individual i and T̃i is a set of indicators based
on cells for individuals i’s spouse or dependent (these indicators are all equal to 0 for single
plan holders). The instruments are the predicted probabilities for k = {C, D}.3 The use of a
probit model is inessential to the empirical strategy.4 These instruments are only exogenous
conditional on covariates and we condition on covariates (detailed below) throughout our
analyses.

         The motivation for our empirical strategy is to compare changes in the medical
care distribution between 2005 and 2007 and how these distributions diﬀerentially changed
   2
     Given the benefit design of the plans, both directions are potentially beneficial.
   3
     We estimate the eﬀects of Plan C, Plan D, and not enrolling (as described in Section 3.4) relative to
Plan B.
   4
     Our results are not meaningfully changed if we use an ordered probit model or a set of linear probability
models.


                                                     12
for families based on the plans that they were likely to choose. Each family, regardless of
preferences for more or less generous health care coverage, is constrained to enroll in the
same plan in 2005. In 2006, plans with varying levels of generosity become available and
households sorted based on these preference. We use this shock to plan availability for
identification.

          We condition on 2005 medical expenditures to account for individual-level hetero-
geneity in medical care consumption propensities. Since each person was in the identical
plan in 2005, medical care expenditures reflect variation in health and preference for med-
ical care since the treatment (plan generosity) is the same for each person. In our main
analysis, we condition on ln Mi,2005 , the log of 2005 medical expenditures for person i (set
to 0 if Mi,2005 = 0), and a dummy variable equal to 1 for individuals with no 2005 medical
expenditures Mi,2005 = 0. In robustness checks, we condition on 2005 medical expenditures
more flexibly through the inclusion of indicators for each percentile of 2005 expenditures and
find little diﬀerence in the final estimates.

         Preferences for medical care may change over time so we cannot use actual enroll-
ment in the 2007 plan. Instead, we predict plan enrollment based on family characteristics.
Individual characteristics may also predict changes in health care preferences so we condi-
tion on individual covariates in our analyses so that identification originates from variation
in spousal (or dependent) characteristics (which predict diﬀerential preferences for health
care coverage associated with those characteristics) and the introduction of new plans. The
assumption is that spousal characteristics do not predict changes in own medical care con-
sumption conditional on the person’s own characteristics, except through diﬀerential choices
in plan generosity. We also condition on the 2005 medical expenditures of the individual’s
spouse/dependent to account for diﬀerences across households. Variation in the instruments
conditional on covariates then originates from predictable diﬀerences in preferences for health
insurance generosity, similar in spirit to the heterogeneity in plan choice discussed in Geruso
[2013].

3.4    Attrition

A common concern with the use of claims data is attrition, which may bias estimates if this
attrition is systematic. However, selection bias concerns extend throughout the literature on
medical care utilization, including influential randomized experiments (see Nyman [2008],
Newhouse et al. [2008] for discussion of attrition in the RAND HIE and Finkelstein et al.


                                              13
[2012] for the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment). The RAND Health Insurance Experi-
ment, which consisted of plans with very generous coverage still had attrition rates as high as
37%. In firm-level claims data, attrition results from employees dropping coverage, leaving
the firm, switching to a spouse’s plan at another employer, and so on. If we define attrition
as individuals enrolled in 2005 but enrolled for less than 365 days in 2007, the attrition rate
in the MarketScan data (selecting on firms in the data in both 2005 and 2007) is 58.3%. Our
sample has a 58.7% attrition rate.

         We select on individuals that are enrolled for 365 days in 2005. Some individuals
disenroll in 2005, but this disenrollment should be orthogonal to the introduction of the new
plans. The plans begin on January 1 and there is little incentive to switch to a diﬀerent
source of insurance (or no insurance) before that date. Attrition in the last part of 2005 is
rare and unlikely to be systematic. Furthermore, we have tested the robustness of our result
to treating the first 11 months of 2005 as the full initial year (i.e., selecting on individuals
enrolled for the first 11 months, treating individuals that leave the sample in December as
attriters, and conditioning only on medical care in the first 11 months5 ) and the results are
similar.

         Despite the high rates of attrition in the MarketScan data and claims data more
generally, research using these data sets often ignore the potential problems caused by selec-
tion. The concern in our context is that some individuals may attrit instead of, for example,
enrolling in the least generous plan. The observed sample of enrollees in the least generous
plan, then, would not be random. Conditioning on 2005 medical expenditures and covariates
alleviates this concern. However, there may still be attrition on unobservables.

        We account for selection explicitly. We consider anyone in our sample for all of 2005
but enrolled for less than 365 days of 2007 as “attriters.” This definition is necessary because
we will study the distribution of medical expenditures in 2007, which we only observe for
those enrolled for all of 2007. We predict selection in our sample (non-attrition) in the same
manner as we predict plan choice. We estimate equation (1) where the outcome variable is
an indicator equal to 1 if the individual is enrolled for the full 2007 year. In other words,
there are four possible choices for an individual enrolled in 2005: enroll in Plan B, enroll
in Plan C, enroll in Plan D, not enroll (which also includes dropping out at some point
before the end of 2007). We can predict probabilities for all of these choices (excluding
   5
    Conditioning on only the first 11 months of medical care is also a test of robustness to systematic changes
in the timing of medical care if individuals diﬀerentially utilized medical care in 2005 that they otherwise
would have consumed in 2006.


                                                      14
one) using our covariates. Attrition is separately identified using our empirical strategy and
the conditions for a valid selection instrument are equivalent here to those needed for our
plan choice instruments: the estimated probability of non-attrition must (1) predict non-
attrition and (2) not aﬀect medical care expenditures except through selection. We can
show that (1) is true empirically. We assume that (2) holds for the same reasons that we
assume our instruments are plausibly exogenous conditional on 2005 medical expenditures
and covariates.

3.5    Sample Selection

We select our sample on families with two or fewer members and a full year of enrollment
in 2005. As explained earlier, we want to exclude individuals that may potentially meet
the family deductible or out-of-pocket maximum, and these thresholds can only be met by
families with at least three members. Family-level parameters add a layer of complexity
and it would be diﬃcult to map the distribution of expenditures to the nonlinear budget set
generated by the plan when people with the same medical expenditures may face diﬀerent
marginal prices due to family-level expenditures.

         We study the medical care expenditures of the employees only. Our analysis sample
includes 21,429 people. A high fraction of these 2005 enrollees attrit at some point before
the end of 2007. Many are not observed in the data because they left the firm or dropped
insurance at some point in 2006 or 2007. We also consider individuals that change plans after
January 1, 2007 as attriters since we cannot map their behavior to a single budget constraint.
Moreover, some policies gain members due to spouses or dependents joining the policy or due
to births. We label employees which originally had policies with two of fewer members but
added members by the end of 2007 as attriters since, as described above, these employees are
subject to the family deductible and out-of-pocket maximum. Our selection adjustment term
is estimated with these attriters and should account for diﬀerent sources of attrition. When
estimating the quantile functions of interest, our sample is the set of employees enrolled in
the same 2007 plan for the entire year. We adjusting for the probability of remaining in the
sample until the end of 2007 to account for non-random attrition.




                                             15
4       Empirical Model and Estimation
We use a quantile framework in our analysis for three reasons. First, a significant proportion
of our analysis sample consumes no medical care within a year. This censoring can bias
mean estimates. Quantile estimates are robust to censoring concerns without making strong
distributional assumptions. Second, the distribution of medical expenditures is heavily-
skewed. Mean regressions techniques may primarily reflect behavioral changes for people at
the top of the expenditure distribution and, in general, mean regression estimates are not
necessarily representative of the impact at any part of the distribution. Third, a primary
goal of this paper is to understand how insurance plans aﬀect medical care consumption. If
individuals are responding to the end-of-year marginal price, then we should observe that
plans have a larger causal impact in the parts of the distribution above the deductible
than the parts of the distribution below the deductible. Estimating a distribution, then, is
important as we can map the quantile estimates to the plan parameters - the deductible and
the stop loss - and observe whether the plan has larger impacts at parts of the distribution
where the end-of-year price is lower.

        We are interested in estimating two equations. In the first equation, we assume
that individuals only respond to the end-of-year marginal price. In the second equation, we
assume that individuals respond to the plan, but we place no restrictions on this response.
We will use the quantile treatment eﬀect (QTE) framework introduced in Powell [2015].
There are several advantages of this framework over the traditional conditional quantile
frameworks and we will discuss the benefits in the context of each equation in Sections 4.2
and 4.3. We discuss the IV-GQR estimator more generally first.

4.1     Quantile Estimation

4.1.1    IV-GQR

This paper uses IV-GQR (Powell [2015]), an estimator that generalizes more conventional
quantile estimation techniques such as quantile regression (QR, Koenker and Bassett [1978])
and instrumental variables quantile regression (IV-QR, Chernozhukov and Hansen [2006]).
We discuss the benefits of IV-GQR over traditional quantile estimators in this section and
will focus on its utility relative to IV-QR, given instruments Z, treatment variables D, and
control variables X. We will specify D for our context in proceeding sections but discuss the


                                             16
estimator more generally here.

         Traditional quantile estimators allow the parameters of interest to vary based on a
nonseparable disturbance term, frequently interpreted as unobserved “proneness” (Doksum
[1974]). In our context, this disturbance term can be interpreted as an individual’s underlying
(untreated by plan generosity) tendency to consume medical care due to health, preferences
for medical care, and other factors. As more covariates are added, however, the interpretation
of the parameters in traditional quantile models changes as some of the unobserved proneness
becomes observed. It is common in applied work to simply add covariates in a quantile
regression framework. To illustrate why this is problematic, let us consider a case where
medical care prices are randomized. With randomized prices, one could simply perform a
quantile regression of medical expenditures on prices. If we are interested in how prices
impact the top of the distribution, we could estimate a quantile model for τ = 0.9. However,
we might want (or need) to condition on covariates as well. Adding these covariates in a
traditional quantile framework changes the interpretation because the τ = 0.9 estimates now
refers to people with high levels of medical care given their covariates. Many of these people
may be at the bottom of the medical care distribution.

         Let U ∗ ∼ U (0, 1) be a rank variable which represents proneness to consume med-
ical care (normalized to be distributed uniformly). Powell [2015] models proneness for the
outcome variable as an unknown and unspecified function of “observed proneness” (X) and
“unobserved proneness” (U ): U ∗ = f (X, U ). The specification of interest can be written
as
                                Y = D′ β(U ∗ ), U ∗ ∼ U (0, 1).                        (2)

        Following Chernozhukov and Hansen [2008], we are interested in estimating the
Structural Quantile Function (SQF):

                                      SY (τ |d) = d′ β(τ ).                                (3)

The SQF defines the τ th quantile of the outcome distribution given the policy variables if
each person in the data were subject to the policy variables D = d. It is common and
frequently necessary to condition on additional covariates. IV-QR requires those covariates
to be included in the structural model, altering the SQF. The parameters are no longer
assumed to vary by proneness, only the unobserved component of the disturbance term. A
primary motivation of employing quantile techniques is that they allow for a nonseparable


                                               17
disturbance term. Adding covariates to the quantile function separates this term into dif-
ferent components, undermining the original motivation. Instead of treating the covariates
in the same way as the policy variables, IV-GQR lets the covariates provide information
about the distribution of the disturbance term. An older person is likely to have a diﬀerent
distribution for U ∗ than a younger person. The IV-GQR estimator uses this information,
jointly estimating the probability that the outcome is less than the quantile function.

          Table 3 provides concise comparisons between the IV-QR and IV-GQR estimators.
With IV-QR, it is possible to estimate the SQF of interest (equation (3)) under the as-
sumption that U ∗ |Z ∼ U (0, 1). IV-GQR relaxes this assumption (U ∗ |Z, X ∼ U ∗ |X), which
will be necessary with our empirical strategy since our instruments are only conditionally
independent. In short, IV-GQR compares conditional (on 2005 medical expenditures and
covariates) distributions, but the parameters refer to the unconditional distribution.6 Uncon-
ditional quantile regression (Firpo et al. [2009]) and distribution regression (Chernozhukov
et al. [2013]) were introduced with similar motivations as IV-GQR. Neither was developed in
an IV framework or to permit sample selection adjustments. Furthermore, neither estimates
equation (3).

        The IV-GQR estimator simultaneously uses two moment conditions. We write the
quantile function as D′ β(τ ):
                                 {                                 }
                                     [                         ]
                               E Z 1(Y ≤ D′ β(τ )) − τ̂X               = 0,                              (4)


                                         E[1(Y ≤ D′ β(τ )) − τ ] = 0.                                    (5)

where τ̂X is an estimate of P (Y ≤ D′ β(τ )|X), which we define by

                                 τ̂X = P (Y ≤ D′ β(τ )|X) = Φ (X ′ α)                                    (6)

In words, IV-GQR uses the covariates to determine the probability that the outcome variable
is below the quantile function given the covariates. An older individual is less likely to have
medical expenditures below the quantile function and the estimator uses this information.
For comparison with a conditional IV-QR estimator, note that equation (4) is equivalent
to IV-QR when τ̂X is replaced by τ . Put diﬀerently, when there are no covariates, IV-
   6
    We use “unconditional” to mean unconditional on the covariates (2005 medical expenditures and indi-
cators based on cells). The resulting distribution depends on the treatment variables (price or plan choice).


                                                     18
GQR reduces to IV-QR. This illustrates the benefit of covariates in the IV-GQR framework
- it relaxes the assumption that P (Y ≤ D′ β(τ )|Z) is constant and, instead, allows X to
aﬀect this probability. Condition (5) ensures that the estimates refer to the τ th quantile
of the unconditional (on covariates) distribution. The use of the probit model (instead
of a semi-parametric estimator) in equation (6) is for computational convenience. Powell
[2015] discusses how incorrect distributional assumptions for this equation will not necessarily
bias the estimates of the treatment eﬀects since these errors should be orthogonal to the
instruments (this is verified in simulations). We use GMM to estimate the parameters of
interest.

4.1.2   Extension to Include Sample Selection Adjustment

Because of attrition, we do not observe the full distribution of medical expenditures. Instead,
we observe medical care only when Si = 1, where Si represents selection (i.e., not-attriting).
We model selection into the sample as a function of observables and a non-additive selection
term (ϵi ):
                                       Si = F (Wi′ δ, ϵi )                                  (7)

where Wi′ δ ≡ Xi′ ϕ1 + Zi′ ϕ2 + ϕ3 pi . pi represents our selection instrument. It is important
that we have a variable that aﬀects selection above and beyond the other instruments and
covariates, which can be shown by rejecting the null hypothesis ϕ3 = 0.

         Buchinsky [1998, 2001] discusses sample selection adjustments for quantile regres-
sion. However, these papers include an additive sample selection term which Huber and
Melly [2015] shows assumes a homogenous treatment eﬀect. As before, including an additive
control undermines a primary motivation for using a quantile framework. It is straightfor-
ward to extend IV-GQR to include the sample selection adjustment as a covariate and allow
it to the inform the non-additive disturbance term. This relaxes the IV-GQR assumption to
account for the estimated selection term:

                                 Ui∗ |Zi , Xi , Wi′ δ̂ ∼ Ui∗ |Xi , Wi′ δ̂

The sample selection adjustment term is simply included as an additional covariate in equa-
tion (4), accounting for selection while preserving the nonadditive disturbance term. We
also modify (5):
                             E[1(Y ≤ D′ β(τ )) − τ |S = 1] = 0.


                                                   19
We define the τ th quantile estimates as the estimates for the τ th quantile of the observed
sample (S = 1). There is little loss in our context for defining the quantiles in this man-
ner. Alternatively, we could impose an identification-at-infinity assumption and generate
estimates for the τ th quantile of the full sample as if we observed the medical expenditure
distribution for the full sample.7 We choose not to do this for several reasons. First, the
only diﬀerence between the two sets of estimates is which quantile that the estimates refer
to (e.g., the 60th quantile of the observed sample may refer to the 50th quantile of the full
sample, but the estimated parameters would be the same). Since we will map the estimates
to specific medical expenditure dollar values, the values of the quantiles themselves are rel-
atively uninteresting. Second, it is computationally much easier to estimate the quantiles
for the observed sample. Third, we are hesitant to impose the identification-at-infinity as-
sumption. Finally, the adverse selection literature (see Geruso [2013], Handel [2013] for two
examples) typically defines adverse selection as diﬀerences in selection across plans. This
metric refers to the observed sample and does not include people unobserved in the data.
While understanding systematic selection for the attriters (relative to non-attriters) may be
independently interesting, the assumptions required to infer it are restrictive.8

4.2     Price Elasticity

Our empirical strategy is to estimate the relationship between per-person medical care ex-
penditures and health insurance generosity. The literature has commonly parameterized an
insurance plan with one price measure. In our framework, we write the log of annual medical
care expenditures as a function of the end-of-year price (P ). We are interested in estimating
the Structural Quantile Function:

                 Sln M (τ |P ) = ϕ(τ ) + δ(τ ) [ln P × 1 (P > 0)] + γ(τ )1 (P = 0) .                  (8)

In this equation, δ(τ ) represents the price elasticity for the τ th quantile of the distribution.
Elasticities are only valid for positive prices so we include a separate term for people facing
an end-of-year price of 0.
   7
    The relevant condition would be E [P (Y ≤ D′ β(τ )) |X, P (S = 1|W )] = τ .
   8
    Since medical expenditures for the attriters are unobserved, it should not be surprising that it would
require additional assumptions to infer their medical care distribution.




                                                   20
4.3    Plan Elasticity

A primary motivation for this paper is to estimate individuals’ responsiveness to health
insurance plans without parameterizing the plan in a restrictive manner. We believe that this
is especially worthwhile given the lack of evidence to support the parameterizations found in
the literature. The estimation of QTEs using IV-GQR becomes even more important when
we estimate these plan elasticities. The SQF is
                                                 ∑
                   Sln M (τ |Plan) = ϕ(τ ) +               βk (τ ) [1 (Plani = k)] .        (9)
                                               k∈{B,C,D}



        Our goal is to estimate the distribution of medical care for each plan. The SQF will
provide the resulting distribution for each plan if everyone in the sample were enrolled in
that plan. We can graph the resulting distribution for each plan along with the deductible
and stop loss for that plan to observe whether the distribution responds to these parts of the
plan. Conditional quantile estimators are uninformative in this context because we cannot
map the quantiles to specific expenditure levels. A conditional quantile estimate would
provide the impact of the plan for that quantile given a fixed age, sex, etc. For diﬀerent
covariates, this estimate would refer to diﬀerent expenditure levels. For a 60 year old, a given
quantile estimate may refer to a value above the stop loss. But the same quantile estimate
may refer to a value near the deductible for a younger individual. We are interested in how
the plan aﬀects medical care spending and, consequently, we require that the estimates map
to the same part of the cost-sharing schedule for each person in the data. Conditioning
on 2005 medical expenditures, which we believe is necessary for our identification strategy,
exacerbates the problems associated with conditional quantile estimation. An individual at
the top of the distribution conditional on 2005 medical expenditures may be at the lower
end of the unconditional distribution. IV-GQR provides the relevant estimates.

4.4    Estimation

We implement the IV-GQR estimator with a non-additive sample selection term to estimate
equations (8) and (9). Focusing on the plan elasticity model, our model is




                                                 21
                                  ∑
             ln M = α(U ∗ ) +           βk (U ∗ ) [1 (Plan = k)] ,   U ∗ ∼ U (0, 1)                     (10)
                                    k

             Y ∗ = max(ln M, C),                                                                        (11)
             Y =Y∗       if S = 1,                                                                      (12)
             S = F (W ′ δ, ϵ) ,                                                                         (13)
             U ∗ |Z, X, W ′ δ̂ ∼ U ∗ |X, W ′ δ̂                                                         (14)
             1 (Plan = k) = ψk (Z, X, V ) for all k.                                                    (15)


We make no assumptions on the functional form ψk (·) and no restrictions are placed on
the disturbance term V which partially determines plan choice. Many individuals do not
consume any medical care and we model these individuals as having censored medical ex-
penditures. Quantile estimation is, generally, robust to censoring. We estimate the SQF for
quantiles that are unaﬀected by censoring (i.e, quantiles where the SQF predicts M > 0).9
Practically, we set the outcome variable for observations with no medical expenditures to a
very low value. The exact number chosen has no impact on the final estimates. The covari-
ates (X) include Ti , f (Mi2005 ), f˜(M̃i2005 ), and Wi′ δ̂, where M̃i2005 refers to the 2005 medical
expenditures of individual i’s spouse or dependent.

        We estimate the index in equation (13) using the monotone rank estimator intro-
duced in Cavanagh and Sherman [1998], which does not require distributional assumptions.
We include a 5-piece spline in the estimated index as covariates to flexibly account for attri-
tion, comparing individuals with similar (ex-ante) probabilities of not attriting.

         We use subsampling (Politis and Romano [1994]) for inference and implement the
entire procedure for each subsample to account for the inclusion of an estimated prediction
in the second step.
   9
    Censoring is only problematic if the quantile function itself is censored for any of the observations.
Traditional quantile estimators include all variables in the quantile function so it is much more likely that
at least some observations will be censored (e.g., if a variable has a large negative eﬀect on the outcome
and some observations have high values for that variable, then the quantile function evaluated for that
observation’s covariates is likely censored), even at high quantiles. IV-GQR only includes the treatment
variables - which take a limited set of values in our context - in the quantile function and the additional
covariates cannot induce censoring issues. Our estimated SQFs at all values of the treatment variables imply
positive medical expenditures and we are robust to censoring concerns.




                                                       22
4.5     Reported Parameters

We will present our results with graphs that show the parameters over the entire distribution.
When applicable, our graphs will include the points where the distribution has passed the
plan deductible and stop loss. Some caution in interpretation is necessary. Each point refers
to the quantile in the distribution based on the end of the year expenditures. The estimates,
then, are not comparing the behavior of a person right before and right after that person
hits the deductible. Instead, the estimates below the deductible refer to people that never
pass the deductible in that year while the estimates above the deductible refer to individuals
that passed the deductible by the end of the year.

4.5.1   Price Elasticities

For the price elasticity estimates, we report the estimates for δ(τ ) and γ(τ ). δ(τ ) is the price
elasticity of medical care for quantile τ . γ(τ ) is the causal impact of a marginal price of
zero.

4.5.2   Plan Elasticities

We report diﬀerences in the plan estimates, using one plan as a baseline. For example,
we present a figure graphing the diﬀerences between the most generous and least generous
plan, corresponding to βB (τ ) − βD (τ ). We graph the estimates by quantile and mark which
quantiles correspond to the deductible and stop loss thresholds for each plan. Presenting the
results in this way allows us to test visually whether plans encourage additional expenditures
for the part of the distribution that is above the deductible for the most generous plan but
not for the least generous plan.

        Furthermore, we can use the price elasticity estimates (Section 4.5.1) to simulate
what the plan distributions would look like under the assumption that plans impact medical
care consumption solely through the end-of-year price. We create a plan distribution defined




                                                23
by a set of β̃k (τ ). We define the “parameterized” distribution of this plan by
                          [      ]
           
            d                d
           
           ϕ(τ )   if exp   ϕ(τ )  < Plan k’s Deductible
           
                                                                 [     ]
           
            d) + δ(τd) [ln(Plan k’s Coinsurance Rate)] if exp ϕ(τ  d) ≥ Plan k’s Deductible
           
           ϕ(τ
                           [                                           ]
β̃k (τ ) =                    d      d
                  and exp ϕ(τ ) + δ(τ ) [ln(Plan k’s Coinsurance Rate)] < Plan k’s Stop loss
           
           
           
            d) + γ(τ d)
           
           ϕ(τ
           
                        [                                            ]
           
                          d       d
                 if exp ϕ(τ ) + δ(τ ) [ln(Plan k’s Coinsurance Rate)] ≥ Plan k’s Stop loss
                                                                                       (16)
This is the distribution that we would estimate if people responded purely to the end-of-
year price. We can compare the resulting distribution generated by the estimates of βk (τ )
and β̃k (τ ). For inference, we employ a Cramér-von-Misses-Smirnov (CMS) test discussed in
Chernozhukov and Fernández-Val [2005] which uses resampling to simulate the test distri-
bution.

         We estimate each quantile function separately. When creating the expenditure dis-
tributions caused by each plan, we use the Chernozhukov et al. [2010] method to rearrange
quantiles when necessary.

4.5.3   Adverse Selection

We report adverse selection as the fraction of people that select into plan k that are below
the estimated τ th quantile for that plan, using the plan elasticity estimates (equation (9)).
These estimates refer to the medical expenditures if the entire sample were exogenously
enrolled in the plan, shutting down adverse selection. Consequently, we can compare the
expenditure distribution of those actually enrolled in the plan. If the fraction of enrollees in
the plan that have medical expenditures below ϕ(τ  d) + β[k (τ ) is smaller than τ , then this is

evidence of adverse selection into that plan. Let Nk represent the number of people enrolled
in plan k and K represent the set of people enrolled in plan k. We present the empirical
probability
                            \          1 ∑           d) + β[
                            ψ k (τ ) =        1(Yi ≤ ϕ(τ     k (τ )).                       (17)
                                       Nk i∈K

This equation represents the sample equivalent of the probability that an enrollee in plan k
                       \
is below the τ th SQF. ψk (τ ) < τ implies that the enrollees are consuming more medical care

than expected and that the plan has adverse selection. We expect to find adverse selection
for the most generous plan and relatively healthy people to enroll in the least generous plan.

                                               24
We present graphs of the distribution of the adverse selection parameters by τ for each
plan.


5     Results

5.1    First Stage and Selection Equation

In the first step, we create instruments which predict plan choice. We use the demographic
information in our data to predict which plan each family will select in 2007. In 2005, all
families were constrained to choose Plan A. Identification originates from the availability
of Plans B, C, and D in 2007 and the diﬀerential preferences (based on spousal observable
characteristics) for these plans. We predict these probabilities using the covariates.

         It is first necessary that our predicted probabilities are actually predictive of plan
choice, conditional on the covariates. Table 4 shows that there is a relationship. We construct
the probability of choosing Plan C in 2007 and the probability of choosing Plan D in 2007.
Plan B is the excluded category. We include fixed eﬀects for each demographic cell as well
as controls for 2005 medical expenditures. We report partial F-statistics which represent the
strength of the instruments in predicting each endogenous variable independent of the other.
We find that the instruments have a strong relationship with the endogenous variables.

          In Table 5, we report estimates for the selection equation. We present estimates
using a probit estimator and a monotone rank estimator. We use the estimates from the
latter to construct the selection adjustment term. We find that the selection instrument (the
predicted probability of not attriting) is positively associated with remaining in the sample
for all of 2007.

5.2    Price Elasticity Estimates

In this section, we provide estimates of equation (8). We present the results graphically. The
price elasticity term δ(τ ) is presented with confidence intervals in Figure 3a. We simultane-
ously estimate the eﬀect of free marginal medical care. These results are presented in Figure
3b. We present results only for quantiles in which the relevant parameters are identified.
For example, at lower quantiles, people face the full price of care regardless of plan choice.
Consequently, the price elasticity estimates are not identified until the expenditure distri-
bution is above the deductible for the most generous plan (and, similarly, the distribution


                                              25
is smaller than the stop loss for the least generous plan). A similar point can be made for
the eﬀects of free marginal care. Note, however, this will not aﬀect our interpretation when
we use the price elasticity estimates to create the distribution inferred by the estimates in
Section 5.3.10

          The elasticity estimates are relatively constant throughout the distribution. We esti-
mates an elasticity between 0 and -0.9 for most of the sample. In general, the elasticities are
similar to those found and reported by the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. An elastic-
ity of -0.4 implies that a coinsurance rate of 0.2 would increase medical care consumption by
90%. The estimates in Figure 3b suggest that medical expenditures are very responsive to
a marginal price of 0. The estimates are between 2 and 4 up to quantile 70 but decreases at
upper ends of the distribution. An estimate of 3 implies that a marginal price of 0 increases
medical care by 1,909%, relative to facing the full price of care. The results in Figures 3a
and 3b suggest that individuals in the top quarter of annual medical expenditures behave as
if they are inelastic to the price of medical care.

5.3     Plan Elasticity Estimates

This section presents our main results. We estimate the SQF in equation (9) and then
present the diﬀerences in the SQFs to show how the plans generate diﬀerent distributions
of medical care. In Figure 4, we present the diﬀerences in the distributions for the most
generous plan (Plan B) relative to the least generous (Plan D). We also include markers
signifying the deductibles and stop loss points for each plan. The figure shows the estimated
distribution of Plan B (relative to Plan D) if there were no systematic selection into either
plan, mapping that distribution to the kinks in the budget sets generated by the plans’
parameters. If people respond to the marginal end-of-year price, then we should see the plan
elasticity increase immediately after the deductible.

        We estimate little diﬀerence at the very bottom of the distribution, but the Plan
B distribution becomes very responsive at quantile 15, peaking with an elasticity of 1.5.
This high responsiveness occurs even before either distribution is subject to the deductible.
The elasticity decreases until it reaches 0.56 (at about $540 of annual medical expenditures
for Plan B) before increasing rapidly prior to Plan B’s stop loss point. The out-of-pocket
  10
    The problem with point identification at these low quantiles is that certain combinations of the two
parameters could generate the same distribution. However, the distribution itself is point-identified even if
the underlying parameters are not.



                                                     26
maximum for Plan B has little eﬀect on the distribution. The Plan D distribution does
rise relative to the Plan B distribution after the Part D deductible is reached, suggesting
that individuals are reacting to the lower price of care. The elasticity of Plan B relative
to Plan D steadily decreases to about 0.25 at $3,248 of medical expenditures for Plan A
($2,519 for Plan D). The Plan D maximum has little eﬀect on the distribution. We estimate
large elasticities even at the top of the medical care distribution. Overall, Figure 4 provides
evidence that the more generous plan appears to encourage additional medical care spending
through most of the distribution, even in parts where the generosity diﬀerences are small.
There are several possible reasons for this such as diﬀerences in the prices of episodes of care
for expensive treatments and reductions in spot prices early in the year.

         While it is diﬃcult to understand the mechanisms through which these plans aﬀect
the entire distribution, it is instructive to look at the distributions generated by the assump-
tions that individuals respond only to the end-of-year marginal price. We label this the
“parameterized diﬀerence” and present the results in Figure 5. The resulting distributions
are highly unrealistic and look very diﬀerent from the less parametric results found in Figure
4. The comparison of these figures illustrates the value of our non-parametric approach. We
will formally test the equality of these distributions in the next section.

         We can perform the same exercise for Plans B and C. The diﬀerence in the resulting
distributions is shown in Figure 6. Here, we observe similar patterns as before. In general,
the elasticities are smaller, consistent with the fact that Plan C is more generous than Plan
D. The estimated coeﬃcients after the Part B deductible are between 0.2 and 0.4, implying
a 22%-49% increase in spending due to enrollment in Plan B relative to Plan C. The relative
distributions appear unaﬀected by the Plan C deductible or the Plan B maximum. The
estimates for the two plans do converge, but we still estimate large elasticities near the top
of the distribution.

         The counterfactual distributions again illustrate that assuming that individuals re-
spond only to the end-of-year price leads to very diﬀerent conclusions. Figure 7 presents
these results. For the sake of completeness, we also compare Plan C to Plan D, though the
conclusions can be inferred from the other comparisons. Figures A.1 and A.2 present these
estimates.




                                              27
5.4    Equality of Distributions Tests

For each plan, we can also formally test the equality of the distributions generated by our
non-parametric method (estimation of SQF (9)) and the parametric method which assumes
that individuals respond solely to the end-of-year marginal price. While the distributions
look very diﬀerent, we would like to test these diﬀerences statistically.

         We use a Cramér-von-Misses-Smirnov (CMS) test and simulate the distribution of
this test statistic using subsampling. The CMS test for Plan B rejects the equality of the
two distributions at the 5% level. The graphs and the CMS tests suggest that an assumption
that individuals respond solely to the end-of-year price is a particularly poor one that cannot
be justified empirically. Consequently, we use the non-parametric distributions to generate
our adverse selection estimates.

5.5    Adverse Selection

Next, we present our metric of adverse selection. Without adverse selection, the observed
plan distributions and the causal distributions would be the same, implying that P (Yi ≤
d) + β[
ϕ(τ      k (τ )) = τ . Graphically, we would see a 45-degree line for each plan. The intuition

behind our metric is that once we have estimated the causal distribution of a plan, we can
compare the observed distribution to the estimated distribution for information about the
magnitude of adverse selection.

        We estimate our metrics and present them in Figure 8. We include the 45-degree
line as well. If the adverse selection metric is above the 45-degree line, then that is evi-
dence of favorable selection. For example, Plan D appears to attract an especially healthy
population. With no systematic selection, we would expect 20% of the Plan D enrollees to
have expenditures below the estimated 20th quantile of the SQF for Plan D, which is equal
to $182.32. Instead, we observe that almost 28% of the enrollees have smaller expenditures
than $182.32. This favorable selection extends throughout the distribution.

        Plan B shows evidence of adverse selection, especially at the bottom of the distribu-
tion. We estimate that without selection, the 30th quantile of the medical care distribution
for Plan B would be $380.65. Only 20.6% of Part B enrollees have smaller expenditures
than this amount. The systematic selection into Plan B disappears close to the top of the
expenditure distribution. Plan C shows a mix of favorable and adverse selection. We observe
adverse selection close to the bottom of the medical care distribution but favorable selection

                                              28
for most of the distribution.

         More formally, we can compare the observed distribution with the estimated causal
distributions using the same CMS test as Section 5.4. These distributions would be the same
in the absence of systematic selection. We reject the equality of distributions at the 1% level
for Plans B and C, implying that there is systematic selection. We can reject non-systematic
selection at the 10% level for Plan D.

5.6     Relative Importance of Moral Hazard and Selection

While we have presented several metrics involving the distribution of medical expenditures,
we can also look at the overall importance of the causal impact of the plan on mean ex-
penditures and selection. Given estimates of equation (9), we integrate over all quantiles to
arrive at the mean medical expenditures for each plan if there were no systematic selection
into the plan. These metrics are the expected per-person medical expenditures for a given
plan if everyone in our sample were subject to that plan. The calculation for Plan B is the
following:
                                                                       ∫ [             ]
Ê [Per-Person Medical Expenditures in Plan B with Random Selection] =     d) + β\
                                                                          ϕ(τ    B (τ )  dτ
                                                                                        τ
                                                                                       (18)
We label these “Per Person Expenditures with Random Selection” in Table 6 because all
diﬀerences across plans are driven solely by moral hazard. The first row is the actual per-
person expenditures which includes moral hazard and adverse selection. Note that, for the
sake of consistency, we calculate the actual expenditures in a similar manner by using the
values of the quantile endpoints and integrating over τ . Consequently, the numbers are
slightly diﬀerent from those found in Table 2.11

        We also include “Adverse Selection” which eliminates the causal impact of the plan
and describes the expenditures of the individuals selecting into the plan if the plan itself
did not impact expenditures. We simply subtract the moral hazard estimate from the per-
person expenditures estimate to estimate selection. In the previous section, we tested the
equality of the observed and estimated (causal) distributions as a test for adverse selection.
We also see evidence of selection in the mean estimates. Again, we find statistical evidence of
systematic selection. Under the assumption that diﬀerences in premiums across plans only
  11
    We should also highlight that the standard errors in Table 6 represent the standard errors for the mean
estimates and are not comparable to the standard deviations found in Table 2.


                                                    29
reflect diﬀerences in expected insurer payments, our selection estimates provide evidence
about the ramifications of policies which change enrollment behavior. For example, the
Cadillac Tax may encourage enrollment in less generous plans. Our estimates suggest that if
our entire sample enrolled in Plan D that the premium would increase by over $1,000.

        Table 7 repeats the results in Table 6 but provides complementary metrics by using
comparisons between plans. We estimate that enrollment in Plan B increases per-person
medical expenditures by over $2,000 relative to Plan D and over $1,000 relative to Plan C.
We can also estimate diﬀerences in selection and calculate the fraction of the diﬀerences in
observed per-person costs across plans that can be attributed to selection. We estimate that
47% of the additional spending in Plan B can be attributed to adverse selection.

5.7     Adverse Selection Metrics

Our empirical strategy allows us to calculate precise estimates of systematic selection into
each plan. It is useful to compare this method to an alternative metric of selection - previ-
ous year’s medical expenditures. To test for selection, it might seem reasonable to observe
whether individuals with higher medical expenditures in 2005 choose Plan B. Since all indi-
viduals were enrolled in the same plan in 2005, the diﬀerences in 2005 expenditures across
2007 plans reflect diﬀerences in selection.

         However, these diﬀerences in 2005 expenditures do not reflect the true magnitude
of selection. Individuals have private information about changes in health. Furthermore,
individuals with high medical expenditures may, on average, expect to require less care in
the next year due simply to mean reversion and health improvements, but may still value
the additional financial risk protection of the most generous plan.12 Our results suggest
that previous medical expenditures overstate the magnitude of adverse selection. Referring
back to Table 2, we find that the diﬀerence in 2005 medical expenditures between Plan B
and Plan D enrollees is $3,704. However, in Table 6, we see that the diﬀerence in selection
in 2007 expenditures is only $1,853. Similarly, the diﬀerence in 2005 medical expenditures
between Plan B and Plan C enrollees is $2,636. But, in 2007 expenditures, selection accounts
for only $1,531. These diﬀerences are economically meaningful and highlight the benefits of
estimating adverse selection in the same year that the selection is occurring.
  12
    All three 2007 plans provide full coverage above the stop loss point, but individuals may still value the
financial risk protection at lower levels of annual expenditures.




                                                     30
5.8    Robustness Checks

Table 8 includes estimates from robustness tests. We present only the moral hazard esti-
mates: the eﬀect of Plan B relative to Plan D (top row) and the eﬀect of Plan B relative to
Plan C (bottom row). The corresponding estimates from Table 7 are included in the first
column. In our first test, we replicate our previous analysis using the 2006 data. We find
similar estimates. The consistency of the estimates suggests that are identification strategy
is robust to concerns of intertemporal substitution of medical care between 2005 and 2006.
We condition on 2005 medical expenditures to account for individual heterogeneity, though
it is possible that some care was shifted to 2005 (conversely, it is possible that care was
shifted to 2006) in anticipation of the introduction of new plans. This would imply that our
medical expenditure controls are partially treated. This shifting would aﬀect care in 2006
as well. Since the estimates are similar whether 2006 or 2007 is used as the “treated” year,
we conclude that any shifting of care was not systematic.

         We believe that it is important for our empirical strategy that we account for
individual-level heterogeneity in medical care consumption. We control for 2005 medical
care to account for initial diﬀerences in care and predict changes in care due to considera-
tions such as mean reversion. In the last column of Table 8, we present estimates in which
we condition more flexibly on 2005 medical expenditures. We include indicator variables
for each percentile of individual medical expenditures in 2005, permitting especially flexible
predictions of the distribution of care in 2007. Our estimates are robust to the use of these
more flexible controls. The moral hazard estimate for Plan B relative to Plan D increases
while the estimate for Plan B relative to Plan C is very similar. If the more parameterized
controls used in the main analysis were not adequate, we would expect to over-estimate the
role of moral hazard since we would attribute diﬀerences in underlying heterogeneity to the
causal impact of the more generous plans. This does not appear to be the case.


6     Conclusion
Understanding moral hazard and adverse selection in private health insurance is widely-
recognized as critical to policy. While the literature has frequently estimated the eﬀect of
price on medical care consumption, it has typically resorted to parameterizing the mechanism
through which individuals respond to cost-sharing. We show that these assumptions typically
contradict economic reasoning, and we provide empirical evidence that these specifications


                                             31
perform poorly. In this paper, we estimate the impact of diﬀerent health insurance plans
on the entire distribution of medical care consumption using a new instrumental variable
quantile estimation method. These estimated distributions are the distributions caused by
the plans in the absence of systematic selection into plans. We map these causal distributions
to the parameters of the plans themselves. We can statistically reject that individuals only
respond to the end-of-year price.

         We also estimate the magnitude of adverse selection. We find favorable selection
in the least generous plan and adverse selection in the most generous. We estimate that
adverse selection is responsible for $773 of additional per-person costs in the most generous
plan, implying that an individual considering this plan would pay over $60 per month in
additional premium payments simply to cover the expected costs of the population selecting
into the plan. Similarly, a policy which resulted in our entire sample enrolling in the least
generous plan would cause annual premiums for that plan to rise by over $1,000.

         We estimate that moral hazard is responsible for 53% of the diﬀerences in expendi-
tures between the most and least generous plans. Adverse selection also plays an important
role, accounting for the other 47%. In the absence of moral hazard, the diﬀerence in average
medical expenditures across these plans would be $2,117 instead of $3,969. Finally, we find
that using the previous year’s medical expenditures as a metric of selection greatly overstates
the magnitude of selection.




                                              32
References
Jason Abaluck, Jonathan Gruber, and Ashley Swanson. Prescription drug use under Medi-
  care Part D: A linear model of nonlinear budget sets. Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, 2015.

Jaap H Abbring, Pierre-André Chiappori, James J Heckman, and Jean Pinquet. Adverse
  selection and moral hazard in insurance: Can dynamic data help to distinguish? Journal
  of the European Economic Association, pages 512–521, 2003.

Abby Alpert. The anticipatory eﬀects of Medicare Part D on drug utilization. 2015.

Aviva Aron-Dine, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R Cullen. Moral hazard in health
 insurance: How important is forward looking behavior? Technical report, National Bureau
 of Economic Research, 2012.

Katherine Baicker and Dana Goldman. Patient cost-sharing and health care spending growth.
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(2):47–68, 2011.

Patrick Bajari, Christina Dalton, Han Hong, and Ahmed Khwaja. Moral hazard, adverse
  selection, and health expenditures: A semiparametric analysis. The RAND Journal of
  Economics, 45(4):747–763, 2014.

Moshe Buchinsky. The dynamics of changes in the female wage distribution in the USA: a
 quantile regression approach. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13(1):1–30, 1998.

Moshe Buchinsky. Quantile regression with sample selection: Estimating women’s return to
 education in the US. Empirical Economics, 26(1):87–113, 2001.

M Kate Bundorf, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney. Pricing and welfare in health plan
 choice. The American Economic Review, 102(7):3214–3248, 2012.

James H Cardon and Igal Hendel. Asymmetric information in health insurance: evidence
  from the National Medical Expenditure Survey. RAND Journal of Economics, pages
  408–427, 2001.

Caroline Carlin and Robert Town. Adverse selection, welfare and optimal pricing of employer-
  sponsored health plans. 2008.

Christopher Cavanagh and Robert P Sherman. Rank estimators for monotonic index models.
  Journal of Econometrics, 84(2):351–381, 1998.

                                            33
Victor Chernozhukov and Iván Fernández-Val. Subsampling inference on quantile regression
  processes. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics, pages 253–276, 2005.

Victor Chernozhukov and Christian Hansen. Instrumental quantile regression inference for
  structural and treatment eﬀect models. Journal of Econometrics, 132(2):491–525, 2006.

Victor Chernozhukov and Christian Hansen. Instrumental variable quantile regression: A
  robust inference approach. Journal of Econometrics, 142(1):379–398, January 2008.

Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Fernández-Val, and Alfred Galichon. Quantile and probability
  curves without crossing. Econometrica, 78(3):1093–1125, 2010.

Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Fernandez-Val, and Blaise Melly. Inference on counterfactual
  distributions. Econometrica, 81(6):2205–2268, 2013.

Pierre-Andre Chiappori. Econometric models of insurance under asymmetric information.
  In Handbook of insurance, pages 365–393. 2000.

Pierre-André Chiappori and Bernard Salanie. Testing for asymmetric information in insur-
  ance markets. Journal of Political Economy, 108(1):56–78, 2000.

John F. Cogan, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Daniel P. Kessler. The eﬀect of tax preferences on
  health spending. The National Tax Journal, 64(3):795, 2011.

Christopher J Cronin. Insurance-induced moral hazard: A dynamic model of within-year
  medical care decision making under uncertainty. 2015.

David M Cutler and Richard J Zeckhauser. The anatomy of health insurance. Handbook of
  Health Economics, 1:563–643, 2000.

Kjell Doksum. Empirical probability plots and statistical inference for nonlinear models in
  the two-sample case. Ann. Statist., 2(2):267–277, 1974.

Fabian Duarte. Price elasticity of expenditure across health care services. Journal of Health
  Economics, 31(6):824–841, 2012.

Matthew J Eichner. The demand for medical care: What people pay does matter. The
 American Economic Review, 88(2):117–121, 1998.

Matthew Jason Eichner. Medical expenditures and major risk health insurance. PhD thesis,
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1997.



                                             34
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Stephen P Ryan. Selection on moral hazard in health
  insurance. American Economic Review, 103(1):178–219, 2013a.

Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf. The response of drug expenditures to
  non-linear contract design: Evidence from Medicare Part D. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2013b.

Amy Finkelstein and James Poterba. Adverse selection in insurance markets: Policyholder
 evidence from the U.K. annuity market. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1):183–208,
 2004.

Amy Finkelstein, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P
 Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker. The Oregon health insurance experiment:
 Evidence from the first year. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1057–1106,
 2012.

Sergio Firpo, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. Unconditional quantile regressions.
  Econometrica, 77(3):953–973, May 2009.

Michael Geruso. Selection in employer health plans: Homogeneous prices and heterogeneous
 preferences. 2013.

Ben Handel. Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When nudging hurts.
  The American Economic Review, 2013.

Martin Huber and Blaise Melly. A test of the conditional independence assumption in sample
 selection models. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2015.

Emmett B Keeler and John E Rolph. The demand for episodes of treatment in the health
 insurance experiment. Journal of Health Economics, 7(4):337–367, 1988.

Emmett B Keeler, Joseph P Newhouse, and Charles E Phelps. Deductibles and the demand
 for medical care services: The theory of a consumer facing a variable price schedule under
 uncertainty. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 641–655, 1977.

Roger W Koenker and Gilbert Bassett. Regression quantiles. Econometrica, 46(1):33–50,
  January 1978.

Amanda Kowalski. Censored quantile instrumental variable estimates of the price elasticity
 of expenditure on medical care. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2015.



                                            35
Willard G Manning, Joseph P Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B Keeler, and Arleen
 Leibowitz. Health insurance and the demand for medical care: evidence from a randomized
 experiment. The American Economic Review, pages 251–277, 1987.

Joseph P Newhouse, Robert H Brook, Naihua Duan, Emmett B Keeler, Arleen Leibowitz,
  Willard G Manning, M Susan Marquis, Carl N Morris, Charles E Phelps, and John E
  Rolph. Attrition in the RAND health insurance experiment: a response to nyman. Journal
  of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 33(2):295–308, 2008.

John A Nyman. The value of health insurance: the access motive. Journal of Health
  Economics, 18(2):141–152, 1999.

John A Nyman. Health plan switching and attrition bias in the rand health insurance
  experiment. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 33(2):309–317, 2008.

Mark V Pauly. The economics of moral hazard: comment. The American Economic Review,
 pages 531–537, 1968.

Dimitris N Politis and Joseph P Romano. Large sample confidence regions based on sub-
  samples under minimal assumptions. The Annals of Statistics, 22(4):2031–2050, 1994.

David Powell. Estimation of quantile treatment eﬀects in the presence of covariates. Working
  papers, RAND Corporation Publications Department, 2015.

Michael Rothschild and Joseph Stiglitz. Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An
 essay on the economics of imperfect information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90
 (4):629–649, 1976.




                                            36
Figures

              Figure 1: Indiﬀerence Curve and Non-Linear Budget Constraint




Notes: This figure graphs consumption of all other goods as a function of total annual medical
expenditures. The indiﬀerence curve assumes convex preferences.




                                             37
                      Figure 2: Budget Constraints Generated by Plans in Data




Notes: This figure graphs the nonlinear budget set generated by each 2007 plan. We do not observe premiums, but we estimate
premium diﬀerences using spending diﬀerences across plans. The variation in the starting points of the 3 budget constraints is
due to estimated premium variation only.




                                                             38
                                                   Figure 3: Parameterized Estimates
                                                         (a) Price Elasticity Estimates


                                        .6

                                        .3
              Price Elasticity




                                        0

                                       −.3

                                       −.6

                                       −.9

                                      −1.2

                                              35     40       45        50        55      60     65    70        75   80
                                                               Quantile of End−of−Year Spending

                                                              Estimate                    95% Confidence Interval


                                             (b) Eﬀect of Price=0 on Medical Expenditures

                                  7


                                  5


                                  3
              Price Elasticity




                                  1
                                  0
                                 −1


                                 −3


                                 −5
                                       50           55             60             65           70           75        80
                                                            Quantile of End−of−Year Spending

                                                           Estimate                    95% Confidence Interval




Notes: Using an instrumental variable quantile regression estimator, we estimate the price elasticity
and the eﬀects of a marginal price of 0. Confidence intervals generated using subsampling.

                                                                             39
           Figure 4: Diﬀerence in Expenditure Distribution: Plan B vs. Plan D

                                                2
                                               1.8
                                               1.6
             Difference in Log(Expenditures)




                                               1.4
                                               1.2
                                                1
                                                .8
                                                .6
                                                .4
                                                .2
                                                0
                                               −.2
                                               −.4
                                               −.6
                                                     Deductible (B)         Maximum (B)
                                                                                 Deductible (D)       Maximum (D)

                                                                      Estimate           95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Using an instrumental variable quantile regression estimator, we estimate the distribution
of Plan B and Plan D if enrollment into each plan were random. We graph the diﬀerence in these
             distributions here. Confidence intervals generated using subsampling.




                                                                                 40
   Figure 5: Parameterized Diﬀerence in Expenditure Distribution: Plan B vs. Plan D


                                                4.5
             Difference in Log(Expenditures)




                                                3.5

                                                2.5

                                                1.5

                                                 .5

                                                −.5

                                               −1.5

                                               −2.5
                                                      Deductible (B)                     Maximum (D)
                                                                   Maximum (B)       Deductible (D)

                                                           Estimate              95% Confidence Interval


    Notes: We use the price elasticity estimates shown in Figures 3a and 3b to generate the
  distributions that we would observe given random enrollment into Plans B and D under the
assumption that individuals respond only to the end-of-year marginal price. Confidence intervals
                                 generated using subsampling.




                                                                       41
           Figure 6: Diﬀerence in Expenditure Distribution: Plan B vs. Plan C

                                               1.8
                                               1.6
                                               1.4
             Difference in Log(Expenditures)




                                               1.2
                                                1
                                                .8
                                                .6
                                                .4
                                                .2
                                                0
                                               −.2
                                               −.4
                                               −.6
                                               −.8
                                                     Deductible (B)            Maximum (B)
                                                                      Deductible (C)         Maximum (C)

                                                                         Estimate            95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Using an instrumental variable quantile regression estimator, we estimate the distribution
of Plan B and Plan C if enrollment into each plan were random. We graph the diﬀerence in these
             distributions here. Confidence intervals generated using subsampling.




                                                                                    42
   Figure 7: Parameterized Diﬀerence in Expenditure Distribution: Plan B vs. Plan C


                                               3.5
             Difference in Log(Expenditures)




                                               2.5


                                               1.5


                                                .5


                                               −.5




                                                     Deduct (B)Deduct (C)
                                                               Maximum (B)   Maximum (C)

                                                         Estimate            95% Confidence Interval


    Notes: We use the price elasticity estimates shown in Figures 3a and 3b to generate the
  distributions that we would observe given random enrollment into Plans B and C under the
assumption that individuals respond only to the end-of-year marginal price. Confidence intervals
                                 generated using subsampling.




                                                                    43
                                                              Figure 8: Adverse Selection
            0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
             Percentage Below Quantile Prediction




                                                    10   20   30      40        50   60      70       80   90   100
                                                                   Quantile of End−of−Year Spending

                                                                       Plan B             Plan C
                                                                       Plan D             45 degree line


  Notes: We use the plan elasticities presented in Figures 4, 6, A.1 to estimate the empirical
 probability that an enrollee in the plan is below the estimate quantile function for that plan.
Confidence intervals generated using subsampling. The 45 degree line represents a plan with no
                                      systematic selection.




                                                                                44
Tables

                            Table 1: Health Insurance Plans

                Plan       Plan A   Plan B Plan C       Plan D   Plan B Plan C     Plan D
               (Year)      (2005)   (2006) (2006)       (2006)   (2007) (2007)     (2007)

 Deductible   Individual    $0       $200       $400     $800     $250     $450     $800
                Family      $0       $400       $800    $1,600    $500     $900    $1,600
              Individual   None     $1,000     $2,000   $4,000   $1,250   $2,250   $4,000
 Stop loss
                Family     None     $2,000     $4,000   $8,000   $2,500   $4,500   $8,000
Coinsurance                20%       10%        20%      20%      10%      20%      20%
 Plan Type                 PPO       PPO        PPO      PPO      PPO      PPO      PPO




                                          45
                                      Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                           A. Family Size ≤ 2
                                     Plan B      Plan C                           Plan D         No Plan
    2005 Medical Expenditures       $5,157.89   $2,521.67                        $1,453.58      $3,821.29
                                   ($12562.64) ($5462.58)                       ($3059.12)     ($12226.04)
    2007 Medical Expenditures       $5,441.79   $2,883.20                        $1,559.35           –
                                   ($13291.73) ($7827.91)                       ($5021.00)           –
           Family Size                 1.51        1.57                             1.41           1.66
                                      (0.50)      (0.50)                           (0.49)         (0.47)
               Age                    52.23       48.69                            39.88           52.88
                                      (8.98)     (11.33)                          (13.05)         (9.84)
 End-of-Year Marginal Price = 0.1    67.52%       0.00%                            0.00%             –
 End-of-Year Marginal Price = 0.2     0.00%      45.72%                           24.32%             –
  End-of-Year Marginal Price = 0      9.54%       4.14%                            0.63%             –
                N                     2,777       4,639                            1,435          12,578
                                  B. Full Sample
                                                   Plan B      Plan C             Plan D         No Plan
     2005 Medical Expenditures                    $5,004.00   $2,458.86          $1,520.46      $3,447.75
                                                 ($13336.92) ($7255.11)         ($3579.90)     ($11001.93)
     2007 Medical Expenditures                    $5,130.47   $2,788.15          $1,466.76           –
                                                 ($12932.82) ($9323.08)         ($4320.47)           –
               Family Size                           1.91        2.30               2.68           2.27
                                                    (1.07)      (1.27)             (1.54)         (1.16)
                   Age                              50.85       46.46              39.96           50.44
                                                    (9.36)     (10.86)            (10.55)        (10.38)
 End-of-Year Marginal Price = 0.1                  68.26%       0.00%              0.00%             –
 End-of-Year Marginal Price = 0.2                   0.00%      49.29%             30.65%             –
  End-of-Year Marginal Price = 0                    9.12%       4.15%              0.56%             –
               N                                    3,346       6,729              2,679          17,760



                                   Table 3: Comparison of Estimators

                                    IV-QR with covariates        IV-QR without covariates        IV-GQR
         Assumption                   U |Z, X ∼ U (0, 1)             U ∗ |Z ∼ U (0, 1)       U ∗ |Z, X ∼ U ∗ |X
 Structural Quantile Function          d′ β̃(τ̃ ) + x′ δ̃(τ̃ )             d′ β(τ )                d′ β(τ )
Interpretation for τ th quantile      τ th quantile of U            τ quantile of U ∗
                                                                     th
                                                                                            τ quantile of U ∗
                                                                                             th

                Diﬀerences in the SQF imply diﬀerences in the quantile treatment eﬀects.
                U ∗ = f (X, U ).



                                                           46
                 Table 4: First Stage Estimates

                                      Actual Plan Choice
              Instruments             Plan B     Plan C
         Predicted Pr(Plan B)         0.938*** -0.399***
                                       (0.092)   (0.079)
         Predicted Pr(Plan C)         -0.804*** 1.301***
                                       (0.137)   (0.119)
           Partial F-Statistic          45.65     53.08
*** Significant at 1 percent level; ** Significant at 5 percent
level; * Significant at 10 percent level. Regressions also include
cell fixed eﬀects, where cells are based on sex, age, relationship
to employee, and family size. They also include logged 2005
medical expenditures and a dummy variable equal to 1 if 2005
medical expenditures equal to 0. They also condition on 2005
medical expenditures of the spouse or dependent.




                  Table 5: Selection Equation

                              Pr(Not Attrit)     Pr(Not Attrit)
 Predicted Pr(Not Attrit)         0.954***        0.677***
                                   (0.037)         (0.028)
   Predicted Pr(Plan C)             -0.001        0.314***
                                   (0.054)         (0.046)
   Predicted Pr(Plan D)             -0.026        0.225***
                                   (0.062)         (0.056)
         Estimator                 Probit       Monotone Rank
*** Significant at 1 percent level; ** Significant at 5 percent
level; * Significant at 10 percent level. Standard errors estimated
using subsampling. Regressions also include cell fixed eﬀects,
where cells are based on sex, age, relationship to employee, and
family size. They also include logged 2005 medical expenditures
and a dummy variable equal to 1 if 2005 medical expenditures
equal to 0. They also condition on 2005 medical expenditures
of the spouse or dependent. Coeﬃcients are scaled so that the
norm is equal to 1.



                                 47
                     Table 6: Decomposition of Plan Eﬀects

                                                  Plan B      Plan C     Plan D
           Per Person Expenditures            $5,507.19      $2,928.35 $1,537.83
                                              ($292.41)      ($111.67) ($149.89)
Per Person Expenditures with Random Selection $4,733.64      $3,686.22 $2,616.87
                                              ($303.70)      ($191.36) ($232.89)
              Adverse Selection                $773.55        -$757.87 -$1,079.04
                                              ($338.74)      ($172.17) ($221.49)
   Subsampling is used to generate the standard errors. “Adverse Selection” is
   equal to “Per Person Expenditures” minus “Per Person Expenditures with
   Random Selection”.




                                       48
                                          Table 7: Comparisons Across Plans

                                                             Plan B               Plan C             Plan B
                                                       relative to Plan D   relative to Plan D relative to Plan C
                Per Person Expenditures                    $3,969.36            $1,390.52          $2,578.84
                                                           ($328.56)            ($191.66)          ($308.22)
     Per Person Expenditures with Random Selection         $2,116.77            $1,069.36          $1,047.42
                                                           ($304.38)            ($344.77)          ($394.93)
                   Adverse Selection                       $1,852.59             $321.17           $1,531.42
                                                           ($382.86)            ($331.89)          ($461.68)
             Subsampling is used to generate the standard errors.




49
                 Table 8: Robustness Checks: Moral Hazard Estimates

                               Main Results       2006 Data   Less Parametric Controls
   Plan B relative to Plan D     $2,116.77        $2,217.64          $2,769.91
   Plan B relative to Plan C     $1,069.36        $1,051.73           985.88
These estimates correspond to columns 1 and 3 of Table 7. We include the same estimates
from Table 7. In the second column, we use the 2006 data and reproduce our analyses. In
the final column, we include indicators for each percentile of 2005 medical expenditures as
covariates.




                                             50
A     Appendix

          Figure A.1: Diﬀerence in Expenditure Distribution: Plan C vs. Plan D


                                         1.4
                                         1.2
                                           1
             Difference in Log(Expenditures)




                                          .8
                                          .6
                                          .4
                                          .2
                                           0
                                         −.2
                                         −.4
                                         −.6
                                         −.8
                                         −1
                                        −1.2
                                        −1.4
                                                                Deductible (D)      Maximum (D)
                                               Deductible (C)           Maximum (C)

                                                  Estimate             95% Confidence Interval


Notes: Using an instrumental variable quantile regression estimator, we estimate the distribution
of Plan C and Plan D if enrollment into each plan were random. We graph the diﬀerence in these
         distributions here. Confidence intervals generated using clustered subsampling.




                                                                51
  Figure A.2: Parameterized Diﬀerence in Expenditure Distribution: Plan C vs. Plan D

                                               4.5


                                               3.5
             Difference in Log(Expenditures)




                                               2.5


                                               1.5


                                                .5


                                               −.5




                                                        Deductible (C)   Maximum (C)
                                                                            Deductible (D)

                                                     Estimate            95% Confidence Interval


    Notes: We use the price elasticity estimates shown in Figures 3a and 3b to generate the
  distributions that we would observe given random enrollment into Plans C and D under the
assumption that individuals respond only to the end-of-year marginal price. Confidence intervals
                            generated using clustered subsampling.




                                                                52
