NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATENT CITATION DATA IN SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH:
OVERVIEW AND BEST PRACTICES
Adam B. Jaffe
Gaétan de Rassenfosse
Working Paper 21868
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21868

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

We thank David Schwartz for suggesting this project. We received helpful comments from Bronwyn
Hall, Dietmar Harhoff, Sadao Nagaoka, and Beth Webster, as well as participants at the 2015 Workshop
on the Economics of Intellectual Property in Northwestern University. Jan Kozak provided valuable
research assistance. The authors are solely responsible for all opinions or errors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Adam B. Jaffe and Gaétan de Rassenfosse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Patent Citation Data in Social Science Research: Overview and Best Practices
Adam B. Jaffe and Gaétan de Rassenfosse
NBER Working Paper No. 21868
January 2016
JEL No. O31,O32,O34
ABSTRACT
The last two decades have witnessed a dramatic increase in the use of patent citation data in social
science research. Facilitated by digitization of the patent data and increasing computing power, a community
of practice has grown up that has developed methods for using these data to: measure attributes of
innovations such as impact and originality; to trace flows of knowledge across individuals, institutions
and regions; and to map innovation networks. The objective of this paper is threefold. First, it takes
stock of these main uses. Second, it discusses four pitfalls associated with patent citation data, related
to office, time and technology, examiner, and strategic effects. Third, it highlights gaps in our understanding
and offers directions for future research.

Adam B. Jaffe
Motu Economic and Public Policy Research
PO Box 24390
Wellington 6142
New Zealand
and Queensland University of Technology
and also NBER
adam.jaffe@motu.org.nz
Gaétan de Rassenfosse
EPFL - CDM - ITPP - IIPP
Odyssea Station 5
CH-1015 Lausanne
gaetan.derassenfosse@epfl.ch

CONTENT
1.

Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1

2.

Citations as an indicator of invention attributes ................................................................. 3
2.1

Forward citations and technological impact .................................................................................. 5

2.2

Backward citations and reliance on previous technology ......................................................... 7

2.3

Technological distance and diversity................................................................................................ 8

2.4

Linkage to science ................................................................................................................................ 11

2.5

Economic value ..................................................................................................................................... 12

3.

Citations as an indicator of knowledge flows .....................................................................16
3.1

Geographic dimension of knowledge flows ................................................................................. 16

3.2

Temporal dimension of knowledge flows .................................................................................... 18

3.3

Validation studies................................................................................................................................. 19

4.

Citations as links in knowledge or innovation networks ................................................20
4.1

Mapping patents, individuals, institutions, and regions .......................................................... 20

4.2

Mapping of technological trajectories ........................................................................................... 22

5.

6.

Pitfalls and best practices in use of citation-based indicators.......................................23
5.1

Office effects ........................................................................................................................................... 24

5.2

Time and technology field effects ................................................................................................... 26

5.3

Examiner effects ................................................................................................................................... 27

5.4

Strategic effects ..................................................................................................................................... 28

Conclusion .....................................................................................................................................28

References ................................................................................................................................................31
Appendix A ...............................................................................................................................................39

ii

“Knowledge flows […] are invisible; they leave no paper trail by which
they may be measured and tracked, and there is nothing to prevent the
theorist from assuming anything about them that she likes.”
Paul Krugman (1991)

1. Introduction
Eugene Garfield is one of the pioneers of the study of citation data. In his 1955 article,
Garfield proposes to build a citation index for scientific articles in order to make it
possible for “the conscientious scholar to be aware of criticisms of earlier papers.” He
further explains, “even if there were no other use for a citation index than that of
minimizing the citation of poor data, the index would be well worth the effort required
to compile it” (p. 108). It turns out that citation indices have been used in a variety of
ways and for a variety of purposes. Two of the most notable uses are to assess the
attributes of the idea embedded in a scientific article and to track its diffusion through
time, space and technology domains. In fact, Garfield (1955) foresaw these two uses as
he described the citation index as an “association-of-ideas index” (p. 108) and as he
explained that the citation index may “help the historian to measure the influence of the
article—that is, its ‘impact factor’” (p. 111).
While the analogy with the broader field of bibliometrics may seem obvious,
patent citations differ from scientific citations in substantial ways. Citations in patents
are the results of a highly mediated process that involves multiple parties: the inventor,
the patent attorney and the patent examiner (Meyer 2000). These parties have different
incentives for citing publications and may do so at different times and in different
sections of the patent document (Cotropia, Lemley and Sampat 2013). Much of the
empirical research relies on US citations, but there are important differences across
jurisdictions in citation rules and practice. 1 This creates interesting opportunities for
research on non-US data, but also suggests a degree of caution in thinking about the
global implications of results based solely on US data.

The present survey also discusses evidence on citations at the European Patent Office whenever
available.

1

1

The widespread use of patent citations in social science research can be traced to
the availability of patent statistics in digitally readable form in the late 1970s.2 Zvi
Griliches (1979), in his important manifesto for research on R&D and productivity
growth, suggested that the frequency with which patents from different industries cite
each other could be used as a measure of the technological proximity of industries. An
early strand of research on patent citations was the work of Francis Narin and his
associates at CHI Research, Inc. (Carpenter, Narin and Woolf 1981; Carpenter and Narin
1983; Narin and Noma, 1985; Narin, Noma and Perry 1987). An influential early
demonstration of the potential utility of patent citation data in economic research was
the PhD research of Griliches’ student Manuel Trajtenberg (Trajtenberg 1990a; 1990b).
The use of patent citation data has grown dramatically over the last two decades, as
illustrated in Appendix A.
What makes citations potentially useful is that they convey information about
the cumulative nature of the research process, as well as information about the
consequences. While some inventors and research organizations pursue patents for
motives of prestige or internal tracking of research success, most patent applications
are made with the goal of securing commercial advantage, or at least preserving options
for pursuit of commercial advantage. Another virtue of patent data for social science
research is that patents reside in a non-market-based technological classification
system, allowing one to place patents, inventors and organizations in technology space
in a way that is not derived from sales or other economic data that one may be trying to
relate to invention.3 Furthermore, the classification scheme is hierarchical so that
technology categories can be very fine or relatively broad as desired. This feature, and
others, has been combined with patent citation data to provide powerful indicators.
This paper provides an overview of the major uses of such data and the issues
that arise in such research. Other authors have previously discussed the use of patent

The earliest reference that we found is Clark (1976). It presents statistics on the obsolescence of USPTO
patents using citation data. Garfield (1966) discusses the use of patent citation searches to say something
about the significance of a patent, but it does not present any systematic analyses or statistics. Kuznets
(1962) did not specifically discuss citations, but did emphasize that patent documents are a rich and deep
source of information on the inventive process, and urged that this richness be exploited in addition to
researchers’ simply counting patents.
3 Jacob Schmookler pointed out that in a patent subclass “Dispensing of semi-solid materials,” he found a
patent for a manure spreader and another for a toothpaste tube (Schmookler, 1966).

2

2

statistics in social science research (e.g., Griliches 1990; Lerner and Seru 2015), and Gay
and Le Bas (2005) provide a brief overview of the use of patent citations to measure
invention value and knowledge flows. However, we are not aware of a broad survey on
the use of patent citation data. 4 In order to identify the papers to include in this survey,
we started from a limited number of references that we were aware of and
complemented those using a keyword-based search on Google Scholar. We then
expanded this core of references by looking at cited and citing references. Ultimately,
we kept the most influential articles, either in terms of the number of citations received
or in terms of relevance of the findings. The majority of papers are published in
economics, management, and information science journals.
Conceptually, we classify research using patent citations into two broad groups.
One research line uses a variety of citation-based statistics to characterize the
inventions, in terms of the magnitude and nature of their impact, as well as the nature
and magnitude of the departure that they represent relative to the existing pool of
knowledge. This work is discussed in the next section. The other research line focuses
on the citations themselves, using them as proxies for knowledge linkages across
inventors in order to explore the nature of knowledge flows and the factors that affect
those flows. This research is discussed first with regard to relatively simple metrics of
knowledge flow in Section 3, and then with respect to attempts to map interactions in a
more complex network framework in Section 4. We then provide some brief comments
on practical difficulties and pitfalls in using citations data in Section 5. Section 6
concludes with opportunities for future research.

2. Citations as an indicator of invention attributes
There is no agreed-upon model of inventions and the inventive process, which leads to
some ambiguity in how citation metrics are interpreted. Nonetheless it is possible to
identify two broad aspects of the process that underlie citation-based inferences. First,
we can think of all possible technologies as mapping onto a high-dimensional
technology space, such that a given invention can be located in that space, and a patent
represents the right to exclude others from marketing products that impinge upon a

Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002) reprints twelve of the key papers on patent citations by them and their coauthors.
4

3

specified region (or regions) of that space. Second, the invention process is cumulative,
that is, inventions build on those that came before and, in turn, facilitate those that come
after. In this ‘geometric’ interpretation, the patent claims delineate the metes and
bounds of the region of technology space over which exclusivity is being granted, while
the citations indicate previously marked off areas that are in some sense built upon by
or connected to the invention being granted.
Thus the citations that appear in a patent (its ‘backward’ citations) inform us
about the technological antecedents of the patented invention. A patent that contains
many citations corresponds to an invention with many antecedents; a patent whose
citations are to technologically diverse previous patents has diverse antecedents; a
patent whose citations are to old patents corresponds to an invention with old
antecedents, and so forth. Conversely, the citations received by a patent from
subsequent patents (‘forward’ citations) inform us about the technological descendants
of the patented invention. A patent that is never cited was a technological dead end. A
patent with many or technologically diverse forward citations corresponds to an
invention that was followed by many or technological diverse descendants.
Note that the discussion so far is entirely definitional. We have said nothing
about the possibility of causal connections between these different attributes of
inventions, or between any of these attributes and the private or social value of the
invention. Ultimately, we are interested in whether, e.g., patents with relatively few
technological antecedents are more or less likely to spawn multiple lines of research or
whether patents that generate many or diverse technological descendants correspond
to inventions that generate large social benefits. It is in large part to be able to say
something about these questions that citation metrics have been developed. In a very
broad sense, citation analysis is predicated on an expectation that the extent and nature
of an invention’s antecedents tells us something about the novelty or ‘radicalness’ of the
invention, and the extent and nature of its descendants tell us something about both its
technological impact and its economic value. But different authors propose or use
different characterizations of citation information to elucidate these ideas.
In practice, writers are not always clear on the underlying concept that a given
metric is intended to measure, and given metrics are used in different contexts as
proxies or indicators for different concepts. In some cases, researchers postulate a
4

relationship between a given citation metric and an underlying concept, and then test
hypotheses about the concept taking that relationship as a given. In other cases
researchers attempt explicitly to validate the extent to which a given metric reflects a
particular underlying conceptual attribute of inventions. We will consider these
different approaches below in the context of specific papers, but for expositional
purposes it is useful to consider five broad categories of approaches:
1. Counts of forward citations as an indicator of subsequent technological impact;
2. Counts of backward citations as an indicator of the extent of reliance on
previous technology;
3. Characterization of both backward and forward citations in terms of
technological diversity and technological distance;
4. Examination of references to non-patent literature as an indicator of science
linkage; and
5. Use of citations as an indicator for private and social value.
We consider each category in turn.

2.1 Forward citations and technological impact
Using the number of forward citations as a measure of technological impact of a
patented invention can be motivated by direct analogy to the larger and pre-existing
bibliometric literature starting with Garfield (1955). Nonetheless, Trajtenberg,
Henderson and Jaffe (1997) undertook to demonstrate the validity of this (and other)
metrics by comparing the citation rate to university patents and corporate patents,
based on a maintained assumption that university patents are more ‘basic’ and hence
have, on average, greater technological impact. To incorporate the cumulative nature of
invention into the metric, they proposed that the importance of an invention be
characterized by the number of forward citations received, plus a fractional weight
multiplied by the number of citations received by those citing patents. That is,
important patents are those that are cited a lot, and are cited by patents that are
themselves relatively highly cited.5 The authors showed that importance by this

The authors report ‘forward importance’ as the number of citations received plus .5 times the number of
citations received by the citing patents, and undertook sensitivity analysis varying this weight between
5

5

definition is, indeed, higher for university patents than for corporate patents, using a
sample of patents assigned to US corporations, matched by patent class and grant date
to patents assigned to US universities. In addition, they discuss qualitatively the highestimportance patents in their sample, and argue that the citing patents can be seen as
technological descendants, and these highly ‘important’ patents are, indeed, subjectively
very important in their respective fields.
More recently, taking advantage of improvements in computing power, scholars
have taken into account the whole stream of citations. For example, Lukach and Lukach
(2007) have proposed computing importance by the PageRank score of patents. This
method is directly inspired from Google’s ‘random surfer’ model and takes into account
the fact that different citations weigh differently depending on the importance of the
citing documents (Brin and Page 1998). However, the authors are not able to validate
their ranking using external measures such that the conditions under which the
PageRank method is more appropriate than a straightforward citation count are
unclear. This approach is a natural extension of earlier work, and begins to move this
line of analysis towards the ‘innovation network’ formulation discussed later in the text.
Albert, Avery, Narin, and McAllister (1991) provide a validation study of the use
of forward citations as an indicator of impact. They reported a strong correlation
between the citation intensities of 77 Kodak silver halide patents and expert evaluations
of technical impact and importance of the patents. Narin (1995) showed that patents
that have attained the legal status of pioneering patents in the United States, as well as
other prominent patents appearing in such patent office publications as 'Hall of Fame'
patents, are very highly cited. Czarnitzki, Hussinger and Schneider (2011) relate a group
of ‘wacky’ patents to control groups and test the extent to which commonly used
metrics are able to identify wacky patents from patents in the control group. Wacky
patents are selected by an employee of the World Intellectual Property Organization
“for their futile nature, as they do not involve a high-inventive step or only marginally
satisfy the ‘non obviousness’ criterion” (p. 131). They find that the number of forward
citations is a good predictor of importance. However, other measures such as originality

.25 and .75. Extending this throughout the citation tree involves a geometrically declining weight, e.g., if
patent E cites patent D which cites patent C which cites patent B which cites patent A, we might consider
patent B to contribute 1 to the importance of A, patent C .5, patent D .25 and patent E .125.

6

and generality (discussed below) were higher for wacky patents. Another interesting
confirmation of patent citations as indicative of technological impact is Benson and
Magee (2015). They identify 28 ‘technological domains’ (e.g., ‘Solar Photovoltaics’ or
‘Genome Sequencing’) in which it is possible to identify a specific metric of the
technological state of the domain (e.g., watts/$ for Solar Photovoltaics’). They take the
exponential rate of improvement of these metrics across domains and across time as the
dependent variable in regressions on various citation metrics of patents in the
technology domain. They find that forward citations are positively related, and the
average age of backward citations negatively related, to the rate of improvement of the
technology over the subsequent ten-year period.

2.2 Backward citations and reliance on previous technology
While it seems clear that important inventions generate more forward citations, the
opposite may hold for backward citations. That is, more trivial inventions are more
extensively rooted in what has come before, while more basic inventions are less
incremental in nature and thus have fewer identifiable antecedents (Trajtenberg,
Henderson and Jaffe 1997). Another way to think of this is that a patent will, to some
extent, tend to cite other patents all the way back along the inventive trajectory upon
which it lies. Patents that are near the beginning of a trajectory are in this sense more
basic, and may be expected to make fewer backward citations because they have less
historical background.
Empirical evidence is rather inconclusive. Trajtenberg, Henderson and Jaffe
(1997) find that university patents (presumably more important than the average
patent) do make fewer citations and cite patents that are themselves less highly cited.
However, von Wartburg, Teichert and Rost (2005) provide a different view. They
correlate a measure of backward citations with expert ratings on the technological value
added (in the form of technical scoring tables) of 107 patents related to four strokes
internal combustion engines. Their backward citations measure counts first and secondgenerations citations received. They obtain a statistically significant correlation
coefficient of 0.38, implying that patents with higher technological value added build on
more references. Liu, Hseuh, Lawrence, Meliksetian, Perlich and Veen (2011) propose a
more in-depth analysis of backward references and patent value. They correlate the

7

number of backward references with the probability that a patent will stand up in court
and find a statistically strong positive association. Overall, it is unclear whether the
number of backward citations captures patent importance.

2.3 Technological distance and diversity
As noted above, one of the basic virtues of patent data is that they provide a nonmarket-based technological classification system for inventions. Looking at the way in
which citations span the technology space defined by the classification scheme is a
natural way to characterize the technological complexion of both an invention’s roots
and its impacts. Broadly speaking, there are two major aspects to be considered,
whether looking forward or backward. One is pure distance: how technologically
different are the patents connected by a citation link, e.g., does a drug patent cite other
patents for compounds in the same chemical class, or patents on other chemicals, or
mechanical or electronic patents? The other is breadth or diversity: independent of
whether that drug patent generally cites other patents that are close to or far from itself,
are they all bunched together in technology space, or are they dispersed far from each
other?
Trajtenberg, Henderson and Jaffe (1997) implement a measure of technological
distance using a three-level representation of the USPTO patent classification system.
The lowest level used is the three-digit original patent class (e.g., Electric lamp and
discharge devices); the next level is the set of two-digit categories (e.g., Electrical
Lighting); the highest level is six very broad fields (e.g., Electrical and Electronic). The
authors axiomatically set two patents in the same patent class at distance 0; two that
are in different classes but the same category at distance .33; two that are in different
categories but the same broad field as distance .66; and two that are not even in the
same field as distance 1. They then calculate the average distance over both forward
and backward citations for each patent in the university and corporate samples. As
expected, they found that the forward citations received by university patents came, on
average, from farther away in technology space, although the difference was small and
not always statistically significant. For backward citations, there was no consistent
pattern, i.e. university patents did not systematically cite earlier patents that were, on
average, technologically more distant by this metric.

8

To measure technological dispersion or diversity, Trajtenberg, Henderson and
Jaffe (1997) proposed 1 minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of concentration
of the citations across patent classes, i.e. 1 minus the sum of squared shares of citations
in each class. This metric is equal to zero if all citations are in the same class, and it
approaches unity as the citations are spread thinly across all classes. The authors
dubbed this metric of diversity ‘generality’ when applied to forward citations, and
‘originality’ when applied to backward citations.6,7 They conjectured that both measures
should be larger for more basic inventions, and therefore expected to be larger for
university patents than for corporate patents. This hypothesis was borne out in the data
for generality measure, but not for originality.
A concept related to generality is that of ‘General Purpose Technology’ or GPT.
GPTs are conceived as technologies that subsequently connect to many different
application or development technologies to allow multiple lines of technology
innovation and diffusion. Frequently mentioned examples are the electric motor in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries, and digital information technology in the late 20th
century. Hall and Trajtenberg (2006) use data from a selected sample of 780 most
highly cited patents that were granted by the USPTO in the years 1967–1999 to
construct generality, number of citations, and patent class growth, for both cited and
citing patents, intended to identify GPTs in their early stages. The paper finds that
highly cited patents differ in almost all respects from the population of all patents (they
take longer to be issued; have twice as many claims; are more likely to have a US origin;
are more likely to be assigned to a US corporation; are more likely to have multiple
assignees; have on average higher citation lags; have a higher generality; are in patent
classes that are growing faster than average). The paper concludes that the identified
measures, although promising, give contradictory messages when taken separately and

For a small number of citations, it is clear that this measure is heavily influenced by the number of
citations, e.g., a patent receiving only two citations cannot possibly have generality greater than .5.
Whether or not this is a problem is largely a matter of interpretation; in some sense it is meaningful to say
that a patent receiving only two citations cannot have a very diverse impact. A different interpretation is
that every invention has a latent or unobserved generality that is randomly realized in the citations it
happens to receive. Under this formulation, the distribution of citations across patent classes is
multinomial, and the observed generality or originality is a biased estimator of the true parameter.
Bronwyn Hall has derived a formula to correct for this bias (Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2001); it produces
a significant correction for patents with just a few citations.
7 Ziedonis (2004) has built on this idea to construct a measure of the fragmentation of ownership rights to
a firm’s complementary patents. Backward citations are stratified by assignee instead of technology class.
6

9

that it is not obvious how to combine those measures to choose a sample of GPT
patents.8 The fundamental difficulty is that we don’t have measures of how generalpurpose a technology is other than broad conceptions of GPT technologies. Thus, while
it seems plausible that general-purposeness would be reflected in citation patterns, it is
hard to pin such patterns down or test their validity.9
Youtie, Iacopetta and Graham (2008) found that nanotechnology patents from
1990–1993 were more general than computer patents and much more general than
drug patents, and interpret this result as evidence that nanotechnology is an emerging
GPT. Moser and Nicholas (2004), however, found that electricity patents from the 1920s
were less general and less highly cited than chemical and mechanical patents from the
same period, suggesting that the relationship between the characteristics that make a
technology a GPT and other characteristics of inventions is complex.
Another concept related to technological distance and diversity is that of a
‘radical’ or ‘breakthrough’ invention. Ahuja and Lampert (2001) propose that radical
inventions are simply the top 1 per cent of patents ranked on citations received in a
given year. Dahlin and Behrens (2005) adopt a more sophisticated approach. They
conceive a ‘radical’ invention within a given technology domain (tennis rackets, in their
application) to be one that recombines previous technology elements in a new and
different way, but which is then imitated and so spawns subsequent patents that
combine technology elements in a manner substantially similar to the radical invention.
They construct a measure of the ‘overlap’ in the respective sets of patents cited by two
different patents, and show that the radical inventions (over-sized and wide-body
rackets, in their application) had little overlap with previous or contemporary patents,
but significant overlap with patents that came after.

Hall and Trajtenberg (2006) explain that the generality measures suffer from the fact that they treat
citations from patents in patent classes different from the cited patents in the same way, although some
patent classes are very different and some are closely related. They suggest that the future research could
construct a weighted generality measure, with weights inversely related to the overall probability that
one class cites another class. To the best of our knowledge no one has implemented such an approach.
9 Hall and Trajtenberg (2006) also show that a disproportionate share of the patents in the extreme upper
tail of the distribution for generality and total forward citations in the period 1967–1999 are IT patents,
suggesting that these metrics may be indicative of a GPT.
8

10

2.4 Linkage to science
As discussed, patents contain references to non-patent documents, the overwhelming
majority of which are scientific papers. On this basis, the number of non-patent
backward citations made by a patent, or the fraction of backward citations that these
non-patent citations represent, has been explored as a metric of the closeness of linkage
between an invention and scientific research.10
Collins and Wyatt (1988) looked at citations to scientific papers from 366
genetics patents granted from 1980 to 1985, in order to trace linkages from basic
research to genetics technology. The United States had the highest number of papers
cited in patents, followed by the United Kingdom, Japan, Germany and France. These
figures were compared to the total output of genetics papers for those countries,
showing some differences, which were interpreted as indicating that the United
Kingdom produced more papers that were useful in developing patented technology
than Germany, France or Japan. The number of citations from patents received per
paper was highest for the United Kingdom, followed by the United States and Germany.
Callaert, Van Looy, Verbeek, Debackere, and Thijs (2006) characterizes nonpatent references in a sample of patents at the USPTO and the European Patent Office
(EPO) from 1991–2001. Non-patent references are found in 34 per cent of USPTO
patents and 38 per cent of EPO patents, comprising about 17 per cent of all references
(patent and non-patent combined). For both the USPTO and EPO, more than half of nonpatent references are journal references. Of the remaining non-patent references, many
can be considered scientific in the broader sense (as they consist of conference
proceedings, books, databases or other non-journal scientific publications), or
technology related. The paper reports that at the USPTO at least 42 per cent of nonjournal non-patent references can be considered scientific in broader sense, and 40 per
cent relate to technological information. For the EPO sample these figures are 77 per
cent and 20 per cent, respectively.

Lemley and Sampat (2012, footnote 12) find that the vast majority of references to non-patent prior art
at the USPTO come from applicants, not examiners, potentially making these a relevant measure of
science dependence.
10

11

Tijssen (2002) provides a note of caution on the use of non-patent references. He
found no relationship between the number of non-patent references and the inventorreported dependence on science in a small (< 100) sample of Dutch patents from 1998–
99. Li, Chambers, Ding, Zhang, and Meng (2014) qualify this finding. They argue that
non-self citations to scientific papers are a noisy measure of science linkage but that
applicant self-citations to scientific papers are indeed informative of science linkage.
Roach and Cohen (2013) matched patent citations to survey reports from R&D lab
managers in the United States, with particular focus on the extent to which patent
citations capture knowledge flows to commercial R&D from publicly funded research.
They find that patent citations reflect codified knowledge. However, citations miss the
reliance on private and contract-based science, as well as basic research. (The
discussion in the section on citations as a measure of knowledge flows considers further
whether non-patent references are an indicator of science dependence.)

2.5 Economic value
As noted above, the (public or private) economic value of an invention is a distinct
concept from its technological impact. Citations are, first and foremost, an indicator of
technological impact. But it turns out that forward citation intensity is, in fact,
correlated with economic value. There are, however, several different concepts of
economic value. First, we can in principle think of the (gross) social value of an
invention, i.e. the total producers’ and consumers’ surplus associated with its use. In
some cases this gross social value may be much greater than the net value, for which we
would subtract off the lost rents that may be suffered by previous technologies made
wholly or partially obsolete. The gross social value is greater than the private value, i.e.
the value to the owner of a patented invention; the net social value may be either
greater or less than the private value, depending on the magnitude of the ‘rent stealing’
effect. For any of these concepts, we can distinguish the value of the invention and the
value of the patented invention, which differ by the value of the legal protection afforded
by the patent grant. In practice, these different value concepts may or may not be
distinguishable, and proxies for value are often used whose mapping onto these
different value concepts may be ambiguous.

12

An early strand of research on citations and economic value was the work of
Francis Narin and his associates seeking to develop indicators based on patent data of
companies’ competitiveness or technological strength. Carpenter, Narin and Woolf
(1981) showed that inventions identified in The Industrial Research Institute IR100
awards are much more highly cited than a random sample of matched patents. Narin,
Noma, and Perry (1987) found that the average citation frequency of a company’s
patent portfolio was associated with increases in firms’ profits and sales among
publicly-traded pharmaceutical companies.
Trajtenberg (1990b) calculated the social welfare gains associated with
successive generations of Computed Tomography (CT) scanners by estimating hedonic
demand functions for the attributes. He then showed that the number of citationweighted patents associated with each generation was statistically predictive of the
magnitude of welfare gains, while the raw or unweighted count of patents was not
correlated with surplus (sample of about 500 patents). This suggests that the gross
social value of these inventions is associated with the citation intensity of the associated
patents. Interestingly, the unweighted patent counts were correlated with the level of
R&D expenditure. He interpreted these findings as suggesting that the number of
patents is associated with the magnitude of research effort, but not indicative of
research success. Counting citation-weighted patents then combines the scale of effort
with a measure of such success and yields a measure of effective research output.
Moser, Ohmstedt and Rhode (2014) identified specific improvements in hybrid
corn and gathered data on the magnitude of the yield improvement they allowed. They
interpret this as measuring the ‘inventive step’ associated with the patent, but as the
measurement is in the use domain rather than strictly in the technology domain it
seems more closely related to social value than to inventive step, per se. They found that
there is, indeed, a strong correlation between yield improvements and citation
intensities. Interestingly, they find that there are a small number of early patents that
are routinely cited in almost all patents in the field. Excluding these citations enhances
the correlation between yield and citation frequency.
Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005) consider the relationship between citation
intensity and the private value of patents by relating citation-weighted patents to the

13

market value of the firm. They confirm that citation weighting greatly improves the
information content of patent counts in terms of predicting market value. In addition,
they find that citations from future patents assigned to the same firm as the original
patentee have a larger associated market value than citations from others.11 They also
find that a disproportionate share of the value associated with patents is associated
with a very small number of highly cited patents. Finally, they find that forward
citations are associated with increases in market value at the time a patent is initially
granted, suggesting that to a significant extent market participants can anticipate the
eventual value of inventions at this early stage, and those expectations are (on average)
then confirmed by subsequent citations.
Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001) provide indirect evidence of the relationship
between citations and value, by assuming that patents that are litigated are, on average,
more valuable than those that are not, and comparing the citation patterns of litigated
patents with a control sample of non-litigated patents. They find that the probability of
litigation rises with the number of claims and the number of forward citations per claim,
while declining with the number of backward citations per claim. Allison, Lemley,
Moore, and Trunkey (2003) undertake a similar approach. Consistent with expectations,
they find that litigated patents are more highly cited. Interestingly, they find that
litigated patents also have more backward citations.
Harhoff, Scherer and Vopel (2003) obtained estimates from patent holders of the
private value of 772 patents with a 1977 German priority date, and that were
maintained to full term. They then examined how that reported value correlated with
publicly observable indicia of patent value, including patent citations (and also the
number of four-digit IPC codes and family size). They found that both the number of
forward citations and the number of backward references to the patent literature are
significantly correlated with patent value (see also Harhoff, Narin, Scherer & Vopel
1999). Interestingly, they also found that the number of citations made to non-patent
literature was predictive of value, particularly in drug and chemical patents. They note
that the predictive value of backward citations (both patent and non-patent) is quite

Since Trajtenberg (1990b) showed that total citations are correlated with social returns, the finding
that self-citations have a stronger effect on market value than other citations suggests that self-citation is
associated with the extent of appropriation of the social returns by the original patenting firm.
11

14

useful, as this information is available at time of patent grant, while forward citations
must be awaited. 12 It is unclear theoretically why backward citations are predictive of
value. For non-patent references, it is plausible that in some fields inventions linked to
science are less incremental and hence more valuable. For backward patent citations, it
may reflect some tendency for bigger, more complex patents to make more backward
citations and also be more valuable on average. In addition, the positive correlation
between the number of backward citations and value may simply arise from the fact
that applicants have stronger incentives to search for prior art for more important
patents (Sampat 2010).
Gambardella, Harhoff and Verspagen (2008) undertook a similar survey of
inventors listed in patent applications at the EPO. They found that the number of
forward citations is by far the best predictor of reported value, but that the fraction of
the variance in reported value explained by any or all of the metrics was relatively low,
consistent with a view of citation-weighted patents as an indicator of value, but one
with substantial noise.
Nicholas (2008) looked at patents granted to US corporations between 1910 and
1939, and identified the citations to those historical patents from the period 1976–
1999. He found that about 15 per cent of the patents from the 1910s received at least
one citation from the recent patents, rising to almost 30 per cent for those from the
1930s. He then goes on to show that citation-weighted patents constructed in this way
are correlated with firm market value. Thus, patents that are still cited after 40 to 60
years are more valuable than those that are not. What we cannot know from this
exercise (since early citations have not been captured) is the extent to which valuable
patents are simply more highly cited at all lag durations, or whether there is greater
persistence in the sense that the rate of obsolescence is lower.
Bessen (2008) related the value of patents, as indicated by both renewal
information and firm financial data, to a number of patent characteristics, including
forward citations received. He estimated that each additional citation is associated, on
average, with an increase in value of about 1 per cent. Nonetheless, the relationship is

Similarly, international family size is a measure predictive of value that is knowable soon after patent
application.
12

15

very noisy, so that even among very highly cited patents, a significant fraction appears
to be of little value; 37 per cent of the patents in the top decile in citation intensity from
1991 were not renewed.
Recent work by Abrams, Akcigit and Popadak (2015) also suggest an overall
positive correlation between forward citations and patent value, but with an invertedU-shaped relationship in which value falls at high citation rates. This finding is
provocative, but it is unclear how robust it is, given the highly selected nature of the
sample and the fact that the value of individual patents was estimated as the value of
patent portfolios divided by the number of patents in the portfolio.
The next section moves away from work focused on citations as indicators of
invention characteristics, and discusses the use of citation data to capture geographic
and temporal dimensions of the innovation process.

3. Citations as an indicator of knowledge flows
3.1 Geographic dimension of knowledge flows
Jaffe, Henderson and Trajtenberg (1993) took on the challenge identified by Krugman
(1991) on the invisibility of knowledge flows. They suggested that patent citations could
be used as a kind of ‘paper trail’ that could allow knowledge flows to be measured and
tracked. They took a sample of patents from universities, large firms and other firms,
and identified all of their citations. They then found, for every citing patent, a
corresponding ‘control’ patent, issued at the same time and in the same primary US
patent class as the citing patent, and compared the frequency with which citing patents
were geographically proximate to the cited patents with the frequency with which the
control patents were proximate. Looking at metropolitan statistical areas, states and
countries, and eliminating citations that are ‘self-citations’ from the same firm, they
showed that citations are indeed more likely to be proximate. For example, at the level
of metropolitan areas, 7–9 per cent of citations (depending on the nature of the cited
patents) were from the same area, while only 1–4 per cent of the control patents were,
and the differences were highly significant statistically.
Thompson and Fox-Kean (2005) criticize the Jaffe, Henderson and Trajtenberg
methodology. They argue that selecting control patents based on the primary patent
class of the citing patents is too rudimentary to capture the heterogeneity of technology.
16

Patents in the same main patent class may be in different subclasses with inherently
different technologies, and patents are assigned to multiple classes, again introducing
heterogeneity not captured by the main patent classification. In response, Henderson,
Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005) agree that it is possible that finer technological controls
might be appropriate, but they point out that slicing things too finely minimizes the
possibility for identifying knowledge flows across subclasses. Ultimately, the question
comes down to the robustness of the localization effect under different identifying
assumptions.
A number of other authors have similarly used citation data to measure
knowledge flows. Almeida and Kogut (1997) compare the patent citations of small and
large semiconductor firms, and find that the citations made by small firms are more
geographically localized. Hicks, Breitzman, Olivastro, and Hamilton (2001) show that US
companies’ citations to university patents exhibit geographic localization, particularly
to patents of nearby public universities. Almeida and Kogut (1999) examine citation
patterns among semiconductor firms in the United States, including data on both the
firms and the inventors. They show that a significant fraction of the geographic
localization of the citations can be traced to specific engineers who move among firms,
but are more likely to move to another nearby firm than to one that is farther away.
Sonn and Storper (2008) show that, despite improvements in communications
technologies, geographical localization has been increasing over time.
Thompson (2006) compares the extent of localization in citations listed by the
inventor to those added by the examiner. He finds localization at both the metropolitan
area and state levels in both the examiner and inventor citations. Inventor citations are
found to be about 20 per cent more likely to match the country of origin of the citing
patent than are examiner citations. In a similar vein, Alcácer and Gittelman (2006)
estimate the probability that a citation is generated by an examiner or an inventor,
conditional on a set of variables that are frequently employed in the knowledge
spillover literature. They find that examiner citations introduce bias for some variables
only (e.g., self-citations). They find no evidence that the degree of geographic proximity
between citing and cited patents differs for inventor and examiner citations.

17

A subtler pitfall in the use of citations to track knowledge flows relates to the
intervention of law firms in the drafting of the patent document. Wagner, Hoisl and
Thoma (2014) show that patents by firms who rely on external agents are more likely to
cite documents that are part of the law firm’s knowledge repository. They take this
result as evidence that law firms help overcome localization. However, a blunter
interpretation is that external agents include citations that the firms were not aware of,
further increasing the noise in patent citation data.
Maurseth and Verspagen (2002) used data on citations among European patents
to construct a region-by-region citations frequency matrix. They then looked at
numerous variables to explain these frequencies. Geographical distance has a negative
and substantial impact on knowledge flows. Controlling for distance, knowledge flows
are greater between regions located within one country than between regions located in
separate countries. The country effect remains even if regions share the same language,
though sharing a language increases the amount of knowledge flows between two
regions by up to 28 per cent. The study also suggests that knowledge flows are industry
specific, and regions’ technological specialization is an important determinant of their
technological interaction.

3.2 Temporal dimension of knowledge flows
Caballero and Jaffe (1993) and Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1999) developed a structured
model of knowledge diffusion across space and time. They postulate that two competing
forces dominate the citation process. Over time, knowledge gradually diffuses, so that
the number of people potentially citing a given patent increases exponentially with
time. But the relevance or usefulness of a bit of knowledge becomes obsolete, leading to
a countervailing exponential depreciation in the likelihood of citations. The parameters
of these two exponential functions can be estimated econometrically. If allowed to vary
across different technologies, different kinds of research organizations, and different
geographic locations, they then capture the rates of diffusion in different areas across
organizations and across space. Jaffe and Trajtenberg show, for example, that the
geographic localization of citations diminishes as time passes, and also that
obsolescence (as captured by declining citation rates) is more rapid in electronic
technologies than in chemical and mechanical technologies.

18

Bacchiocchi and Montobbio (2009) used this double-exponential function to look
at knowledge flows from universities and public research organizations compared to
flows from corporate patents in six countries: France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United
Kingdom and the United States. They found that technology embodied in patents from
universities and public research organizations diffuses more rapidly than that of firms.
The diffusion rates are relatively homogenous across technological fields, but vary
across countries: rapid in the United States and Germany, less so in France and Japan.
Mehta, Rysman and Simcoe (2010) have criticized this diffusion model on the
ground that the age of a citation is computed as the citation year minus the application
year, leading to an identification problem. Because citations received by a patent are
rare before it is issued, the authors propose to use the lag between application year and
grant year as a source of exogenous variation. They find that the citation peak occurs
earlier than suggested by the double-exponential function. However, their method does
not alter differences in the mean citation ages across industries. They conclude that the
double-exponential function provides a good approximation to the non-parametric age
distribution.

3.3 Validation studies
Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Fogarty (2000) report a survey of inventors to test the extent to
which citations in those inventors’ patents correspond to the inventors’ perceptions of
how their inventions depended on earlier knowledge, and how the rate of citation
relates to inventors’ own perceptions of impact or importance. They find that citations
are a valid but noisy indicator of knowledge flows: the likelihood of reported knowledge
impact is significantly higher (both quantitatively and statistically) when a citation link
exists, but a significant fraction of citations (perhaps as high as one half) do not
correspond to any reported knowledge link.
Duguet and MacGarvie (2005) tested the validity of patent citations as a measure
of knowledge flows using data from French firms on their patents and citations,
combined with survey responses regarding sources of knowledge. The total number of
backward citations was correlated with survey answers about R&D and innovation, but
this correlation is weakened by controlling for the number of patents held by the citing
firm. Backward citation rates of French firms can reflect their R&D activities (if the

19

technology is obtained from firms located in the EU), or purchases of equipment goods
(if the source is located outside the EU). In general it can be understood that backward
citations are correlated with learning through R&D collaboration, licensing of foreign
technology, mergers and acquisitions and equipment purchases.
In their analysis, Roach and Cohen (2013, discussed above) found evidence of
both ‘errors of omission’ (reported knowledge flows with no corresponding citations)
and ‘errors of commission’ (observed citations with no corresponding reported
knowledge flows). They conclude that despite these sources of measurement error,
patent citations are likely to reflect meaningful aspects of knowledge flows from public
research. Interestingly, they found that references in patents to non-patent publications
(primarily scientific literature) are a better indicator of knowledge flow than are
citations in commercial patents to the patents of universities and other public labs (cf.
Tijssen 2002).
The next section discusses a third category of citation data research, in which the
focus shifts to using citation links to understand and characterize networks.

4. Citations as links in knowledge or innovation networks
A natural way of representing citation data is in the form of a network. Researchers
have used concepts from network theory to grasp the way the innovation system is
structured and the way knowledge is formed. A first group of studies seek to map key
components of the innovation system (patents, individuals, institutions and regions). A
second group of studies use the network of citations to map technological trajectories.
We review these two applications in turn.

4.1 Mapping patents, individuals, institutions, and regions
Huang, Chiang, and Chen (2003) rely on patent citation data to map Taiwan’s electronic
industry. The researchers identify USPTO patents belonging to 58 relevant Taiwanese
companies as well as the citations made by these patents. They identify the strength of
the relationship between companies by looking at the strength of bibliographic
coupling. Bibliographic coupling is a method proposed by Kessler (1963) that involves
identifying related documents through common cited references. The researchers then
applied cluster analysis on the data produced to identify major sectors of the Taiwanese
electronic industry. Although bibliographic coupling provides rich insights on the
20

relatedness of patent documents, more recent studies make better use of network
analysis theory and tools.
Chen and Hicks (2004) study the citation ‘degree’ distribution of 16 million
citations made to the 3 million USPTO patents granted in the period from 1963 to 1999.
The degree of a ‘node’ (patent) is simply the number of ‘connections’ (citations)
received by the node. They estimate that the distribution follows a power law with an
exponent of 2.89, which is very similar to the parameter obtained for scientific papers
by Dorogovstev and Mendes (2002).13 The fact that the degree distribution of the patent
citation network follows a power-law is indicative of so-called scale-free networks,
which can be seen as networks characterized by large hubs through which knowledge
flows.
Li, Chen, Huang, and Roco (2007) use a patent citation network to study the
knowledge transfer process between entities. In particular they study the efficiency
with which knowledge transfers within the network compared to a random network.
Their measure of efficiency is the average path length between any pair of patents in the
network. They focus on USPTO nanotechnology patents in the period from 1976 to
2004. They find that knowledge transfer across assignees in the citation network is
more efficient than knowledge transfer that would occur in a random network.
Knowledge flow across (assignee) countries is as efficient as a random network.
However knowledge flow across technology fields is less efficient than knowledge flow
that would occur in a random network. In other words, technological distance is a
greater barrier to knowledge flows than geographic distance.
Hung and Wang (2010) examine the characteristics of the citation network
formed by RFID patents. They find that the network can be characterized as a ‘smallworld’ network, i.e. a network in which most nodes can be reached from every other by
a small number of steps. They also find that the network has a power-law connectivity
distribution and exhibits preferential connectivity behavior. That is, a few key patents
have a very large number of connections and the majority of patents have few
connections. The authors conclude that only a limited number of patents play a key role

Cf. Huang, Huang, Chang, Chen, and Lin (2014) who provide evidence that the distribution of patent
citations is more concentrated than the distribution of citations in scientific articles.
13

21

in diffusing RFID technology. This approach provides a more system-based way of
thinking about knowledge flows than simply counting citations: key patents are not only
highly cited patents, but also connect and integrate different technological
trajectories. 14 More detailed analyses of technological trajectories using citation
network are described in the next section.

4.2 Mapping of technological trajectories
Scholars have recently used citation networks to identify technological trajectories that
led to the advent of major technological breakthroughs. The main trajectory, or search
path, is the sequence of links and nodes that is central to the development of a
technology. It represents the main flow of ideas in the development of a technology. The
method was pioneered by Hummon and Doreian (1989) on a citation network of
scientific papers describing the development of DNA theory. This approach shifts the
focus from the nodes of the network (looking at individual patents) to the connections
that these nodes form. It allows identifying key patents through their structural
connectivity in the network. Technologically important patents should belong to the
main paths of the citation network and/or locate at particularly critical junctions within
those paths.
Mina, Ramlogan, Tampubolon, and Metcalfe (2007), Verspagen (2007), and
Fontana, Nuvolari and Verspagen (2009) applied the method to patent citation
networks. Mina et al. (2007) use it to understand how medical knowledge emerges,
grows and evolves. They argue that the approach provides a dynamic view of
innovation that recognizes the long-term, path-dependent and complex nature of
technology. Their case study is based on treatment for coronary artery disease and
covers 5136 USPTO patent documents granted between 1976 and 2003. The authors
seek to identify the main path and ‘islands’ of the network. Islands are small clusters of
inventions whose internal connectedness is relatively superior to the strength of their
outward connections within the global network. The authors argue that islands allow
accounting for the variety of complementary and competing areas of technical expertise
that contributed to the advancement of the technology. They report that the results
Hu, Rousseau, and Chen (2012) provide another study on the importance of patents using their
positions in the citation network. Other applications include, e.g., Liu and Shih (2011) who use the
network formed by patents to improve patent classification.
14

22

form a consistent map of the major scientific and technological trajectories in the
domain.
Fontana, Nuvolari and Verspagen (2009) study the structural connectivity of the
citation network formed by patents related to local area networks (LAN) technology.
Innovation in such a systemic technology has three main features. First, innovation is
distributed: it takes place at the level of individual components but these components
all have to work together. Second, innovations in systems tend to be incremental and to
occur around well-established technical designs. Third, innovations also tend to occur
continuously. The authors argue that the classical approach of assessing the importance
of patents by counting the number of citations they have received may have drawbacks
in such systemic technologies. It may fail to identify concepts and principles that could
act as ‘focusing devices’ for a sequence of inventive activities. By contrast a structural
analysis of the citation network would allow the identification of inventions that have
played a major role in the evolution of LAN technology. They find that the main path
they have identified displays a coherent economic and engineering logic, consistent
with qualitative accounts of the evolution of the Ethernet standard.
One of the most interesting insights of the paper comes from the analysis of
companies owning patents that lie on the main path. No company is ‘dominant’ in the
sense of claiming ownership of the majority of patents on the main path, which the
authors take as evidence that no company is strategically placed along the main path of
knowledge flow. Verspagen (2007) performs a similar analysis for citations among fuel
cell patents. He finds that there are dominant companies: a small number of
organizations hold patents belonging to the main path. Study of the ownership structure
of technologies on the main path provides a novel way of characterizing technology
dominance. It is a promising avenue for research in industrial economics and strategic
management.

5. Pitfalls and best practices in use of citation-based indicators
We take the opportunity of this review to discuss potential pitfalls associated with
patent data. We focus on four key challenges.

23

5.1 Office effects
Institutional differences across jurisdictions induce differences in citation practices
across offices. We briefly summarize two main differences in citation practices between
the EPO/JPO and the USPTO for illustrative purposes. More generally, researchers
should get a clear understanding of citation practices in the office of interest before
using citation-based indicators.15
A first difference is the ‘duty of candor’ in US patent law. Failure to report known
relevant prior art may lead to subsequent revocation of the patent (inequitable conduct
doctrine). There is no duty of candor in European patent law, and applicants do not
have to submit a list of prior art. It follows that search reports at the EPO usually
contain many fewer references than USPTO search reports. In fact, according to EPO
philosophy, “a good search report contains all the technically relevant information
within a minimum number of citations” (Michel & Bettels 2001:189). In addition, since
applicants at the EPO do not bear the same responsibility to disclose prior art as
applicants at the USPTO, the citations come mostly from the examiner. This does not
undermine their interpretation as indicators of impact or value; for example Harhoff,
Scherer and Vopel (2003, discussed above) find EPO citations to be predictive of value.
It does suggest that EPO citations might be less indicative of knowledge flows; although
we are not aware of any empirical analysis of this question comparable to the survey
work of Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Fogarty (2000). In Japan, the patent law was revised in
2002 and imposed on applicants the obligation to disclose prior art. Although not
complying with the disclosure requirement bears less severe consequence than in the
United States, the reform led to a substantial increase in prior art disclosure by
applicants. Takahiro, Nagaoka, and Naito (2015) find that about 8 per cent of citations
came from applicants in the years following the reform, compared to around 4 to 5 per
cent before the reform.
A second important difference with the USPTO is that EPO patent examiners
classify documents cited in particular citation categories (Schmoch 1993). A document
that shows essential features of the invention or questions the inventive step of these

For example, researchers interested in EPO citations should read the “Guidelines for Examination in the
European Patent Office” available on the EPO website.
15

24

features if taken alone is marked with the letter ‘X’. A document that questions the
inventive step if combined with another document is marked with the letter ‘Y’ (hence
‘Y’ citations never occur singly). The letter ‘A’ marks a document that shows the general
state of the art. According to Schmoch (1993:195) a patent document can be highly cited
because it comprises “a good description of the prior art from a didactic point of view.”
The classification provides opportunities for finer analyses. One may want to exclude
class ‘A’ citations for assessing the inventive step of patents, but class ‘A’ citations are
relevant for measuring technological proximity of patents. Additional classification
codes exist; see Webb, Dernis, Harhoff, and Hoisl (2005) for a discussion. Examiners at
the JPO also classify citations into categories. In particular, they flag whether citations
are used as ground for rejection, similar to ‘X’ and ‘Y’ citations at the EPO, or whether
they are used for assessing the application but do not serve as a basis for rejection,
similar to ‘A’ citations at the EPO (Goto & Motohashi 2007).
The classification into categories opens the door to original uses of citation data.
For example, von Graevenitz, Wagner and Harhoff (2011) identify patent thickets at the
EPO using X and Y citations. Their measure identifies constellations in which three firms
each own patents that block patent applications of the other two firms (so-called
triples). The authors show that density of triples in complex technology areas has risen
steadily since the early 1980s, whereas the density of triples has been constant in
discrete technology areas. Guellec, Martinez and Zuniga (2012) use ‘X’ and ‘Y’ citations
together with administrative information on the patent examination process
(withdrawal and grant events) to identify defensive patents, i.e. patent applications
used to pre-empt others from getting their patents granted. Palangkaraya, Webster and
Jensen (2011) posit that patents with a higher inventive step will generate more ‘X’ and
‘Y’ citations, and use this information to proxy for the probability of grant ex-ante.
Beyond institutional differences in the use of citations, researchers have also
illustrated the presence of home bias in citation practices. Bacchiocchi and Montobbio
(2010) analyze the geographic distribution of cited documents for a set of 657,151
equivalent patents filed at the EPO and the USPTO. In theory, distributions should be
similar since they refer to the same invention. They find that the frequency of US-cited
patents at the USPTO exceeds 65 per cent, while the frequency at the EPO is less than 40
per cent. That examiners have a tendency to cite local documents does not come as a
25

surprise.16 However, it illustrates an important limitation of the use of citations for
assessing cross-border knowledge flows.

5.2 Time and technology field effects
The number of citations received by a patent increases as time passes such that there
are strong cohort effects. This issue can be dealt with in a straightforward manner by
counting citations received in a fixed time interval (e.g., citations received up to five
years after grant). A more serious concern is the increase over time of citations made
per patent. Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001) report that the average patent issued in
1999 made over twice as many citations as the average patent issued in 1975 (10.7
versus 4.7 citations). Although this issue does not affect the comparison of patents
within a cohort, citation inflation makes it challenging to compare patents across
cohorts. Analogously, citation practices and the intensity of activity vary by technology
fields, so that what constitutes a high citation rate in one field may be modest or small
for another field.17 The authors discuss two econometric techniques to deal with
citation inflation and varying intensities by field: scaling citation counts by “dividing
them by the average citation count for a group of patents to which the patent of interest
belongs”; and identifying the multiple biases on citation rates via econometric
estimation. Marco (2007) provides a recent illustration of the latter technique. He
argues that by estimating a hazard rate based only on factors that are correlated to
citation inflation rather than value, residuals can be used to measure latent patent
value. For example, the ratio of observed citations to predicted citations may represent
a proxy of patent value. Such an approach is an important step forward, although it is
difficult to identify factors that are truly exogenous to value.
A broader question, which has received little coverage in the literature, relates to
differences in patenting and citation practices across technology fields. We know that
the propensity to patent differs across fields (Cohen, Nelson & Walsh 2000) and that the
relevance of patent data as innovation indicator therefore also varies across fields (e.g.,

For example, there is a substantial cost to including non-English references at the USPTO. When using a
foreign language reference in a rejection, examiners should provide a translation of the entire document.
17 Technology fields are tracked using the patent office classification systems. Historically, the United
States has maintained its own classification (USPC), while other offices use the International Patent
Classification (IPC). The USPTO has recently introduced a Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) based
on the IPC, and is phasing out the USPC.
16

26

Danguy, de Rassenfosse & van Pottelsberghe 2014). However, to the best of our
knowledge, no study has investigated in a systematic manner how differences across
fields affect the relevance of patent citation data.

5.3 Examiner effects
Cockburn, Koru and Stern (2002) show that there is substantial examiner
heterogeneity, e.g., in terms of variations in tenure at the USPTO and in the average
approval time per issued patent. Such heterogeneity translates into variations in
outcomes of the examination process — such as in the volume and pattern of citations
made.18 Lemley and Sampat (2012) demonstrate the presence of an examiner effect, in
the sense that more experienced examiners cite less prior art. Alcácer and Gittelman
(2009) painted a picture of examiner-added citations across key strata of patent data.
They report that the proportion of citations added by examiners is higher for patents:
by foreign applicants to the USPTO; by applicants with a large patent portfolio; and by
applicants in electronics, communications, and computer-related fields. Criscuolo and
Verspagen (2008) perform a similar analysis for EPO patent data. They show that the
share of inventor citations has been declining from about 14 per cent in 1985 to 9 per
cent in 2000. In addition, there is also substantial variation across fields. More than 20
per cent of citations in organic chemistry patents were added by the inventor, while for
information technology patents this share is 4 per cent. 19
Examiner intervention may bias the information content of citations. It may
undermine the use of citations as a measure of knowledge flow, since the inventors may
not have even been aware of the patents cited by examiners at the time of invention.
However, examiner citations may be taken as a valid reflection of technological and
economic value. In this spirit, Hegde and Sampat (2009) show that examiner citations
have a much stronger relationship with renewal probability (a measure of private
value) than the number of applicant citations.

Alcácer and Gittelman (2006) estimate that examiners insert two-thirds of citations on the average
patent, and 40 per cent of all patents have all citations added by examiners.
19 There are few country-specific studies. See Azagra-Caro, Mattsson and Perruchas (2011) for Spanish
evidence.
18

27

5.4 Strategic effects
Variations in the number of examiner-added citations may also come from differences
in applicants’ incentives to search for or disclose prior art. Recent research suggests
that citing prior art (or not) is a strategic decision. Atal and Bar (2010) study firms’
incentives to search for unknown prior art. Although applicants at the USPTO have a
duty to disclose what they know, they have no duty to search for prior art and may be
better off by remaining ignorant. The authors show theoretically that firms search more
when R&D investment (a proxy for innovation quality) and patenting costs are higher.
Sampat (2010) provides empirical data on when applicants search for prior art. He
shows that applicants contribute more prior art for their more important inventions. He
also shows that applicants are more likely to search for prior art in fields where
individual patents are important for appropriating returns from R&D (chemicals and
drugs) and less likely to do so in industries where firms tend to accumulate patent
portfolios for other strategic reasons (computers and communications, electronics and
electrical, and mechanical).
Lampe (2012) focuses on applicants’ decision to disclose known prior art. He
identifies ‘voluntary withholding’ of citations to prior art material by looking only at
citations that were present on prior patents issued to the same firm. He estimates that
applicants withhold between 21 per cent and 33 per cent of relevant citations. The rate
is higher for firms applying for computer and electronic patents (25 to 42 per cent) and
lower for firms applying for drug and chemical patents (8 to 22 per cent). More
generally, Lampe finds that the likelihood of citation is positively correlated with
proxies of patent value (number of claims and forward citations) and negatively
correlated with the size of applicant patent portfolios.

6. Conclusion
The use of patent citation data in social science research has exploded in the last two
decades. As just one indication, the frequency of appearance of the term ‘patent citation’
in scientific documents listed in Google Scholar increased 10-fold between 2000 and
2014 (Appendix A). As is often the case, this increase reflects increases in both supply
and demand. On the supply side, the digitization of the patent office records, combined
with the increased power of computers to analyze them, makes analyses possible today

28

that simply could not have been undertaken 25 years ago. The number of scientific
documents referencing the NBER patent citation data file is likewise continuously
increasing (Appendix A). On the demand side, intangible assets are increasingly seen as
a source—some would argue the dominant source—of economic returns. By definition,
intangible assets are hard to track and measure, and so researchers interested in
diverse questions about knowledge accumulation and diffusion, innovation, firm
strategy and regional economic growth seek measures that convey information about
the sources and consequences of these assets.
Neither of these trends is likely to reverse, so interest in measures of this kind is
likely to continue to grow. Recent developments in computational linguistics may allow
for construction of measures that are conceptually related to citations but use all of the
information contained in the patent text rather than relying solely on the links between
patents that are explicitly identified via citation. It is now possible, for example, to
identify connections between a patent and its antecedents by measuring the frequency
with which important words are used in both patents, to measure novelty by identifying
patents that use a certain technical term or combination of words in a particular phrase
for the first time, and to measure impact by counting the number of subsequent patents
that use such a phrase (e.g., Packalen & Bhattacharya 2015). Younge and Khun (2015)
use more advanced techniques to develop a text-based pairwise similarity comparison
of any and every two patents at the USPTO. These new approaches have not yet been
subjected to the kind of validation that has demonstrated the economic significance of
citations, but because they utilize more information, they offer the promise of a valuable
broadening and deepening of the research possibilities.
A more mundane, but equally important task, is to further validate citation
indicators. This applies to both established and novel indicators, at both the USPTO and
other offices. For example it is unclear whether the count of backward citations proxies
for patent importance. Even the link between forward citations and economic value, one
of the most established and used indicators, is not well understood. In a similar vein,
little research exists on technology field differences on the relevance of patent citation
data. The need for validation studies will grow more pressing as new indicators are
being developed and more patent offices make their data available. Similarly, legislative
changes affect citation practices in non-trivial ways, and conclusions drawn using data
29

from one time period are not necessarily valid in another time period. This calls for a
continuous assessment of the validity of citation indicators.
Another exciting area of research is the further application of network theory
and analysis tools to the patent citation network. For example, the identification of key
technologies and actors on the main knowledge path promises to greatly improve our
understanding of industry dynamics and the knowledge creation process. A limitation of
current research in the area is the insularity of two communities of scholars. Studies by
scholars using advanced network analysis tools offer little practical implications,
whereas studies by scholars looking at real-world implications use quite basic network
analysis tools. A promising way forward is to better integrate the technical and the
practical aspects of network analysis.
Finally, researchers realize that the patent citation generation process is complex
but more work needs to be done to understand it. The complexity of the patent citation
generation process is a blessing and a curse. Whereas it may distort the reality in an
undesirable fashion, it may also provide a window into the incentives faced by
inventors, patent attorneys and examiners and serve as a source of econometric
identification. The example of examiner-added citations is a case in point. Whereas
citations made by examiners arguably weaken the measurement of knowledge flows,
they also strengthen the measurement of patent value.

30

References
Abrams, D., Akcigit, U., Popadak, J. (2015). Patent Value and Citations: Creative
Destruction or Strategic Disruption? University of Pennsylvania Law School PIER
Working Paper 13-065.
Ahuja, G., & Lampert, C. M. (2001). Entrepreneurship in the large corporation: A
longitudinal study of how established firms create breakthrough inventions.
Strategic Management Journal, 22(6–7), 521–543.
Albert, M. B., Avery, D., Narin, F., & McAllister, P. (1991). Direct validation of citation
counts as indicators of industrially important patents. Research policy, 20(3), 251–
259.
Alcácer, J., & Gittelman, M. (2006). Patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows:
The influence of examiner citations. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4),
774–779.
Alcacer, J., Gittelman, M., & Sampat, B. (2009). Applicant and examiner citations in US
patents: An overview and analysis. Research Policy, 38(2), 415–427.
Allison, J. R., Lemley, M. A., Moore, K. A., & Trunkey, R. D. (2003). Valuable patents.
Georgetown Law Journal, 92, 435.
Almeida, P., & Kogut, B. (1997). The exploration of technological diversity and the
geographic localization of innovation. Small Business Economics 9, 21–31.
Almeida, P., & Kogut, B. (1999). Localization of knowledge and the mobility of engineers
in regional networks. Management science, 45(7), 905–917.
Atal, V., & Bar, T. (2010). Prior art: To search or not to search. International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 28(5), 507–521.
Azagra-Caro, J. M., Mattsson, P., & Perruchas, F. (2011). Smoothing the lies: The
distinctive effects of patent characteristics on examiner and applicant citations.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(9), 1727–
1740.
Bacchiocchi, E., & Montobbio, F. (2009). Knowledge diffusion from university and public
research. A comparison between US, Japan and Europe using patent citations. The
Journal of Technology Transfer, 34(2), 169–181.

31

Bacchiocchi, E., & Montobbio, F. (2010). International Knowledge Diffusion and
Home-bias Effect: Do USPTO and EPO Patent Citations Tell the Same Story?. The
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 112(3), 441–470.
Benson, C. L., & Magee, C. L. (2015). Quantitative determination of technological
improvement from patent data. PLoS ONE, 10(4): e0121635.
Bessen, J. (2008). The value of US patents by owner and patent characteristics. Research
Policy, 37(5), 932–945.
Brin, S., & Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine.
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 30, 107–117.
Caballero, R. J., & Jaffe, A. B. (1993). How high are the giants' shoulders: An empirical
assessment of knowledge spillovers and creative destruction in a model of economic
growth. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993, Volume 8 (pp. 15–86). MIT press.
Callaert, J., Van Looy, B., Verbeek, A., Debackere, K., & Thijs, B. (2006). Traces of prior
art: An analysis of non-patent references found in patent documents. Scientometrics,
69(1), 3–20.
Carpenter, M. P., & Narin, F. (1983). Validation study: Patent citations as indicators of
science and foreign dependence. World Patent Information, 5(3), 180–185.
Carpenter, M. P., Narin, F., & Woolf, P. (1981). Citation rates to technologically important
patents. World Patent Information, 3(4), 160–163.
Chen, C., & Hicks, D. (2004). Tracing knowledge diffusion. Scientometrics, 59(2), 199–
211.
Clark, C. V. (1976). Obsolescence of the patent literature. Journal of Documentation,
32(1), 32–52.
Cockburn, I. M., Kortum, S., & Stern, S. (2002). Are all patent examiners equal?: The
impact of characteristics on patent statistics and litigation outcomes. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8980.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting their intellectual assets:
appropriability conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent or not. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7552.
Collins, P., & Wyatt, S. (1988). Citations in patents to the basic research literature.
Research Policy, 17(2), 65–74.

32

Cotropia, C. A., Lemley, M. A., & Sampat, B. (2013). Do applicant patent citations matter?
Research Policy, 42(4), 844–854.
Criscuolo, P., & Verspagen, B. (2008). Does it matter where patent citations come from?
Inventor vs. examiner citations in European patents. Research Policy, 37(10), 1892–
1908.
Czarnitzki, D., Hussinger, K., & Schneider, C. (2011). “Wacky” patents meet economic
indicators. Economics Letters, 113(2), 131–134.
Dahlin, K. B., & Behrens, D. M. (2005). When is an invention really radical?: Defining and
measuring technological radicalness. Research Policy, 34(5), 717–737.
Danguy, J., de Rassenfosse, G., & van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2013). On the
origins of the worldwide surge in patenting: an industry perspective on the R&Dpatent relationship. Industrial and Corporate Change, 23(2), 535–572.
Dorogovtsev, S. N., & Mendes, J. F. (2002). Evolution of networks. Advances in physics,
51(4), 1079–1187.
Duguet, E., & MacGarvie, M. (2005). How well do patent citations measure flows of
technology? Evidence from French innovation surveys. Economics of Innovation and
New Technology, 14(5), 375–393.
Fontana, R., Nuvolari, A., & Verspagen, B. (2009). Mapping technological trajectories as
patent citation networks. An application to data communication standards.
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 18(4), 311–336.
Gambardella, A., Harhoff, D., & Verspagen, B. (2008). The value of European patents.
European Management Review, 5(2), 69–84.
Garfield, E. (1955). Citation indexes for science: A new dimension in documentation
through association of ideas. Science, 122(3159), 108–111.
Garfield, E. (1966). Patent Citation Indexing and the Notions of Novelty, Similarity, and
Relevance. Journal of Chemical Documentation, 6(2), 63–65.
Gay, C., & Le Bas, C. (2005). Uses without too many abuses of patent citations or the
simple economics of patent citations as a measure of value and flows of knowledge.
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 14(5), 333–338.
Goto, A., & Motohashi, K. (2007). Construction of a Japanese Patent Database and a first
look at Japanese patenting activities. Research Policy, 36(9), 1431–1442.

33

Griliches, Z. (1979). Issues in assessing the contribution of research and development to
productivity growth. The Bell Journal of Economics, 92–116.
Griliches, Z. (1990). Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey. Journal of
Economic Literature, 28(4), 1661–1707.
Guellec, D., Martinez, C., & Zuniga, P. (2012). Pre-emptive patenting: securing market
exclusion and freedom of operation. Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
21(1), 1–29.
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (2001). The NBER patent citation data file:
Lessons, insights and methodological tools. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 8498.
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A., & Trajtenberg, M. (2005). Market value and patent citations. RAND
Journal of economics, 36(1), 16–38.
Hall, B. H. & Trajtenberg, M. (2006). Uncovering GPTs using patent data. In: Antonelli, C.,
Foray, D., Hall, B.H., Steinmuller, W.E. (Eds.), New Frontiers in the Economics of
Innovation and New Technology—Essays in Honor of Paul A. David. Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Harhoff, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F. M., & Vopel, K. (1999). Citation frequency and the value
of patented inventions. Review of Economics and statistics, 81(3), 511–515.
Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. M., & Vopel, K. (2003). Citations, family size, opposition and the
value of patent rights. Research Policy, 32(8), 1343–1363.
Hegde, D., & Sampat, B. (2009). Examiner citations, applicant citations, and the private
value of patents. Economics Letters, 105(3), 287–289.
Henderson, R., Jaffe, A., & Trajtenberg, M. (2005). Patent citations and the geography of
knowledge spillovers: A reassessment: Comment. American Economic Review, 95(1)
461–464.
Hicks, D., Breitzman, T., Olivastro, D., & Hamilton, K. (2001). The changing composition
of innovative activity in the US—a portrait based on patent analysis. Research
Policy, 30(4), 681–703.
Hu, X., Rousseau, R., & Chen, J. (2012). A new approach for measuring the value of
patents based on structural indicators for ego patent citation networks. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 63(9), 1834–1842.

34

Huang, M. H., Chiang, L. Y., & Chen, D. Z. (2003). Constructing a patent citation map using
bibliographic coupling: A study of Taiwan's high-tech companies. Scientometrics,
58(3), 489–506.
Huang, M. H., Huang, W. T., Chang, C. C., Chen, D. Z., & Lin, C. P. (2014). The greater
scattering phenomenon beyond Bradford's law in patent citation. Journal of the
Association for Information Science and Technology, 65(9), 1917–1928.
Hummon, N. P., & Dereian, P. (1989). Connectivity in a citation network: The
development of DNA theory. Social Networks, 11(1), 39–63.
Hung, S. W., & Wang, A. P. (2010). Examining the small world phenomenon in the patent
citation network: a case study of the radio frequency identification (RFID) network.
Scientometrics, 82(1), 121–134.
Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (1999). International knowledge flows: evidence from
patent citations. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 8(1–2), 105–136.
Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (2002). Patents, citations, and innovations: A window on the
knowledge economy. Cambridge: MIT press.
Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., & Fogarty, M. S. (2000). Knowledge Spillovers and Patent
Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors. American Economic Review 90(2),
215–218; also published with additional detail as “The Meaning of Patent Citations:
Report on the NBER/Case-Western Reserve Survey of Patentees,” in Jaffe and
Trajtenberg (2002), op cit.
Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., & Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108(3), 577–598.
Kessler, M. M. (1963). Bibliographic coupling between scientific papers. American
documentation, 14(1), 10–25.
Krugman, P. R. (1991). Geography and trade. MIT press.
Kuznets, S. (1962). Inventive activity: Problems of definition and measurement. In The
rate and direction of inventive activity: Economic and social factors (pp. 19–52).
Princeton University Press.
Lampe, R. (2012). Strategic citation. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 320–333.
Lanjouw, J. & Schankerman, M., 2001. Characteristics of patent litigation: a window on
competition. RAND journal of economics, 32(1), pp.129–151.

35

Lemley, M., & Sampat, B. (2012). Examiner characteristics and patent office outcomes.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3), 817–827.
Lerner, J., & Seru, A. (2015). The use and misuse of patent data: Issues for corporate
finance and beyond. Harvard Business School Mimeo.
Li, R., Chambers, T., Ding, Y., Zhang, G., & Meng, L. (2014). Patent citation analysis:
Calculating science linkage based on citing motivation. Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology, 65(5), 1007–1017.
Li, X., Chen, H., Huang, Z., & Roco, M. C. (2007). Patent citation network in
nanotechnology (1976–2004). Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 9(3), 337–352.
Liu, Y., Hseuh, P. Y., Lawrence, R., Meliksetian, S., Perlich, C., & Veen, A. (2011). Latent
graphical models for quantifying and predicting patent quality. In Proceedings of the
17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining
(pp. 1145–1153).
Liu, D. R., & Shih, M. J. (2011). Hybrid-patent classification based on patent-network
analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
62(2), 246–256.
Lukach, R., & Lukach, M. (2007). Ranking USPTO patent documents by importance using
random surfer method (pagerank). Available at SSRN 996595.
Marco, A. C. (2007). The dynamics of patent citations. Economics Letters, 94(2), 290–
296.
Maurseth, P. B., & Verspagen, B. (2002). Knowledge spillovers in Europe: a patent
citations analysis. The Scandinavian journal of economics, 104(4), 531–545.
Mehta, A., Rysman, M., & Simcoe, T. (2010). Identifying the age profile of patent
citations: New estimates of knowledge diffusion. Journal of Applied Econometrics,
25(7), 1179–1204.
Meyer, M. (2000). What is special about patent citations? Differences between scientific
and patent citations. Scientometrics, 49(1), 93–123.
Michel, J., & Bettels, B. (2001). Patent citation analysis. A closer look at the basic input
data from patent search reports. Scientometrics, 51(1), 185–201.
Mina, A., Ramlogan, R., Tampubolon, G., & Metcalfe, J. S. (2007). Mapping evolutionary
trajectories: Applications to the growth and transformation of medical knowledge.
Research policy, 36(5), 789–806.
Moser, P., & Nicholas, T. (2004). Was electricity a general purpose technology? The
American Economic Review, 94(2), 388–394.
Moser, P., Ohmstedt, J., & Rhode, P. W. (2014). Patent citations and the size of patented
inventions - Evidence from Hybrid Corn (p. 48). Available at SSRN.

36

Narin, F. (1995). Patents as indicators for the evaluation of industrial research output.
Scientometrics, 34(3), 489–496.
Narin, F., & Noma, E. (1985). Is technology becoming science? Scientometrics, 7(3–6),
369–381.
Narin, F., Noma, E., & Perry, R. (1987). Patents as indicators of corporate technological
strength. Research policy, 16(2), 143–155.
Nicholas, T. (2008). Does innovation cause stock market runups? Evidence from the
great crash. The American Economic Review, 1370–1396.
Packalen, M., & Bhattacharya, J. (2015). New ideas in invention. NBER Working Paper
20922.
Palangkaraya, A., Webster, E., & Jensen, P. H. (2011). Misclassification between patent
offices: evidence from a matched sample of patent applications. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 93(3), 1063–1075.
Roach, M., & Cohen, W. M. (2013). Lens or prism? Patent citations as a measure of
knowledge flows from public research. Management Science, 59(2), 504–525.
Sampat, B. N. (2010). When do applicants search for prior art? Journal of Law and
Economics, 53(2), 399–416.
Schmoch, U. (1993). Tracing the knowledge transfer from science to technology as
reflected in patent indicators. Scientometrics, 26(1), 193–211.
Schmookler, Jacob (1966). Invention and economic growth. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Sonn, J. W., & Storper, M. (2008). The increasing importance of geographical proximity
in

knowledge

production:

an

analysis

of

US

patent

citations,

1975–

1997. Environment and Planning A, 40, 1020–1039.
Takahiro, M., Nagaoka, S., & Naito, Y., 2015, Effects of stronger disclosure rule on
applicants’ behavior and on examination efficiency: Evidence from Japan. Paper
presented at EPIP 2015 conference at the University of Glasgow.
Thompson, P. (2006). Patent citations and the geography of knowledge spillovers:
evidence from inventor-and examiner-added citations. The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 88(2), 383–388.
Thompson, P., & Fox-Kean, M. (2005). Patent citations and the geography of knowledge
spillovers: A reassessment. American Economic Review, 450–460.

37

Tijssen, R. J. (2002). Science dependence of technologies: evidence from inventions and
their inventors. Research policy, 31(4), 509–526.
Trajtenberg, Manuel (1990a). Economic analysis of product innovation: The case of CT
scanners. Vol. 160. Harvard University Press, 1990.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990b). A penny for your quotes: Patent citations and the value of
innovations. The Rand Journal of Economics, 21(1), 172–187.
Trajtenberg, M., Henderson, R., & Jaffe, A. (1997). University versus corporate patents: A
window on the basicness of invention. Economics of Innovation and new technology,
5(1), 19–50.
Verspagen, B. (2007). Mapping technological trajectories as patent citation networks: A
study on the history of fuel cell research. Advances in Complex Systems, 10(01), 93–
115.
von Graevenitz, G., Wagner, S., & Harhoff, D. (2011). How to measure patent thickets—A
novel approach. Economics Letters, 111(1), 6–9.
von Wartburg, I., Teichert, T., & Rost, K. (2005). Inventive progress measured by multistage patent citation analysis. Research Policy, 34(10), 1591–1607.
Wagner, S., Hoisl, K., & Thoma, G. (2014). Overcoming localization of knowledge—the
role of professional service firms. Strategic management journal, 35(11), 1671–1688.
Webb, C., Dernis, H., Harhoff, D., & Hoisl, K. (2005). Analysing European and
International Patent Citations: A set of EPO patent database building blocks. OECD
STI Working Paper 2005/09.
Youtie, J., Iacopetta, M., & Graham, S. (2008). Assessing the nature of nanotechnology:
can we uncover an emerging general purpose technology? The Journal of Technology
Transfer, 33(3), 315–329.
Younge, K, & Kuhn, J. (2015). Patent similarity: A vector space model. Mimeo, Ecole
polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne.
Ziedonis, R. H. (2004). Don't fence me in: Fragmented markets for technology and the
patent acquisition strategies of firms. Management Science, 50(6), 804–820.

38

Appendix A
Figure A plots the yearly number of scientific articles listed in Google Scholar that
contain the term ‘patent citation’ (blue line), and the number of articles citing the NBER
patent citation data file described in Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001) (red dashed
line). One can reasonable assume that the latter group of articles forms a subset of the
former group.

Figure A. Number of scientific articles listed in Google Scholar.

Notes: HJT refers to Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001).

39

