                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              NEW DIRECTIONS IN THE RELATIONSHIP
               BETWEEN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DEBT




                    Benjamin M. Friedman




                   Working Paper No. 2186




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                         March 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2186
                                                   March 1987




       New Directions In The Relationship Between Public and Private Debt




                                     ABSTRACT




     Until the 1980s the outstanding indebtedness of' government and

private—sector borrowers in the United States exhibited sufficient negative

covariatiori that total outstanding debt remained steady relative to

nonfinancial economic activity. Three hypotheses —— one based on lenders'

behavior, one on borrowers' behavior, and one on credit market institutional

arrangements —-   provide potential explanations for this phenomenon. Since 1980
the U.S. debt markets have departed from these previously prevailing patterns,

however, as both government and private borrowing have risen sharply.




                                       Benjamin M. Friedman
                                       Harvard University
                                       Department of Economics
                                       Littauer Center 127
                                       Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                                              January, 1987




       NEW DIRECTIONS IN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DEBT


                               Benjamin M. Friedman
                                Harvard University



     The emergence during the l980s of persistent U.S. Government budget

deficits on a scale unprecedented in the nation's prior peacetime experience,

coupled with a strong increase in borrowing both by businesses and by

individual Americans, has focused renewed attention on the long—standing

question of what relationship (if any) connects the economy's public— and

private—sector indebtedness.

     This unusual set of developments raises scientific questions as well as

questions of public policy. The most widely discussed issue at the policy

level has been the concern that so large a federal deficit, persisting even at

near—full employment, is impairing the economy's long—run growth and

competitiveness by absorbing so much saving as to "crowd out" investment in

productive new plant and equipment. The private sector's mounting indebtedness

has also raised concerns of financial fragility, in that business and

individual borrowers may not be able to meet their obligations in the event of

disappointing growth in their cash flows.

     At a more fundamental level, this departure from previously prevailing

regularities offers an opportunity to gain new perspectives on the underlying

behavior of borrowers and lenders. Economics, after all, is not a laboratory
                                      —2—

science. Controlled experiments are impossible at the macroeconomic level, and

the data available for empirical analysis, generated as they are by the complex

interaction of market dynamics, government policies, and external shocks, too

often exhibit insufficient variation to unravel the diverse causal forces at

work. Observed outcomes exhibiting variation well outside the range of prior

experience present new opportunities as well as new challenges.

     Until the 1980s, a long—standing regularity characterizing the U.S. debt

markets was that public— and private—sector borrowing exhibited sufficient

negative covariation over time, both cyclically and secularly, that the

combined indebtedness of all borrowers remained roughly steady in relation to

U.S. nonfinancial economic activity. Yet there is no a priori reason why

public and private debt need covary negatively, or why total debt outstanding

need be constant in relation to income. Why then did these relationships

obtain for so long? Did they reflect the behavior of borrowers, or lenders?

Or both? What implications do plausible hypotheses about borrowers' or

lenders' behavior in this context bear for other unsettled questions about

economic behavior, or for policy issues like how government deficits affect

private capital formation, or what level of private—sector indebtedness would

threaten the economy's financial stability?

     The sharp departure from prior relationships exhibited by the U.S. debt

markets since 1980 should now make it easier to answer questions like these.

Given economists' limited opportunities to observe the phenomena they study,

explanations for change are more accessible and more readily testable than

explanations for invariance. If so major a feature of the U.S. financial

system has now changed so markedly, then something else —— plausibly related to

financial outcomes through understandable representations of economic behavior
                                         —3—


——   must have changed as well. Establishing the central connections involved,

and exploring their implications for other behavioral and policy questions, isa

research challenge of substantial importance. In economics as in other

disciplines, diagnosis must precede prescription.



Public and Private Debt Before the 1980s

      Figure 1 illustrates the stable pre—1980 relationship between debt and

economic activity by plotting the yearend credit market indebtedness of all

U.S. obligors other than financial intermediaries, expressed as a percentage of

fourth—quarter gross national product (seasonably adjusted), since the end of

the Korean War.(1) During 1953—1980 the economy's total debt ratio

fluctuated narrowly, with mean 137.1% (that is, just over $1.37 of debt for

every $1 of GNP), standard deviation 2.9%, high 1112.8% (in 19611), and low

131.5% (in 1956). What little fluctuation occurred mostly followed the

business cycle, with the debt ratio typically rising a point or two in

recession years (when GNP, in the denominator, was below trend) and falling

back during expansions. There is no evidence of any time trend.

      This stability In the total debt ratio stands in contrast to the variation

of the five underlying sector components shown in Figure 1, which exhibited

substantial variation throughout this period. In brief, the secular post—war

rise in private debt outstanding largely mirrored a major decline (relative to

GNP) in public debt, while cyclical bulges in public debt issuance (mostly due

to recession—induced shortfalls of tax revenues) had their counterpart in

recessionary reductions in private borrowing. (2)

      Figure   2 provides a broader historical perspective by plotting similar
data beginning with the l920s. For    this longer sample as well,   there is no
evidence   of any time trend in the total debt ratio. The 1921—30 mean of 133.2%

differs only marginally from the mean of 137.0% for 1971-80. Over these six
                                       —1$—


decades the ratio rose significantly only during the depression years 1931—35,

when GNP had declined sharply and much of the private—sector debt on record had

defaulted de facto.(3) By comparison, World War II appears as only a minor

episode from this perspective, since the enormous wartime bulge in federal debt

was largely offset by a sharp decline in the relative indebtedness of borrowers

in the economy's private sector.

     What makes this stability of the total debt ratio especially striking is

that it did not represent merely a sum of individually stable parts. The

indebtedness of specific borrowing sectors exhibited substantial fluctuation,

but typically in a sufficiently offsetting way that the total debt ratio stayed

close to the norm of about 135%. In short, the respective sectors' debt ratios

jointly exhibited substantial negative covariation over time.

     The dimension of this negative oovariation that bears most directly on key

questions of economic behavior and public policy is that between public— and

private—sector debt. Table 1 summarizes this comovenient by showing simple

correlation coefficients relating the federal government's debt ratio to

several different measures of the private sector's debt ratio, again based on

yearend data. The evidence of negative covariation persists for 1921—80 as a

whole and for several different subperiods (including one omitting the

depression years), thereby indicating that the offsetting behavior of public

and private debt before the 1980s was not due merely to a few outlier

observations. Regression analysis, allowing for time trends and other factors

like the use of GNP to scale the data, also show similar evidence.



ThrDotheses Exolainin the Stable Debt Ratio

     There is no known reason, based on strictly a priori grounds, why an

economy's outstanding public— plus private—sector debt need bear any specific
% ofGNP




15i



                                             Total Nonfinancial Debt



1




          Federal
          Government                                                         Households
                                           Nonfinancial Business
                                           Corporations
                                                                                    —
                            —— — — — — —— —               —
          -5-- —                              —. —. —. — —. .—.
                           — . —S                                 -   .—.—.—.—.      —. —.

                      State 8i Local Governments



      1955          1960            1965         1970             1975             1980       1985
                                                   FIGURE     1


                    OUTSTANDING DEBT OF U.S. NONFINANCIAL                         BORROWERS
                                          —5—

relationship to its level of output or income. Especially in an economy like

that of the United States, both businesses and individuals can finance their

activities in a rich variety of ways. In choosing whether to use their own or

borrowed funds, and in the case of businesses whether to raise debt or equity,

they presumably take into account not only market yield relationships but also

considerations like credit availability, tax rates, economy—wide risk levels,

bankruptcy arrangements, and so on. Many of these basic determinants of

private borrowing decisions have undergone major change over the course of this

century, and even just within the post—war period. Government at all levels

also typically has broad latitude to spend much or little in relation to

economic activity, and to finance that spending through varying combinations of

taxing and borrowing. The regularity highlighted in Figures 1 and 2 is the

more striking in that neither government nor private—sector borrowers make the

decisions that determine their outstanding debt in a way that would necessarily

impose any constancy in the relationship of' their combined debt to GNP, or that

would necessarily enforce a negative covariation between public and private

debt outstanding.

     For every borrower, of course, there must be a lender. Throughout most of

this century ——   again,   until the 1980s ——   the United States ran an
approximately balanced current account in its international economic relations,

so that the funds supplied to the U.S. markets by foreign investors just about

balanced the funds supplied abroad by U.S. investors.1 Hence the total

borrowing done by U.S. borrowers approximately equalled the total lending done

by U.S. lenders, so that the steady relationship to GNP exhibited by total debt

owed was also characteristic of total debt held. Just as in the case of'

borrowers, however, there is no a priori reason why an economy's lenders need

invest their portfolios in such a way that their aggregate holdings of debt
%ofGNP



200

                                                                  Total

                                                                  Debt
150
                                                                          nal
                                Federa
100      Nonfinancial           Government
         Business
         Corporations                       Other            State   &    Local
                                            Nonfinancial     Governments
                                            Business
 50
                               Households



 0
 1920      1930         1940     1950         1960         1970           1980
                                     FIGURE 2
          OUTSTANDING DEBT OF U.S. NONFINANCIAL BORROWERS, 1921-1985
                                      TABLE 1


       SIMPLE CORRELATIONS OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DEBT RATIOS. 1921—1980


                                                   SamDle


Private Sectors Included    1921—80      1921—SO. 196—80    1921—52   195—8O


All Non—federal              —.71               —.91         —.71      —.98

Business Plus Household      —.75               -.93         —.75      —.98

Business Only                 —.52              —.66         —.77      —.98

Household Only                —.k7                           —.38      —.92
                                       —6—

assets bear any specific relation to the economy's output or income.

     Not only is there no a priori reason to account for the negative

comovement of public and private debt that underlay the U.S. economy's stable

total debt ratio over so many years, but international comparisons indicate

that other developed economies around the world have not exhibited so strong a

regularity over time in this regard. Some behavioral factor ——      or   more

than one —— must therefore have been at work to bring about this phenomenon in

the United States. Because of the U.S. economy's roughly balanced foreign

position over many years, and hence the approximate equality between total debt

owed and total debt held, whatever was responsible could have worked through

the behavior of either borrowers or lenders, or both. Distinguishing among the

several competing explanations for these phenomena is especially important in

that different hypotheses carry different implications for major public policy

issues like the effects of large government deficits and the risks of higher

levels of private—sector debt.

     A }fvoothesis About Lenders' Behavior. The most straightforward available

explanation for the U.S. economy's stable total debt ratio —— and hence for the

negative covariation between public and private debt, given any source of

independent fluctuation in either -— emerges on the addition of some strong

assumptions about the substitutability of various categories of assets to

standard economic representations of portfolio behavior. At least in

principle, these assumptions, and hence the hypothesis to which they give rise,

are empirically testable. The central question at issue is whether investors

treat debt and other assets as close or distant substitutes in their

portfolios.

     The starting point for the construction of' an applicable hypothesis about

lenders' behavior is a familiar implication of Modigliani's "life cycle"
                                        —7—

hypothesis of saving: In a mature (albeit growing) economy with a stable

population age distribution, individuals will save out of their incomes in such

a way that the economy's aggregate accumulated wealth remains stable in

relation to aggregate income.6 Although the U.S. population's age

structure has varied during this century, most notably with the post World War

II "baby boom," the U.S. economy's aggregate wealth—to—income ratio has hovered

near three—to—one for many decades. Given this stable wealth—to—income

ratio, a stable debt—to—income ratio is equivalent to a stable share of debt

assets in the economy's aggregate wealth portfolio.

     According to the standard theory of risk—averse portfolio behavior,

investors allocate their portfolios to maximize expected return while

minimizing risk. If two or more assets expose investors to similar risks, then

investors will regard them as close substitutes and will simply choose

whichever bears the greatest expected return. Stability in the portfolio

shares allocated to assets that are close substitutes would therefore occur

only if these assets' respective expected returns were always approximately

equal, and even then only by chance.

     By contrast, if two or more assets expose investors to highly disparate

risks, then investors will regard them as only weak substitutes (or not as

substitutes at all) and will prefer to hold such assets in whatever respective

proportions reduce their overall risk posture. As long as investors are at

least moderately risk—averse —— as the available evidence indicates ——

stability   in the portfolio shares allocated to assets that are no more than

weak substitutes would occur even if these assets' respective expected returns

varied widely relative to one another over time.

     Expected asset returns are not observable, but realized returns are.

Given the large systematic variation observed over time in the respective
                                       —8—

returns on different classes of assets in the United States (and in other

countries too), it is implausible to suppose that investors' expectations of

these returns do not fluctuate relative to one another also. In that case,

investors would hold different kinds of assets in roughly constant portfolio

shares only if they regarded those assets as at best weak substitutes. More

specifically, if investors regard debt securities as weak substitutes for other

assets, including equities as well as real estate and tangibles, then over time

they will allocate a stable share of their portfolios to holding debt, despite

sometimes even wide variations in expected debt returns relative to expected

returns on other assets. Given the economy's stable aggregate wealth—to—income

ratio, the resulting stability of the share of total wealth that Investors

devote to holding debt assets will in turn imply a stable aggregate

debt—to-income ratio.

     Since the aggregate of debt held equals the aggregate of debt Issued, the

resulting stable ratio of total lending to income implies a stable ratio of

total borrowing to income. The market mechanism that translates the stable

ratio for debt held into a stable ratio for debt owed Is just the movement of

Interest rates necessary to equate total demand and total supply in the debt

market. A bulge in supply by any one borrower leads to higher Interest rates,

because of lenders' limited willingness to hold debt, and so causes other

interest—sensitive borrowers to reduce their supply. Hence there will be

negative coinovements over time among the debt ratios of individual borrowing

sectors if any one or more sectors behave Independently in this regard —— for

example, if wartime defense spending increases government borrowing, or a

demographically driven surge of hoinebuilding Increases individuals' borrowing.

     Is it plausible to suppose that U.S. investors, on average, treat debt

securities as at best only weak substitutes for other assets? To the extent
                                      —9—

that the variation over time of realized asset returns exhibits a combination

of systematic and unsystematic components, and that investors treat observed

experience as at least a partial guide to the probabilities associated with

future returns, data on realized returns admit inferences about perceived asset

risk structures and hence, via standard portfolio theory, imply asset

substitutabilities. Figure 3 shows the annual record of after—tax

after—inflation returns during 1953—85 on three major classes of financial

assets in the United States: short—term debt, long—term debt, and

equities.8 These returns are clearly positively correlated. (The simple

correlation coefficients are .5I between short— and long—term debt, .50 between

short—term debt and equity, and .53 between long—term debt and equity.) What

matters for portfolio behavior is not realized returns and the associated

variances and covariances, however,   but expected returns and the risk

perceptions associated with them. Before drawing inferences about asset

substitutabilities, it is therefore necessary to separate out the expected and

unexpected components in these series. The results of such empirical efforts

to date, mostly based on data excluding the l980s, have been mixed.'    It is

too early to judge how the introduction of new data, incorporating sharp

departures from prior relationships, will affect future analyses conducted

along these lines.

     A Hypothesis About Borrowers? Behavior. An alternative explanation for

the pre—1980s stable total debt ratio and associated negative public—private

debt covariation focuses on the behavior of borrowers. The central assumptions

required for this hypothesis pertain to borrowers' perceptions, as well as to

their willingness to incur risk. Once again, at least in principle these

assumptions are testable.

     The starting point for a hypothesis along these lines is the pair of
%per annum


40       Equi
      I'
      I'
      I'   I

                                     Short-term
                                     Debt
               'I




  0

-10

-20
                                                         Long- term
-30                                                      Debt

-40
      1955                    1965                1975                1985
                                      FIGURE 3
                    AFTER-TAX REAL RETURNS ON FINANCIAL ASSETS
                                      —10—

assumptions that borrowers are averse to the risks inherent in owing money,

and that they gauge these risks at least in part according to the relationship

between their outstanding debt and their incomes. Debt default and

bankruptcy typically involve costs to borrowers as well as lenders, usually

involving the borrower's loss of control over either personal or business

assets and consequent inability in many cases to proceed with ongoing affairs

in a normal fashion (often with resulting human dislocations and loss of

built—up intangible capital). Gauging the risk of indebtedness in relation to

income is also a familiar idea, although it is not without potential

drawbacks. For example, most debts do not require repayment in full on demand

but obligate the borrower to meet a specific schedule of payments including

interest and principal. Hence debt service requirements can vary in relation

to income, even if debt owed remains steady, if interest rate levels change or

if the debt's average term to maturity changes. In addition, for given debt

the probability of default is the greater the more uncertain is the borrower's

cash flow and value of liquidatable assets. Hence the assumption that

borrowers assess their debt risk by comparing outstanding debt to income can at

best be only approximately true.

    More importantly, by themselves the assumptions that borrowers seek to

avoid default risk and that they measure default risk in this way imply a

stable debt—to—income ratio not for the economy in total but for each borrower

separately. Even after aggregation to allow for the shifting circumstances

confronting different businesses and individuals, and for the fact that

individuals own the businesses, this pair of assumptions implies a stable debt

ratio for the economy's private sector as a whole, but not for the total debt

ratio including the private sector plus the government. Some further

assumption —— some direct link between the economyts public and private sectors
                                           —11—

——   is   needed to imply systematic negative covariation between public— and

private—sector debt, and hence a stable total debt ratio. (11)

      The specific assumption along these lines advanced by Barro and others is

that individuals not only treat as their own debt the liabilities issued by the

businesses they own but also "see through the shell" of government.(12) If

individuals recognize that their tax payments are the sole source of revenue

backing the government's debt, then more government debt outstanding means

larger government debt service obligations, and hence higher tax payments.

After passing through the filter of the tax system, therefore, government debt

is really private debt. Given this additional assumption, the hypothesis that

borrowers in general seek to maintain a steady debt risk level as measured by

outstanding debt relative to income does imply a stable economy—wide total debt

ratio, and hence negative covariation between public debt and private debt in

the presence of independent variation in either.

      Is the assumption that individuals treat government debt as equivalent to

their own plausible? Because individuals' attitudes toward government debt

service obligations are difficult to measure directly, empirical testing of

this proposition to date has been indirect, focusing on two of its chief

impuoations.13 One is the implication that government borrowing should

not affect interest rates (or asset returns and prices more generally). Not

surprisingly, in light of the many forces impinging on interest rate

determination, investigation of this proposition has again led to conflicting
           (lit)
results.           Figure It plots the after—inflation interest rate on U.S.

Treasury bills against two potentially relevant measures of federal government

debt and deficits for 1955—85: the change in the federal debt ratio, as

plotted in Figure 1; and the ratio of the federal budget deficit to GNP, with

both the deficit and GNP computed on a high—employment basis.5 The real
%ofGNP

                                                     Real   I




 5.0
                          High-Employment
                          Federal   Deficit
                          Ratio




  0
                           \

                               \j
          Change in
          Federal Debt
          Ratio
-5.0



   1955            1965                       1975              1985
                               FIGURE 4
          REAL INTEREST RATES AND GOVERNMENT BORROWING
                                            —12—

interest rate series is positively related to both of these federal borrowing

measures (with simple correlation coefficients .37 and .35, respectively),

thereby casting some doubt on the "public debt is private debt" assumption.

The positive relationship is even stronger in the second half of the sample.

Even so, there is clearly range for differences of interpretation, especially

in the context of efforts to control for additional causal influences.

       The other implication of the "public debt is private debt" assumption on

which empirical research has focused is the proposition that individuals,

either directly or via the businesses they own, increase their saving to offset

government deficits so that the economy's total saving rate is more stable than

that of the private sector alone. Here the evidence is more straightforwardly

negative. Figure 5 plots the net saving of the economy's private sector

(including individuals, businesses, and state and local governments), the

federal government's surplus, and the       resulting economy—wide total net saving
——   all   stated as percentages of GNP   —— for l955_85.(16) There is little here

to support the idea that private saving fluctuates so as to insulate total

saving from variations in the federal budget position. During the 1980s, for

example, the private saving rate actually declined slightly in the face of

record—size government deficits. For the sample as a whole, the private saving

and federal surplus measures are not significantly correlated (correlation

coefficient —.02), so that the economy's total saving does covary strongly and

positively with the federal surplus (correlation coefficient .89).

      A Hvoothesis About Market ImDerfections. Finally, a third potential

explanation for the stable U.S. total debt ratio places primary emphasis on

neither borrowers nor lenders but on the market setting in which they interact,

including in particular the asymmetry of information distinguishing borrowers

from lenders: Most potential borrowers inevitably know more about their own
%   of    GNP
                         I

         I                             I                       I                            I




                                                                   Net Private
    10—                                                            Saving Rate



                                                          /           1
                                                              \1 /
    5—                                                         V
                                                                     Total Net
                                                                                 \    /\\
                                    Federal                          Saving Rate     /
                                    Saving
    0                                         Ratet
                ',

                 \.V /       \._./.\J \•\,/•\
                                                              \/                 \
                                                                                      ,%.
    -5 —
                                       I              I
    1955                             1965                     1975                     1985
                                                 FIGURE 5
                             GOVERNMENT DEFICITS AND NET, PRIVATE SAVING
                                          —13—

intentions and prospects than potential lenders can possibly know.

     As a result of this asymmetry, in conjunction with standard legal

procedures governing defaults, lenders face a problem of adverse selection. At

any given interest rate, borrowers whose probability of default is higher are

more likely to seek to borrow than are those with greater likelihood of meeting

their obligations. Moreover, raising the interest rate to compensate for this

enhanced probability of default will only further discourage low—risk borrowers

in comparison to high—risk ones. Hence lenders not only seek information to

distinguish one would—be borrower from another ("credit analysis") but also

discriminate by granting credIt to some but not to others even when all are

willing to accept the same terms ("credit rationing").

     A further way for lenders to protect against default risk is by requiring

collateral ——   that   is, the pledging of assets to be forfeited by the borrower

in the event of default. Collateral not only limits the lender's potential

loss should a default occur, but can also provide an effective way of

discriminating low—risk from high—risk borrowers. Various collateral

arrangements have long been typical of many debt markets, both in the United

States and elsewhere.

     The crucial role played by collateral requirements in explaining a stable

debt—to—income ratio is that they provide a link between assets held and the

ability to borrow. Not only is the U.S. economy's aggregate wealth relatively

stable in relation to aggregate income, but most of this wealth consists of

business assets (plant, equipment and inventories) and personal assets (mostly

houses and consumer durables) which can and do serve as collateral in private

loan arrangements. If the ability to borrow depends in part on the ownership

of assets that can serve as collateral, and the total of such assets is stable

in relation to income, then the debt of at least the private sector will also
                                         —1 il


be stable in relation to income. If, in addition, individuals do              regard

government debt as equivalent to their own (in contrast to the assumption made

above), then they will regard the government debt that they hold as part of

their net wealth. If total wealth is stable in relation to income, therefore,

over time they will adjust their accumulation of other assets so as to offset

fluctuations in their holdings of government debt. As a result, the private

sector's ability to provide collateral, and hence to borrow, will also covary

negatively with the outstanding government debt.17

        The empIrical importance of collateral requirements is straightforward

enough. Borrowing against tangible assets In the form of home mortgage and

consumer installment credit has traditionally constituted 80—90% of all debt

owed by Individuals In the United States. Commercial mortgages, inventory

financing and other forms of secured credit also account for a major share of

business debt. The chief question mark, once again, lies in the assumption

about how individuals (and businesses) react to the issuance of government

debt.

        Is it plausible to assume that increased holdings of government debt

directly reduce the accumulation of wealth in other forms?18 Figure 6

plots aggregate U.S. net investment in residential and nonresidential capital,

respectively ——   both   stated as percentages of GNP ——   against   the two measures

of government borrowing introduced in Figure 1,    for   1955—85. Each form of

investment exhibits significant negative covariation with both measures of

government borrowing. (For net residential investment, the simple correlations

with the change in the federal debt ratio and the high—employment deficit ratio

are _.71$ and —.77, respectively; the corresponding correlations for

nonresidential investment are _.8Z and —.62, respectively.) Here, however,

controlling for other factors is of particular importance because even the most
%ofGNP




 1955                1965                  1975               1985
                               FIGURE 6
         GOVERNMENT BORROWING AND PRIVATE CAPITAL FORMATION
                                      —15—

basic conceptions of how government borrowing plausibly affects private capital

formation crucially depend on whether the economy is or is not at full

employment. Hence distinguishing effects of government borrowing from effects

due to the business cycle is essential in this context, despite the

complication that stems from the cyclical character of government borrowing

itself.



Public and Private Debt Since 1980

     At yearend 1980 the U.S. economy's total debt ratio stood at 137.7%, well

within one standard deviation of the 1953—80 mean. By yearend 1985 the debt

ratio was 169.2%, more than eleven standard deviations higher, and above any

prior U.S. debt level recorded in this century except for 1931—35. As Table 2

shows, all major classes of U.S. nonfinancial borrowers except farmers

participated in this increased indebtedness since 1980. In particular, the

negative covariation between public— and private—sector debt that had

characterized prior decades' experience disappeared. The data indicate a

statistically significant break at 1980 in each of the four correlations

reported in Table 1, with 1981—85 values not just positive but uniformly in

excess of .90.

     The experience of different categories of borrowers in the U.S. debt

markets has varied markedly during this period. After only modest variation in

their indebtedness relative to ON? between 1960 and 1975, U.S. households

sharply increased their debt position in the late l970s and again in the early

l980s. During the late 1970s home mortgage borrowing accounted for

substantially all of the increased household indebtedness, but during the early

1980s all forms of household indebtedness rose, including home inortages and

especially consumer credit. At the same time, rising prices of real estate in
                              TABLE 2


             INCREASE IN THE U.S. DEBT RATIO. 1980—1985


                                        Debt Ratio

Borrower                           1980          1985     Chance



Households                        50.9%         58.5%     + 7.6%

Businesses                        50.3          57.9      + 7.4

     Corporations                 32.1          36.8      +
     Farms                          5.6          14.1     — 1.2
     Other                         12.6         16.6      + 11.0

State—Local Governments           10.11         13.3      +   2.9
Federal Government                26.1          39.14     +13,11



All Nonfinancial Borrowers       137.7%        169.2%     +31.5%
                                           —16—


the   1970s and of equity securities in the l980s increased holdings of both

nonfinancial and finanacial assets during this period, so that household net

worth showed little change relative to GNP despite the sharply higher debt.

      By contrast, as of yearend 1985 the U.S. corporate sector's financial and

tangible assets both stood at approximately the same point in relation to GNP

as they did in 1975 or 1980. Hence there are no additional assets behind the

new accumulation of corporate debt, which has resulted simply from

debt—for—equity exchanges on the other side of the corporate sector's balance

sheet. In l981_85 alone, mergers, acquisitions, leveraged buyouts and other

corporate reorganizations resulted in net retirement of $156 billion of equity.

      Among   non—corporate businesses, the experience has been mixed. Between
1980 and 1985 the U.S. farm sector actually reduced its indebtedness relative

to GNP. By contrast, borrowing by other non—corporate businesses raised the

total debt ratio by almost as much as corporate borrowing despite a far smaller

initial non—corporate debt level. This rise in non—farm non—corporate business

indebtedness, however, was consistent with earlier trends. Almost all of these

businesses' increased debt has been in the form of mortgage financing, and it

has taken place against even more substantially enlarged holdings of tangible

assets (mostly land and residential real estate, but also including some

business plant and equipment), so that the aggregate net worth of non—farm

non—corporate     business sector modestly increased   during 1980—85.

       The   remaining   portion of the large 1980—85 increase in the U.S. economy's

total debt ratio not due to the federal government has reflected increased

indebtedness of state and local governments. This development represented a

sharp reversal of the trend that had prevailed since the late 1960s. More than

all of this increased debt has reflected a form of financial intermediation by

state and local governments, as these authorities have borrowed, in
                                      —17—

anticipation of potential restrictions on their ability to issue tax—exempt

securities, to fund many of their needs in advance and then, for the time

being, simply re—invested the proceeds.

     Finally, nearly one—half of the post—1980 rise in the U.S. economy's total

debt ratio has consisted of increased indebtedness of the federal government.

The steady, unbroken growth of the U.S. Government's outstanding debt between

1980 and 1985, despite a major business expansion during 1983—85, is clearly

the element of the overall debt ratio rise that is most out of character with

prior U.S. historical experience, not just since World War II but throughout

the nation's existence. Until the l980s, significant sustained increases in

federal government debt relative to GNP took place only during wartime. The

contrary pattern, which has resulted in large part from the record—size tax

reductions legislated in 1981, stands as the hallmark of post—1980 fiscal

policy.

     In sum, the two underlying factors behind the post—1980 debt ratio

increase that seem most out of character with prior U.S. experience are the

dramatic change in the federal government's fiscal policy and, with distinctly

less importance, the corporate reorganization movement. At a more fundamental

level, however, what has been absent in the l980s to date is the long—standing

negative oovariation among the debt-issuing behavior of public— and

private—sector borrowers, Bulges in the debt of one borrowing sector or

another have occurred before, but in the past they have been approximately

offset by reductions (at least relative to GNP) in the debt of others. The

experience of the early 1980s has sharply departed from that historical

pattern.
                                         —18—

Concluding Comments

       The breakdown of a long—standing but little understood regularity in

observed behavior presents puzzles but also provides opportunities. Data

incorporating hitherto unseen variation can be invaluable in resolving

questions not just about why behavior has shifted but about what stood behind

the initial regularity in the first place. The sharply changed relationship

since 1980 between total debt and income in the U.S. economy —— and, within the

total, between the respective debt of the economy's public and private sectors

——   presents   such a puzzle, and correspondingly provides an opportunity. At

lease three fundamentally different hypotheses about economic behavior could,

in principle, have accounted for the pre—1980's stability of the debt—to—income

relationship. Empirical analysis incorporating the more recent experience may

now facilitate distinguishing which one (if any) in fact describes the working

of the U.S. debt market.

       Distinguishing among these competing explanations is also important

because the different hypotheses carry sharply different implications for major

issues of public policy. Does the continuing large federal government deficit

impair the economy's ability to undertake productive capital formation? The

answer is yes under the hypothesis based on lenders' behavior, no under that

based on borrowers' behavior, and again yes under that based on market

imperfections. Does the increased indebtedness of private borrowers

potentially threaten the economy's financial stability? The answer is yes

under the hypothesis based on lenders' behavior, no under that based on

borrowers' behavior, and again no under that based on market imperfections.

Finding the right explanation for the observed relationship between debt and

income, and between public debt and private debt, would be a good start on

deciding how to approach either of these current issues.
                                         —19—

                                 REFERENCES AND NOTES



1.   See B. M. Friedman, "The Roles of Money and Credit in Macroeconomic

     Analysis," in J.    Tobin   (ed.), Macroeconomics. Prices and Quantities

     (Brookings, Washington, 1983), for a description of these data. Data

     sources: Federal Reserve Board for debt data, and U.S. Dept. of Commerce

     for GNP data.

2.   The data used here measure debt at par rather than market valuese

     Adjusting to a market—value basis would alter the year—to—year pattern

     somewhat, but would not affect such long—term properties as the small

     coefficient of variation and the absence of any time trend.

3.   The debt ratio peak (224.7%) occurred in 1933, which was also the trough

     year of the depression.

4 The current account balance is the broadly defined difference between U.S.

     exports of goods and services and U.S. imports of goods and services.

     Because such differences must be financed by capital account transactions,

     current account deficits imply net inflows of foreign capital into the

     United States while current account surpluses imply net outflows of U.S.

     capital abroad. Between 1911$ and 1981, the cumulative net capital flow

     was $141 billion of U.S. funds going abroad, or an average of only some $2

     billion per year.

5.   R. W. Goldsmith, "The Stability of the Ratio of Nonfinancial Debt to

     Income, "Banea Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review (1984), 285—305.

6.   F. Modigliani, "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, the Demand for Wealth

     and the Supply of Capital, "Social Research, 33 (1966), 160—217.

7.   R. W. Goldsmith and R. E. Lipsey, Studies in the National Balance Sheet of

     the United States. Vol. I (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 1963).

     Federal Reserve Board data confirm this regularity for subsequent years.
                                         —20—

8.   See B. M. Friedman, "The Substitutability of Debt and Equity Securities,"

     in B. M. Friedman (ed.), Coroorate CaDital Structures in the United States

     (Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1985), for a description of these data.

     The underlying sources are the Federal Reserve Board, U.S. Treasury Dept.

     and Standard & Poor's Corp.

9.   For example, findings reported in B. M. Friedman, "Crowding Out or

     Crowding In? Evidence on Debt—Equity Substitutability" (mimeo: National

     Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 1981$) and "Portfolio Choice and

     the Debt—Income Ratio," Amer. Econ. Rev., 75 (1985), 338_3143, support the

     hypothesis of weak substitutability, at least between debt and other

     financial assets, but the findings in J. A. Frankel, "Portfolio

     Crowding-Out Empirically Estimated," Quart. J. Econ., 100 (1985),

     1O1$11065, do not.

10. It is also necessary for the amount of risk that borrowers are willing to

     bear to be roughly constant in relation to their incomes. Given the

     absence of much variation in the wealth—to-Income ratio, however, this

     property follows from standard models of risk aversion.

11. A link via interest rates ——   for   example, along the lines that heavy

     government borrowing drives up interest rates and thereby discourages

     private borrowing —- would ultimately be based on the behavior of lenders,

     not borrowers.

12. E. J. Barro, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" J. Pout. Econ., 82

     (19714), 1095—1117.

13. It is also necessary, of course, that individuals be aware of the

     government's debt service obligations in the first place. Although

     taxpayers' awareness should be easier to investigate directly than their

     attitudes, no one (to the author's knowledge) has yet attempted to do so.
                                          —21—

         The reason is probably the general disrespect for survey data that

         pervades the economics literature.

 1. See J. Tobin and W. H. Bulter, "Fiscal and Monetary Policies, Capital

     Formation and Economic Activity," in G. von Furstenberg (ed.), The

     Government and Capital Formation (Ballinger, Cambridge, 1980) and J. J.

     Seater, "Does Government Debt Matter? A Review," J. Mon. Econ., 16

         (1985), 121—131, for surveys emphasizing positive and negative findings,

     respectively.

15. The source of the high—employment deficit and GNP data is the U.S. Dept.

     of Commerce.

16. The private and total saving measures are net of depreciation to existing

     capital stocks. The source of the data plotted in Figure 5 is the U.S.

     Dept. of Commerce.

17. See B. M. Friedman, "Debt and Economic Activity in the United States," in

     B. M. Friedman (ed.), The Chanqin Roles of Debt and     Eauitv   in Financing

     U.S. Caoital Formation (Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1982); B. S.

     Bernanke, "Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession," Amer. Econ. Rev., 71

     (1981), 155—159; and B. S. Bernanke and M. Gertler, "Agency Costs,

     Collateral, and Business Fluctuations" (mimeo: National Bureau of

     Economic Research, Cambridge, 1986).

18. Once again, a link via interest rates would ultimately be based on the

     behavior of lenders, as in the discussion above.



This paper was prepared for Science. I am grateful to the National Science
Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for supporting the research on
which it draws, to D. I. Laibson for research assistance and helpful
discussions, and to R. W. Goldsmith and R. M. Solow for comments on an earlier
draft.
