NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO HOURS WORKED VARY WITH INCOME? CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE AND
IMPLICATIONS
Alexander Bick
Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln
David Lagakos
Working Paper 21874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21874

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016, Revised March 2017

Previously circulated as "How do Average Hours Worked Vary with Development? CrossCountry Evidence and Implications." We thank Mark Aguiar, Andy Atkeson, David Atkin,
Angus Deaton, Maya Eden, Chad Jones, Pete Klenow, Aart Kraay, Norman Loayza, Valerie
Ramey, Richard Rogerson, Andres Santos, Matthias Schündeln, Jesse Shapiro, three anonymous
referees, as well as numerous conference and seminar participants for helpful comments and
suggestions. For excellent research assistance we thank Caleb Johnson, Patrick Kiernan, Andre
Ortseifen, Paul Reimers, Ang Xing Yi and Shu Zhang. Fuchs-Sch¨undeln gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council under Starting Grant No.
262116, and from the Cluster of Excellence ”Formation of Normative Orders” at Goethe
University Frankfurt. All potential errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Alexander Bick, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, and David Lagakos. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How do Hours Worked Vary with Income? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications
Alexander Bick, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, and David Lagakos
NBER Working Paper No. 21874
January 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. E01,E24,J21,J22
ABSTRACT
This paper builds a new internationally comparable database of hours worked to measure how
hours vary with income across and within countries. We document that average hours worked per
adult are substantially higher in low-income countries than in high-income countries. The pattern
of decreasing hours with income holds for both men and women, for adults of all ages and
education levels, and along both the extensive and intensive margin. Within countries, hours
worked per employed are also decreasing in the individual wage for most countries, though in the
richest countries, hours worked are flat or increasing in the wage. Our findings imply that
aggregate productivity and welfare differences across countries are larger than currently thought.

Alexander Bick
Department of Economics
W. P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
P.O. Box 879801
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
alexander.bick@asu.edu
Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln
Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance
60323 Frankfurt
Germany
fuchs@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de

David Lagakos
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
lagakos@ucsd.edu

1. Introduction
One of the most basic facts in macroeconomics is that aggregate income per capita
varies greatly across countries (Klenow and Rodrı́guez-Clare, 1997; Hall and Jones,
1999; Caselli, 2005). Much less is known about how aggregate hours worked vary across
countries. Consider the basic question: are average hours worked higher for adults in
high-income countries or for adults in low-income countries? Due to data limitations,
the economics literature does not have an answer to this question. This is unfortunate,
because if hours enter directly into preferences, then measures of average hours worked
at the country level are a key input to understanding welfare differences across countries
(Jones and Klenow, 2016).
In this paper, we create a new database of average hours worked using recent household survey data from 80 countries of all income levels. Unlike several other existing
databases on hours worked, our data are internationally comparable and allow for rich
disaggregate comparisons across and within countries. The surveys we employ are nationally representative and cover workers in all sectors, including the self-employed,
which represent the majority of the workforce in low-income countries. We focus most
of our analysis on a set of 48 core countries, for which international comparability of
hours data is as high as possible. In particular, we require that the data from these core
countries satisfy three basic criteria. First, the surveys cover the entire calendar year
(rather than, say, one month of the year). This is necessary to prevent any bias induced
by seasonality in labor demand. Second, hours worked are measured in a consistent
way: actual (rather than usual) hours in all jobs (not just the primary job), and in the
week prior to the interview. Finally, hours worked cover the production of goods or
services counted in the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). Thus, our hours
measures cover unpaid work in agricultural or non-agricultural businesses, as well as
wage employment, but do not cover home-produced services, such as child care.1
Our main finding is that average hours worked per adult are substantially higher in
low-income countries (the bottom third of the world income distribution) than in highincome countries (the top third). In low-income countries, adults work 28.5 hours per
1 For a smaller set of countries, we document that hours spent on home production of services in
low- and high-income countries follow the same pattern as hours spent on producing goods and services
counted in NIPA; we present these findings in Section 4.4.

1

week on average, compared to 18.9 hours per week in high-income countries. This difference is both statistically and economically significant, with cross-country differences
in average hours per adult (9.6 hours per week) being twice as large as the decline in
hours per adult in the United States over the twentieth century (4.7 hours per week)
(Ramey and Francis, 2009). In percentage terms, adults in low-income countries work
about fifty percent more hours per week than adults in high-income countries. As one
simple summary statistic, the slope coefficient from a regression of log hours per adult
on log GDP per hour is -0.15. We also decompose average hours per adult into an
extensive margin (employment rate) and intensive margin (average hours per worker).
We find that cross-country differences in hours per adult are shaped by both margins.
Employment rates are higher in the poorest third than in the middle third, and similar
between the middle and top third of the world income distribution. Average hours per
worker increase between the poorest and the middle third, and then decrease substantially for the richest third. Overall, employment rates account for about three quarters
of the decline in hours per adult between low- and high-income countries, while hours
per worker account for about one quarter.
After having documented the facts on the aggregate level, we compute average hours by
sex, age group, and educational attainment. We find that the pattern of higher hours in
low-income countries is quite broad-based, being present in each of the disaggregated
categories. We also decompose average hours per worker into three broad sectoral aggregates: agriculture, manufacturing, and services. Hours per worker in agriculture are
similar across the world income distribution, while manufacturing and services workers
work 8.5 and 13.7 more hours per week in the low- than in the high-income countries.
The results from the sectoral breakdowns are reassuring if one has the prior that hours
worked are measured more accurately in manufacturing and services. We show that the
differences in aggregate hours across countries are not driven by different compositions
in age, education, or sectors across countries.
We next ask how hours vary with income within countries, and to what extent the withincountry patterns help account for the aggregate patterns we document thus far. Our
main measure of individual income is the hourly wage from paid employment, which
we compute for all workers who are employed as wage workers.2 We find that when
2 We also look at wages plus self employment earnings for a broader set of workers,

but with the caveat
that self-employment earnings are less well measured than earnings from paid employment.

2

pooling individuals across all core countries, hours per worker fall with wages, just as
they do in the aggregate: the slope of log hours on log wages is -0.09, compared to
a slope of log hours on log GDP per hour of -0.12. When regressing log hours on
both log wages and log country GDP per hour together, the slope on log wages falls
only modestly, while the coefficient on GDP per hour becomes substantially smaller
in absolute terms and insignificant. Even with country fixed effects, the coefficient on
log wages remains similar in magnitude. This suggests that residents of poor countries
work more hours on average mainly because of their low wages, rather than because of
aggregate factors prevalent in poor countries. We find that this effect is stronger for men
than for women, for whom both country effects and individual wages play important
roles.
Finally, we explore how the elasticity of hours to wages varies country by country. We
find that individual slopes are negative for the majority of countries in our database.
Interestingly, these slopes are systematically lower in countries with lower GDP per
capita than in richer countries like the United States, where hours are increasing in
individual wages. This is consistent with historical evidence showing that hours-wage
slopes for employed workers used to be decreasing or flat but are nowadays increasing
in the United States (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007; Costa, 2000) and in other OECD countries
(Huberman and Minns, 2007). The results for the extensive margin are in line with the
intensive margin evidence. Using education as a proxy for the permanent income of
non-working individuals we find that employment rates are flat by education in poor
countries, but increasing by education in richer countries. Our findings suggest that the
change from a decreasing hours-income slope to a positive one within countries may be
a fundamental feature of the development process.
We conclude by discussing implications of our findings for cross-country differences
in aggregate labor productivity and welfare. In the absence of data on hours worked,
development accounting typically relies on GDP per worker as a measure of labor productivity, which implicitly treats hours per worker as identical across countries (see
e.g. Hall and Jones, 1999; Caselli, 2005; Hsieh and Klenow, 2010). Across our core
countries, GDP per worker is a factor 19.9 times larger in the richest third than in the
poorest third of countries, while GDP per hour is 23.5 times as large. Thus, after taking
hours into consideration, cross-country TFP differences are even larger than previously

3

thought. Our findings also have implications for welfare differences across countries.
Building on the work of Jones and Klenow (2016), we construct a flow measure of utility
from consumption and disutility of work. Using our hours data, plus standard measures
of consumption per capita, we calculate that welfare differs by a factor of 19 between
high-income and low-income countries, compared to a factor of 12 when we ignore differences in hours worked. To put it succinctly, residents of low-income countries are not
just consumption poor, but also leisure poor.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 highlights the paper’s contribution relative to the literature. Section 3 describes our underlying data sources, and our
efforts to construct internationally comparable data on hours worked. Section 4 documents that aggregate hours worked per adult are decreasing in the country income level,
compares the data to U.S. time-series, and provides some evidence that hours on home
services are also decreasing in income. Section 5 presents hours worked differences
across countries by gender, education, age, and sector, and shows that differences in
aggregate hours are not driven by differences in the demographic composition across
countries. Section 6 then analyzes how hours vary with income at the individual level
within our sample countries. Section 7 quantifies implications of the aggregate results
for the measurement of labor productivity and welfare differences across poor and rich
countries. Section 8 concludes.

2. Related Literature
Our study is the first to measure how hours worked vary with income across and within
countries of all income levels. Prior studies of aggregate hours worked across countries have almost exclusively focused on rich countries, and in particular on the United
States and European countries (e.g., Bick et al., 2016). Explanations of the U.S.-Europe
gap in average hours have focused largely on differences in taxation (e.g., Prescott,
2004; Rogerson, 2006; McDaniel, 2011; Bick and Fuchs-Schündeln, 2017), institutions
(Alesina et al., 2005) and social security systems (Erosa et al., 2012; Wallenius, 2013;
Alonso-Ortiz, 2014). Other studies have focused on understanding changes in hours
worked over time, though these have also concentrated on rich countries. For example, McGrattan and Rogerson (2004) and Ohanian et al. (2008) measure changes in
hours among OECD countries over time, while Ramey and Francis (2009), and Francis
4

and Ramey (2009) focus on the long-run decline in hours worked in the United States.
Aguiar and Hurst (2007) and Costa (2000) study how hours vary with income within the
United States historically, and Huberman and Minns (2007) focus on these patterns for
a number of OECD countries.
The existing evidence on hours worked from developing countries is quite limited.
The study by Lee et al. (2007) presents some evidence on hours from largely nonrepresentative establishment surveys covering wage earners in manufacturing. Their
data thus excludes the self-employed and those working in agriculture, which together
form the vast majority of all workers in the developing world. Caselli (2005) considers hours worked data for 28 countries from the International Labor Organization
(ILO), though just two of these countries are in the bottom half of the world income
distribution. Gollin et al. (2014) compare average hours worked among workers in
the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors of a large set of countries using nationally
representative surveys. Their data are comparable across sectors within each country,
though not necessarily comparable across countries. Bridgman et al. (2017) provide evidence on household and market production hours from time use surveys covering 43
countries of all income levels, including richer data than in our study on hours of home
production. Jones and Klenow (2016) consider hours worked in their study of welfare
differences across countries. Their micro data cover however only 3 middle- and 3 lowincome countries, and of these 6 only 2 qualify as core countries in our study. For their
extended analysis, they rely on hours data from the Penn World Tables (PWT). None of
these studies analyzes how hours worked vary with wages on the individual level.
The Total Economy Database, run by the Conference Board, recently released data on
annual hours worked per worker, in addition to employment rates, for an unbalanced
panel of countries, with the earliest data coming from 1950. These data are also included
now in the PWT. Many of these data points are however interpolated or extrapolated,
especially for the low- and middle-income countries. Of the data points that have an
actual source available, the quality is highly questionable in terms of consistency of
hours measurement, activity coverage, and potential biases from seasonality. We detail
some of these data quality issues in Online Appendix Section A.4.3
3 To give some concrete examples, from the 304 country-year observations that come from countryyears in which the country’s GDP would place it into the lowest tercile of the world income distribution
today, 89, i.e. almost one third, are inter- or extrapolated. Of the remaining data points, the vast majority,

5

3. Data
In this section, we describe the survey data underlying our analysis. We then introduce
the criteria that we use to define the set of core countries, which are those that have the
most scope for international comparability. Next, we describe how we measure hours
per adult, employment rates, and hours per worker.
3.1. Data Sources
Our analysis draws on nationally representative household surveys. The key advantage
of using household surveys, as opposed to firm surveys or administrative records, is
that our measures of labor supply are not restricted to activities for which individuals
receive a wage, but also include self-employed and unpaid family work. As is well
known, the self-employed form an important fraction of the workforce in all countries,
and particularly so in developing countries, see e.g. Gollin (2008).
All of the surveys we employ are publicly available for researchers, mostly via an application through national statistical agencies or similar institutions. We were able to
collect nationally representative data for 80 countries with a population of at least one
million. For 33 of our countries we can draw from harmonized data sets, for which efforts have already been made to standardize questions across countries. These comprise
the European Labor Force Survey (ELFS; 26 countries) and the International Public-Use
Microdata Project (IPUMS; 7 countries). For the remaining 47 countries, we draw on
country-specific censuses, household or labor force surveys, including 20 surveys conducted as part of the World Bank’s Living Standards Measurement Studies (LSMS).4
When multiple years of appropriate data are available, we choose the year closest to
2005. Most of our data are within a few years of 2005; exact years, data sources, and
namely 196, come from data provided by the Asian Productivity Organization (APO). For 83 of the 196
APO data points, there is no information available regarding the original data source, and for a further 71
the original data source does not contain any information on hours per worker. Hence, only for 42 data
points from 4 countries is there any information on hours per worker in the original data, but the quality is
still unclear. Some of the other low-income data points in the Total Economy Database come from either
Hofman (1998) or Maddison (2001), which in turn often extrapolate data or impute average hours per
employed using only the number of statutory public holidays and vacation days.
4 Note that this does not imply that these standardized surveys are all in our sample of core countries.
All ELFS countries are core countries, while none of the IPUMS countries and only 9 of the LSMS
countries are core countries.

6

sample sizes for all countries are given in Online Appendix Table C.1. Our sample sizes
range from 5,000 to over 700,000 individuals. We focus on all individuals of at least age
15, whom we refer to as “adults”.5
3.2. Core Countries
The key measurement challenge we face is that not all of our surveys are conducted
in the same way, and more specifically, not all surveys collect hours information in the
same way. To ensure that international comparability is as high as possible, we focus
our main analysis on a set of core countries which we define to be those that satisfy the
following three criteria.
1. Activity Definition: We restrict attention to hours worked in the production of output
that is counted in NIPA. These include hours worked in wage employment as well as
hours in own-account agricultural or non-agricultural work, whether or not that output
is sold or used for own consumption (see e.g. Gollin et al., 2014). This is important
if we want to maintain a nationally representative sample of workers, particularly in
the poorest countries, where agricultural work and self-employment are widespread.
Not included in our definition of hours worked are hours spent on non-market services,
such as cleaning or home-provided child care; we return to the issue of home-produced
services in Section 4.4.
2. Hours Worked Information: We focus on actual hours worked, rather than usual
hours worked, since individuals may work more or less than usual in a given week, due
to e.g. over-time or sickness. We also focus on all jobs, rather than just the primary job,
since many individuals have multiple jobs. Finally, we focus only on surveys that ask
respondents about hours worked in the last week or in a recent reference week, since
longer time periods may lead to recall bias.
3. Time Coverage: We restrict attention to surveys that cover the entire calendar year.
While all of our surveys are nationally representative in terms of the covered population, some are conducted over the entire year, and others are conducted over only a few
months or weeks. Using these partial-year surveys creates potentially biased estimates
of hours worked unless the survey period happens to be representative of the entire year.
This bias may be more pronounced in developing countries, which are largely agricul5 The

United States is an exception here as the youngest available age is 16.

7

tural and hence seasonal. Online Appendix A.1 provides a detailed explanation of how
we determine the time coverage of each survey and which surveys qualify as covering
the entire year according to our definition.
Out of the 80 countries in our sample, 48 qualify as core countries. All the non-core
countries satisfy the first criterion on the activity definition but have either non-standard
hours worked information or cover less than the full calendar year (or both).
3.3. Measuring Employment and Hours Worked
Our measures of employment rates and hours worked rest on two key variables: the
self-reported employment status and actual hours worked in all jobs in the last week. We
measure the employment rate as the fraction of all adults that report being employed or
have positive hours worked. We measure hours per worker as the average hours worked
in all jobs in the reference week among all those who are employed. Both measures
are calculated with the individual survey weights. We measure hours per adult as the
product of the employment rate and average hours per worker. We provide more details
on our calculations in Online Appendix Section A.2. Since the surveys of the core
countries cover the entire year, vacations, sick leave, or other reasons for seasonality
should in principle be covered, and multiplying the reported numbers by 52 gives an
estimate of annual hours worked per adult (see our discussion of potential biases in
Online Appendix Section A.5).
Our definition of whether a country in our sample is a low- (bottom third of the world income distribution), middle- or high-income (top third of the world income distribution)
country is based on GDP per capita in the year 2005 for all countries in the Penn World
Tables version 9.0 (see Feenstra et al. (2015) for a detailed description of the PWT).
Specifically, we use expenditure-side real GDP at chained PPPs in 2011 US $ (rgd pe).
We find similar levels of average GDP per capita when comparing each of these terciles
in our core and full set of countries to all countries in the PWT; see Online Appendix
Table C.2. When plotting aggregate hours worked against GDP per capita, we use GDP
per capita for each country from the same year for which we have the hours data.

8

4. Aggregate Hours by Income Across Countries
In this section, we document that average hours worked per adult are substantially
higher in low-income countries than in high-income countries, and that the same holds
true for both the extensive and the intensive margins of labor supply. Last, we provide suggestive evidence that also hours spent on the production of home services are
decreasing by development.
4.1. Average Hours Worked Per Adult
Figure 1 plots average weekly hours per adult against log GDP per capita for our core
countries. Vertical lines separate the three terciles of the world income distribution; 11
countries fall in the bottom tercile, 15 in the middle tercile, and 22 in the top tercile. The
figure shows that average hours per adult are downward sloping in income per capita.
The poorest countries in the world range from a low of around 24 hours per week in
Malawi, Rwanda, and Uganda to a high of almost 40 hours per week in Cambodia. The
richest countries average between a low of around 16 hours in Italy, Spain, Belgium,
and France and a high of 24.4 hours in the United States. Iraq has the lowest hours per
adult in our sample, which is driven entirely by women, as discussed in Section 5.1.
Panel A of Table 1 reports in the first row the average hours per adult by income tercile
in our core countries. In these countries, average hours per adult are 28.5 hours per
week in low-income countries, compared to 22.2 hours in middle- and 18.9 hours in
high-income countries. In terms of economic significance, the 9.6 higher weekly hours
in the low-income group correspond to 50 percent higher hours than in the high-income
group.6 Regressing the logarithm of hours on the logarithm of GDP per hour worked
yields a slope coefficient of -0.15.7
Given that the number of core countries is relatively small, particularly in the lower end
of the income distribution, we conduct statistical tests of the hypothesis that average
6 In

the main analysis, we take unweighted averages across countries. When weighting by population,
hours differences between the bottom and top thirds of the world income distribution are similar: averages
in the low-, middle- and high-income groups are 28, 23.6, and 20.7 hours per week.
7 We regress on the logarithm of GDP per hour worked rather than GDP per capita, because GDP per
hour worked is an aggregate productivity measure analogous to the individual wage, which we use as a
regressor in a similar regression in Section 6. Figure C.2 in the Online Appendix shows the corresponding
scatter plot of the logarithm of average hours worked per adult and the logarithm of GDP per hour worked.

9

hours worked in all countries are drawn from the same distribution. We do so using
permutation tests, which have more favorable small-sample properties than other commonly used tests, such as t-tests (Lehmann and Romano, 2005). Panel B of Table 1
reports the results of these permutation tests. For the core countries, shown in the first
row, the observed difference in mean hours between the low- and high-income groups
is 9.6 hours per week, between the low- and middle-income group 6.3 hours per week,
and between the middle- and high-income group 3.3 hours per week. All p-values are
well under one percent. We conclude that the decreasing average hours over the income
terciles are unlikely to be a coincidence.
Rows 2 and 3 of Table 1, Panel A, report average hours per adult by income tercile
in two broader sets of countries: (i) the core plus those countries having a survey that
covers only part of the year, and (ii) all countries in our data set, regardless of how hours
are measured. Covering more countries comes however at the cost of lower international
data comparability. Across the 73 core plus partial-year survey countries, average hours
worked are 26.7 in the low-, 22.4 in the middle-, and 19.4 in the high-income countries.
Thus, within the low-income countries average hours worked are slightly lower in this
group than in the core, while hours worked in the middle- and high-income groups are
similar to the core. Going to the full set of 80 countries, average hours per adult rise
by 0.2 weekly hours in all income groups (see also Figure C.1 in the Online Appendix.)
As Panel B of Table 1 shows, all differences across the income groups are significant
at the one percent level in the broader set of countries. We conclude that our finding of
higher hours per adult in poor countries than in rich countries holds in a broader set of
countries as well as in our core countries. From here on we focus on the core countries
due to their higher degree of international comparability.8
4.2. Comparison to Time-Series Data from the United States
Our research is motivated by the question of how hours worked vary with income in
the cross-section of countries. Complementary evidence on the relationship between
income and hours worked comes from time-series data. With time series data, one can
ask how hours looked like in the currently rich countries back when they were poor.
8 We

conclude that potential biases from seasonality, measurement of vacation days and public holidays, and child labor would all likely increase measured hours worked differences between rich and poor
countries; see Online Appendix Section A.5.

10

Comprehensive and reliable historical data on hours worked are unfortunately hard to
obtain, and the discussion on the complications of constructing reliable hours worked
data in Section 3 makes clear why this is the case. However, for the United States, data
spanning over 100 years are available from Ramey and Francis (2009). Yet, even 100
years ago, the United States was as rich as current middle-income countries, so these
time series data do not span as large an income range as our data does.
Figure 2 plots Ramey and Francis (2009)’s U.S. time series of average hours worked per
adult (individuals aged 14+) from 1900 to 2005 (gray line), and average hours per adult
from our data (black dots). Average adult hours per week in the United States decreased
from 27.7 hours per week in 1900 to 23.0 hours in 2005, corresponding to a decline of
4.7 hours per week. Interestingly, the patterns for hours in the cross-section of countries
is quantitatively similar over the range of GDP per capita spanned by the United States
in the last century, only with slightly higher overall hours in the United States.
4.3. Extensive and Intensive Margins
Differences in hours worked per adult stem from differences in employment rates, which
represent the extensive margin, and average hours per worker, which represent the intensive margin. Figure 3 plots employment rates (top panel) and average hours per worker
(bottom panel) for our core countries. The figure shows that employment rates are decreasing for much of the income distribution, with a modest increase for the richest
countries, while hours per worker follow more of a hump-shaped pattern.
Table 2 reports the average employment rates and hours per worker in each country
income group. In the low-income countries, the average employment rate is 75.3 percent. In middle- and high-income countries, employment rates are 53.7 and 54.9 percent, respectively. Along the intensive margin, workers in low-income countries average
38.4 hours per week, compared to 41.2 hours and 34.5 hours in the middle- and highincome countries; thus, on average there is a mild hump-shape in hours per worker
among the three income groups. For employment rates, the large difference between the
low- and middle-income countries (21.6 percentage points) is statistically significant at
the one-percent level, while the (negative) difference between the middle- and highincome countries is not significant. For hours per worker, the opposite is true. The small
low-middle difference is statistically insignificant, while the large middle-high differ11

ence (6.7 hours per week) is significant at the one-percent level. Thus, average hours
per adult are shaped by the two margins differently, with employment rates accounting for the decline in hours per adult between low- and middle-income countries, and
hours per worker accounting for the decline between middle- and high-income countries. Overall, we calculate that employment rates account for around three quarters
of the cross-country differences in hours per adult, while hours per worker account for
around one quarter; see Online Appendix A.3 for details.
4.4. Time Spent on Production of Home Services
Until now, we have focused attention entirely on hours worked in the production of
output counted in NIPA. A large literature has emphasized broader notions of work,
however, including hours spent on home production of services (Parente et al., 2000;
Aguiar and Hurst, 2007; Ngai and Pissarides, 2008; Ramey, 2009; Ngai and Pissarides,
2011; Aguiar et al., 2012, 2013; Rendall, 2015; Duernecker and Herrendorf, 2016). In
this section, we consider hours of home production using a smaller set of countries for
which we have data.
Hours spent producing home services are notoriously hard to measure. The two most
important reasons are the difficult differentiation between leisure and home production
of services in some categories, and the possibility of multi-tasking. Both difficulties
apply especially when it comes to child care, but can also arise in other categories like
cooking (see Aguiar and Hurst (2007) and Ramey (2009) for excellent discussions of
the difficulties of measuring leisure and home production hours in general). Questions
covering time spent on home production of services are therefore not usually included
in labor force surveys or censuses. However, a few of the surveys we use do in fact ask
about time spent on some categories of home production of services. We complement
these surveys with data from the Multinational Time Use Study (MTUS).9
We provide evidence on average weekly hours spent in five aggregated service categories, namely cooking (including preparing food and washing dishes), cleaning, child
care, shopping, and collecting water and firewood. These data should be considered
9 For

each country, we use the year closest to 2005. Online Appendix Table C.3 provides an overview
of the countries with data on time use by income terciles. All data from the bottom and middle terciles,
except South Africa, and data from Russia come from our main data source for the respective country.
All other data come from the MTUS.

12

suggestive evidence: we do not apply the same standards to ensure comparability across
countries that we apply when calculating hours worked in the market or in the production of home produced goods. The MTUS covers all five categories except collecting
water and firewood. The other individual country surveys often cover only a subset
of the categories. For each category and each income tercile, we have data from at
least four countries, with the exception of hours spent on collecting water and firewood,
which has minimal data outside the bottom tercile.
Table 3 presents the average hours spent on each of the time use categories by income
group, with the number of countries for each category and group in parentheses. Average hours are lowest for the high-income countries in every single category except
shopping. The totals amount to 25.3 weekly hours in the bottom tercile, 25.8 hours in
the middle tercile, and 18.2 hours in the top tercile. We conclude that our main finding of higher hours worked in low-income than in high-income countries is still present
once we consider time spent on broader categories of work, at least using these data.
Our findings here are consistent with those of Bridgman et al. (2017). Using richer data
on broader time use categories from 43 countries, they find that home production hours
decrease in GDP per capita.

5. Hours Worked by Income for Different Demographic Groups
So far, we document that aggregate hours worked are decreasing in GDP per capita.
We now turn our attention to potential heterogeneity related to this fact. We document
hours worked per adult by sex, education, and over the life cycle, and hours worked per
worker by sector across our core countries. We show that the finding that average hours
worked per adult are substantially higher in low-income countries than in high-income
countries is quite broad-based. The positive hours difference between low- and highincome countries is statistically significant for both sexes, all education groups, and all
sectors except agriculture. Moreover, the decline of aggregate hours by income is not
driven by different compositions of the population across countries.
5.1. Average Hours per Adult by Sex
We start by analyzing average hours worked for both sexes across our set of core countries. As Table 4 shows, for both men and women hours per adult are decreasing by
13

development. For the low-income countries, men average 32.7 hours per week, while in
the middle- and high-income countries they average 28.4 and 23.5 hours per week, for a
difference of 9.2 hours per week between low and high. Women work fewer hours than
men in all income groups, but show the same pattern of higher hours in poorer countries,
with a very similar difference of 9.8 hours between low- and high-income countries.10
5.2. Average Hours by Education Group
Patterns of hours worked have been shown to differ systematically by education group
within the United States, see e.g. Aguiar and Hurst (2007). Do similar patterns arise in
countries in other parts of the world income distribution? Our data allow us to consistently define three broad education groups: those with (1) less than secondary school,
(2) secondary school completed (but not more), and (3) more than secondary school.
We restrict attention in this exercise to adults aged 25 and above, so as to focus on those
who have most likely completed schooling.
Table 5 reports average hours per adult by education group; see Figure C.4 of the Online
Appendix for the plots. All three education groups feature higher hours in the poorer
countries. Among individuals with less than secondary school, average hours are 31.8
in the low-income countries compared to 19.8 in the middle- and just 12.2 in the highincome countries. Thus, for the lowest education group the difference between hours
in low- and high-income countries amounts to 19.6 hours.11 Individuals in low-income
countries with secondary school completed work 13.9 more hours per week on average
than their counterparts in high-income countries, and for individuals with more than
secondary education the difference between low- and high-income countries falls to
12.6 hours. Within each country group, average hours are higher for more educated
individuals than for the less educated, though less so for the low-income countries. We
return to this evidence in Section 6.4 below.
10 Online

Appendix Figure C.3 plots average hours per adult for men (top panel) and women (bottom
panel) for each country. A notable feature of the graphs by sex is that female hours are substantially lower
for countries with large Muslim populations, such as Iraq, Pakistan, and Turkey.
11 This dramatic difference is partly caused by an age-composition effect, because individuals with
less than secondary education are most prevalent among the old in high-income countries. Focusing on
individuals aged 25 to 54 (instead of all individuals aged over 25) reduces the hours difference between
high- and low-income countries of the lowest education group from 19.6 hours to 12.0 hours.

14

5.3. Hours Worked over the Life Cycle
In this subsection, we document hours worked over the life cycle for the three country
income groups. Figure 4 plots average hours for five year age groups, starting at age
15-19 and ending at age 85-89. Since we do not have panel data, we cannot distinguish
between cohort and age effects. We interpret the data as age effects, but one should
keep in mind the caveat that we could be capturing cohort effects at least to some extent.
The well-known hump-shape of hours over the life cycle is present for all three country
income groups. Most importantly, the pattern of decreasing hours by country income
is present at each single age group. The largest differences arise for older individuals.
Starting at the age group 55-59, the differences in hours worked between low- and highincome countries are increasing up to age 65-69, at which point they start decreasing
again. This points to the absence or existence of social security programs as an important
driver of hours worked differences around the retirement age. On average, individuals
aged 55+ work 21.8 hours per week in the low-income countries, compared to 12.3 and
7.6 hours in the middle- and high-income countries. Among individuals younger than
55, the average hours difference between low- and middle-income countries amounts to
4.5 hours, and between middle- and high-income countries to 0.8 hours.12
5.4. Hours Per Worker by Sector
Which sectors contribute most to the patterns of hours per worker that we document?
To answer this question, we compute average hours per worker by three broad sectoral
aggregates, which we can define consistently across countries. These are agriculture
(including forestry and fisheries), manufacturing (including mining and utilities), and
services. We assign each worker to one of these sectors based on their primary sector of
employment (though their hours cover all jobs). We focus on hours per worker (rather
than hours per adult), since industry is only well defined for those currently working.
Table 6 presents the average hours per worker by industry. Among agricultural workers, differences in average hours are statistically insignificant across the three country
groups, with the low-, middle- and high-income countries working 36.0, 37.7 and 39.9
hours per week, respectively. Manufacturing workers work longer hours in the lowincome countries, at 44.9 hours per week, compared to 42.7 in the middle-income and
12 De

Magalhães et al. (2017) find similar patterns for several African countries.

15

36.4 in the high-income countries. The differences are even more substantial for services, where workers in the low-income countries average 47.7 hours, compared to 41.6
and 34.0 hours per week in the middle- and high-income countries. It is reassuring that
the hours differences are so pronounced in manufacturing and services, if one has the
prior that hours worked in these two sectors are measured more accurately since the
prevalence of paid employment is higher. In contrast to age and education, the country income groups do not share a common pattern of hours worked differences across
sectors.
5.5. Compositional Effects on Aggregate Hours
Given that we document substantial differences in hours worked by age, education, and
sector in all three country income groups, the question arises whether the differences in
aggregate hours by income arise due to substantial different compositions of the population by development. To gauge how important the composition of the population by
country is for determining the aggregate hours differences, we conduct several counterfactual exercises. Starting with the age composition, we first compute in each country
average hours per person for 5 year age groups. We then calculate hypothetical average weekly hours per adult in each country by multiplying U.S.-population weights for
the age groups with average hours of the corresponding age group in each country, and
then summing up over all age groups. We do a similar counterfactual exercise for the
educational composition relying on the three education groups, and another one combining the age-education composition. Last, we conduct the same exercise for hours per
worker, imposing the U.S. sectoral composition.
The results are shown in Table 7. The first two rows relate to the age structure. Average weekly hours per adult essentially do not change when the U.S. age structure is
imposed. Imposing the U.S. age structure on poor countries shifts weight from the older
population to the younger one; since both work similarly fewer hours than prime-aged
individuals, the shift has on net a minimal effect. Rows 3 and 4 focus on the educational composition (and thus on the population 25+). The hypothetical hours difference
between low- and high-income countries imposing the U.S. education composition is
somewhat larger than the actual hours difference. By imposing the U.S. education composition, the share of higher educated individuals in the low-income countries rises,

16

increasing the hypothetical hours there. However, since the hours gradient in education is smallest in the low-income countries, the difference in hypothetical hours is still
relatively close to the difference in actual hours. Row 5 then combines the age and education structure, and finds a very similar difference in hypothetical hours as in actual
hours between high- and low-income countries. The hypothetical values for hours per
worker if the U.S. sectoral composition is imposed in all countries are presented in the
last row of Table 7. What we find, not surprisingly, is that the hypothetical hours per
worker would be even higher in low-income countries if those countries had the U.S.
industry composition, given the small share of agriculture in the United States and the
low average hours in the agricultural sector in low-income countries.
Summarizing, we unequivocally find that differences in the population composition
across countries are not the main driver of the aggregate hours worked differences by
development.

6. Individual Hours Worked and Wages
So far, we have provided evidence that hours are decreasing in income at the country
level. In this section, we look at how hours vary with income within countries. We
first pool all our individual data for our core countries and compute an hours-wage
elasticity using individual-level wage data, and ask whether the aggregate hours-income
relationship we document thus far is accounted for mostly by the individual elasticity, or
whether there are aggregate features particular to poor countries that lead to higher hours
there, such as a lack of social security programs. Finally, we compute the hours-wage
slopes country by country, and ask how these slopes vary across countries.
6.1. Constructing Individual Wages
There are two major challenges in constructing wages on the individual level. First, we
observe individual earnings only for individuals who are currently working. Thus, we
focus on the intensive margin of labor supply, i.e. hours per worker. Second, while constructing hourly wages is relatively straightforward for individuals in paid employment,
it is a challenging task for self-employed individuals, who make up the majority of the
work force in developing countries. We thus construct two wage rates: the first is an individual hourly wage from paid employment, which we only construct for workers in paid
17

employment; the second is an hourly wage including earnings from self-employment,
which we construct for all individuals working positive hours. We exclude Namibia and
Laos because of missing earnings data. We briefly summarize the construction of the
two measures here, and more details as well as a validity check can be found in Online
Appendix Section A.6.

Wage from Paid Employment For individuals in paid employment, we construct an
hourly wage (expressed in 2011 PPP-adjusted US $) by dividing monthly earnings from
paid employment by actual weekly hours worked from paid employment in the reference week multiplied by 4.33. We only include individuals who are paid employees in
the main job. If they also report being paid employees in any additional jobs, we sum up
earnings and hours over all relevant jobs, if available. The European Labor Force Survey, which is our main data source for European countries, does not include individual
earnings, and thus in this analysis we use the European Union Statistics on Income and
Living Conditions (EU-SILC) for the European countries. Moreover, we have to recur
to usual rather than actual hours for the European countries and the United States. The
main caveat concerning evidence from the group of wage earners in paid employment is
that they are a selected set of all employed, particularly in lower income countries (see
Table A.1 in the Online Appendix).
Figure 5 presents a simple way of summarizing our individual-level data across all sample countries for which we can construct an individual wage. We sort individuals into
wage deciles within each country, and calculate for each decile the average wage and
average hours worked. We then plot these against each other for all 46 core countries,
and connect all deciles within a given country with a line. Notably, there is substantial
overlap of individual wages between countries of different income levels. While there
appear to be significant country fixed effects, especially among the low-income countries, the decrease of hours by wages seems to hold both within and across countries.

Wage from Paid Employment Plus Self-Employment We also construct an alternative hourly wage which includes earnings from self-employment for a broader set of
individuals, encompassing all those who are working and have non-missing earnings
data. In most of our surveys, self-employment income is reported at the individual level,

18

and so we construct an individual wage by summing all wage and self-employed earnings and dividing by total hours worked at all jobs. An important caveat is that although
self-employment income is reported at the individual level, it is still possible that other
family members supply hours of work in order to help earn the reported income. Furthermore, self-employed income is reported in different ways across countries, and there
are limits to how well we can standardize self-employment income. Fortunately, as we
show below, our overall findings are similar with and without self-employment earnings.
Online Appendix Figure C.6 plots average hours against average wages for the deciles
of the wage distribution in each country. As in Figure 5, there is substantial overlap in
wages across countries. The overall pattern is still a negative relationship between hours
and wages, though substantially flatter than the pattern for wage earners, particularly in
the poorer countries.
6.2. Individual vs. Country Income
Our findings thus far of a negative relationship of hours and GDP per capita at the
country level raise a natural question: do individuals in poor countries work more hours
because they themselves have low income, or because they live in a poor country? If it is
the former, this points to a strong role for preferences in which income effects outweigh
substitution effects (see e.g. Boppart and Krusell, 2016). If country effects dominate,
this points to institutional features of poor countries that raise labor supply relative to
rich countries.
To answer this question, we build a world data set containing all individual observations
from all 46 core countries, and regress hours worked of individual i living in country c
on the individual wage (w) and country GDP per hour worked (GDPph), including as
controls age and age squared, and clustering standard errors at the country level:
log (hic ) = α + βw log (wic ) + βGDP log (GDPphc ) + δ1 ageic + δ2 ageic 2 + εic .

(1)

The results are shown in Table 8. Each column is a different regression specification.
Panel A shows our findings for both sexes. In the first two columns, we show results
if either only GDP per hour or only the individual wage are included as regressors. In
this case, both turn out to have negative and highly significant coefficients of -0.12 and
19

-0.09, respectively. When both regressors are included at the same time (third column),
the coefficient on the individual wage drops slightly to -0.08, but the coefficient on
country GDP per hour drops more substantially to -0.03, and becomes insignificant. In
the last column, we replace GDP per hour with country fixed effects, and the coefficient
on the individual wage remains again largely unchanged at -0.10. We thus conclude that
a low individual wage correlates significantly with high hours worked per worker across
the entire world income distribution. On top of this effect, individuals living in poorer
countries tend to work more hours, though that effect is more modest.
The next two panels of Table 8 show the estimation results separately for men and
women. The main difference between both is that, once both GDP per hour or country
fixed effects and individual wages are included, the coefficient on the individual wage is
more negative for men than for women, while the coefficient on GDP per hour worked
even turns slightly positive for men, but remains negative for women. The positive
coefficient on country productivity for men is driven by variation within the group of
low-income countries (see Figure C.7 in the Online Appendix).
We find similar regression results for the sample including earnings from self-employment
(see Table C.5 in the Online Appendix). The only substantive difference is that the negative coefficient on GDP per hour is smaller in an absolute sense in the specification
without individual wages as regressors, and turns positive for both men and women once
individual wages are added. Thus, even more so than in the sample of wage workers,
high hours seem to be driven by low individual wages rather than low country income.
6.3. Individual Hours-Wage Elasticities by Country
How does the hours-income elasticity vary from country to country? To answer this
question, we follow Costa (2000) and regress within each country the logarithm of individual hours worked on the log wage and age and age squared, separately for men and
women:
log (hi ) = α + βw log (wi ) + δ1 agei + δ2 agei 2 + εi .
(2)
Figure 6 plots the country-specific coefficients βw against log GDP per capita, for men
in Panel (a) and for women in Panel (b). It shows a negative coefficient for low- and
middle-income countries, which increases towards zero starting with the richer end of

20

the middle-income countries, and turns positive for the richest countries. Thus, in the
majority of countries hours are decreasing with the individual wage, while only in the
richest countries this relationship is reversed. This cross-country evidence is in line
with the historical evidence by Huberman and Minns (2007) for a subset of OECD
countries, and the time-series evidence for the United States. Costa (2000) runs the same
regression on U.S. data from different time periods, and finds a negative coefficient in
the 1890s, which increases over time and turns positive in the female sample by 1973
and in the male sample by 1991. Her estimates are included in Figure 6 and are in line
with the values we find in the respective stages of development in the cross-section.13
Thus, in line with the cross-country evidence of a decline in hours worked per worker
with income, in the majority of countries hours per worker are also declining in the
individual wage. Only for the richest countries does the relationship between hours and
individual wages turn positive. The same holds true in the sample including earnings
from self-employment; see Figure C.8 in the Online Appendix.14
6.4. Variation of Employment Rates by Education
For non-working individuals, wage information is not present, so we use education as
a proxy for permanent income. Table 9 shows employment rates by education for the
age group 25 to 54 in the upper panel, and for the age group 55+ in the lower panel,
and separately for men and women. Employment rates are essentially flat by education
in the low-income countries for all four age-gender groups. By contrast, in the middleincome countries, and even more so in the high-income countries, employment rates are
strongly increasing in education for all age-gender groups.
Of course, this evidence is only suggestive, as education is only a rough proxy for
permanent income. However, the pattern of a positive relationship between employment
rates and education in rich countries, and a flat relationship in poor countries, is in line
with the patterns we find above between hours worked per worker and wages. This
relationship is also positive in rich countries, but negative in poor countries.
13 Costa

restricts the sample to individuals aged 25 to 64. If we do the same, our coefficient for the
United States falls from 0.09 to 0.07 for men, and from 0.12 to 0.10 for women.
14 Note that measurement error in hours induces a negative bias in the coefficient β , because wages are
w
constructed as earnings divided by hours. We provide some evidence on the scope of this division bias in
Online Appendix Section A.6.5, which leads us to conclude that the division bias might be present, but is
unlikely to substantially alter our findings.

21

One potential explanation for the diverging evidence from rich and poor countries could
be the size of the welfare state: more generous welfare states in rich countries might
create disincentives for low-productivity workers to participate in the labor market or
work long hours. Another common pattern that we find is that both the gradient of
employment rates in education, and the gradient of hours worked per worker in wages
are more positive in high-income countries for women than for men. This points to
within-household specialization and insurance in richer countries. In the low-income
countries, by contrast, both gradients are similar for men and women.

7. Implications
Summarizing our findings thus far, we establish a robust negative relationship between
hours worked and income on the aggregate level, for different demographic subgroups,
and also on the individual level for the majority of countries. In this section we discuss
two aggregate implications of these findings. The first is about development accounting,
which tries to account for cross-country income differences using observable factors of
production like physical and human capital. Our aggregate findings for average hours
imply that labor productivity differences, and hence total factor productivity (TFP) differences, are even larger across countries than previously thought. The second implication is about welfare differences across countries. Our finding of higher hours worked
for poorer countries, and poor individuals more generally, imply that welfare differences
across countries are even larger than previously thought.
7.1. Development Accounting
What are the implications of the fact that hours per adult are higher in low-income
countries than in high-income countries for the measurement of labor productivity differences? The literature on development accounting attempts to explain cross-country
differences in output per worker using aggregate stocks of human and physical capital
per worker. One basic piece of information missing from this literature has been hours
worked per worker, which has limited the ability of researchers to accurately measure
labor productivity (Klenow and Rodrı́guez-Clare, 1997; Hall and Jones, 1999; Caselli,
2005; Hsieh and Klenow, 2010). In the absence of data on hours worked, virtually all
previous studies in this literature have measured labor productivity as GDP per worker.
22

Our data suggest that GDP per worker underestimates the true labor productivity differences across countries. To investigate this quantitatively, Table 10 shows two different
measures of labor productivity: GDP per worker and GDP per hour. The first three
columns report the respective values for our three core country income groups, normalizing the value of the high-income countries for each measure to 100, and the last column
presents the ratio of the respective variable for high- to low-income countries. Focusing on this ratio, GDP per worker is 19.9 times larger in high-income countries than in
low-income countries. We can improve on this by adding our data on hours worked.
Since workers in low-income countries work on average 3.9 hours per week more, the
ratio of GDP per hour in high- over low-income countries is even higher than the ratio
of GDP per worker, specifically amounting to 23.5 instead of 19.9. This corresponds to
18 percent larger labor productivity differences across countries than implied by GDP
per worker. Middle-income countries are also less productive relative to high-income
countries based on hours worked compared to based on employment alone.15
Our findings imply that development accounting rests even more on the residual TFP
term once cross-country differences in hours are taken into consideration. This casts
doubt on theories of development that operate through lower labor input in poorer countries. Landes (1999), for example, points to hot weather in the tropics as a cost of
working there. In his theory, TFP differences across countries are in part explained by
differences in labor effort, with high effort in economies with higher TFP.
7.2. Welfare Differences Across Countries
How do measured welfare differences between rich and poor countries change if differences in hours worked are taken into account in addition to consumption differences?
To answer this question, we broadly follow the approach by Jones and Klenow (2016),
who study welfare differences across countries taking into account a wide range of outcome variables. We focus on hours worked, since our data set has a broader coverage of
hours in low- and middle-income countries than the data in Jones and Klenow (2016).
We rely on the standard neoclassical growth model, as used in the literature analyzing
U.S.-Europe hours differences, see e.g. Prescott (2004). The key modification is a nonhomotheticity in preferences in the form of a subsistence consumption requirement c̄,
15 Feenstra

et al. (2015) recommend using rgd po rather than rgd pe for productivity comparisons across
countries. Online Appendix Table C.6 shows that using rgd po does not alter our conclusions.

23

as in Ohanian et al. (2008) and Restuccia and Vandenbroucke (2014). This subsistence
consumption requirement implies that the income effect dominates the substitution effect. As consumption rises, this dominance becomes weaker, and in the limit the two
effects cancel out.
Each country has a representative, infinitely lived household which maximizes life-time
utility:
!
∞
1
1+
1
h φ ,
(3)
max∞ ∑ β t log (ct − c̄) − α
1 t
{ct ,ht }t=0
1
+
t=0
φ
where ct is consumption, ht are hours worked, utility is separable in consumption and
leisure, α determines the relative disutility weight of work, and φ is the Frisch elasticity, which allows for a more flexible labor supply elasticity than does Prescott (2004).
The household faces a standard inter-temporal budget constraint, and there is a representative firm with an aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function. Combining the
intra-temporal first-order condition of the household and the first-order condition of the
firm gives the following solution for optimal hours:

ht =  



1−θ 

ct
c̄
−
yt
yt α

φ
1+φ

.

(4)

Taking aggregate consumption (csh c in PWT 9.0) and aggregate output (rgd pe in PWT
9.0) from the data, we use this equation to calibrate the preference parameters. We set
the Frisch elasticity equal to φ = 1 (Keane and Rogerson, 2015), and the capital share
equal to θ = 0.3224 (Prescott, 2004). We then calibrate α to match average hours
worked per adult in high income countries, and the subsistence consumption term c̄ to
match hours worked per adult in low income countries. The resulting annual subsistence consumption amounts to $896 in 2011 US $, which is close to the value of $842,
corresponding to 5 percent of the U.S. GDP per capita in 1956, chosen by Ohanian
et al. (2008). Online Appendix Section B includes more details on the model setup,
calibration, and fit.
We use the calibrated utility function to compute a simple welfare metric, building on
the work of Jones and Klenow (2016). Conceptually, the welfare metric imagines giving
the representative household of some country i a choice between two options: first,
24

to work the average hours of individuals in high-income countries and to consume a
fraction λ of the average consumption in these high-income countries. The second
option is to stay in country i, and to work i’s average actual hours and enjoy i’s average
consumption. Formally, the welfare metric in country i is the λi that solves
u(ci , hi ) = u(λi · cHI , hHI )

(5)

where cHI and hHI are the average consumption and hours of individuals in our sample
of high-income countries.
Table 11 presents our average λi s by income tercile, normalizing them to have an average of 100 for the group of high-income countries. In row one, we consider only crosscountry differences in consumption, and ignore differences in hours worked. Countries
in the bottom third of the world income distribution have 8.3 percent of the welfare level
of the richest third. The middle third features 35.4 percent of the welfare of the richest
third. The final column shows that the ratio of the top to bottom third is 12.1, meaning,
as expected, very sizable differences in welfare coming through consumption alone.
The second row adds differences in hours worked to the differences in consumption.
Average welfare in the low-income countries falls to 5.2 percent of welfare in the highincome countries, leading to a welfare ratio of 19.2 between top and bottom. Thus,
considering differences in hours worked between low- and high-income countries in addition to differences in consumption increases measured welfare differences by almost
60 percent. Measured welfare differences between middle- and high-income countries
increase by a smaller degree, but still by a sizable 30 percent. Measuring welfare differences across countries is not an exact science, and our calculations leave out a lot of
elements of reality that certainly matter for welfare, such as life expectancy and inequality, as emphasized by Jones and Klenow (2016). Our calculations make however clear
that, all else equal, including cross-country differences in hours worked leads to substantially larger welfare differences across poor and rich countries than when ignoring
differences in hours.16
16 Almas

(2012) also argues that welfare of the poorest countries are overstated relative to the richest,
though for a different reason, which is a bias in the PPP methodology used in the PWT.

25

8. Conclusion
In this paper, we document how hours vary with income across and within countries of
all income levels. To do so, we compile and harmonize international survey data from
countries of all income levels, focusing on a set of countries with the most scope for international comparisons. We document that, on average, adults in the developing world
work about fifty percent more hours per week than adults in rich countries. Average
hours worked are higher in developing countries both for men and for women, for all
age and education groups, and along both the extensive and intensive margins. Within
countries, hours are decreasing with income on average and particularly so in the poorest countries. In the richest countries, hours worked are flat or increasing in income.
One implication of our findings is that aggregate labor productivity and TFP differences
across countries are larger than previously thought. Moreover, ignoring hours worked
also leads to misleading conclusions about the extent of welfare differences across countries. Put simply, residents of the poorest countries are not only consumption poor, but
leisure poor as well.
Future work is needed to reconcile the patterns we document in a model that takes
within-country heterogeneity seriously. The decrease in hours with income suggests
preferences in which income effects dominate substitution effects. The flattening of
the negative hours-income relationship within countries with GDP per capita points to
subsistence preferences as a potential driving force. Replicating the fact that the hoursincome relationship actually turns positive for the richest countries suggests additionally
a role for a tax-transfer system that varies systematically with development.

References
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst (2007). Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time
Over Five Decades. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 969–1006.
Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2012). Recent Developments in the Economics of Time Use. Annual Review of Economics 4, 373–98.
Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2013). Time Use During the Great Recession. American Economic Review 103(5), 1664–1696.
Alesina, A., E. Glaeser, and B. Sacerdote (2005). Work and Leisure in the United States
and Europe: Why So Different? NBER Macroeconomics Annual 20, 1–64.
26

Almas, I. (2012). Measurement of Real Income, Inequality and Poverty. American
Economic Review 102(2), 1093–1117.
Alonso-Ortiz, J. (2014). Social Security and Retirement Across the OECD. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 47(300-316).
Bick, A., B. Brüggemann, and N. Fuchs-Schündeln (2016). Hours Worked in Europe
and the US: New Data, New Answers. Working Paper, Goethe University Frankfurt.
Bick, A. and N. Fuchs-Schündeln (2017). Taxation and Labor Supply of Married Couples Across Countries: A Macroeconomic Analysis. Working Paper, Arizona State
University and Goethe University Frankfurt.
Boppart, T. and P. Krusell (2016). Labor Supply in the Past, Present, and Future: A
Balanced-Growth Perspective. Technical Report 22215, NBER Working Paper.
Bridgman, B., G. Duernecker, and B. Herrendorf (2017). Structural Transformation,
Marketization, and Household Production Around the World. Unpublished Working
Paper, Arizona State University.
Caselli, F. (2005). Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences. In P. Aghion and
S. Durlauf. (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth.
Costa, D. L. (2000). The Wage and the Length of the Work Day: From the 1890s to
1991. Journal of Labor Economics 18(1), 156–181.
De Magalhães, L., D. Koh, and R. Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2017). The Costs of Consumption Smoothing: Less Schooling and Less Nutrition. Unpublished Working Paper,
University of Bristol.
Duernecker, G. and B. Herrendorf (2016). On the Allocation of Time: A Quantitative
Analysis of the US and France. Unpublished Working Paper, University of Mannheim
and Arizona State University.
Erosa, A., L. Fuster, and G. Kambourov (2012). Labor Supply and Government Programs: A Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 84–107.
Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015). The Next Generation of the Penn
World Table. American Economic Review 105(10), 31503182.
Francis, N. and V. A. Ramey (2009). Measures of Per Capita Hours and Their Implications for the Technology-Hours Debate. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41,
1071–1098.
Gollin, D. (2008). Nobody’s Business But My Own: Self-Employment and Small Enterprise in Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics 55(2), 219–233.
27

Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2014). The Agricultural Productivity Gap.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2), 939–993.
Hall, R. E. and C. I. Jones (1999). Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output per Worker than Others? Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1), 83–116.
Hofman, A. A. (1998). Latin American Economic Development : A Causal Analysis in Historical Perspective. Groningen Growth and Development Centre: Groningen Growth and Development Centre Monograph series ; 3. Groningen: Groningen
Growth and Development Centre.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2010). Development Accounting. American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 2(1), 207–223.
Huberman, M. and C. Minns (2007). The Times They Are Not Changin’: Days and
Hours of Work in Old and New Worlds, 1870-2000. Explorations in Economic History 44(4), 538–567.
Jones, C. I. and P. J. Klenow (2016). Beyond GDP? Welfare Across Countries and Time.
American Economic Review 106(9), 2.
Keane, M. and R. Rogerson (2015). Reconciling Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: A Structural Perspective. Annual Review of Economic 7, 89–117.
Klenow, P. J. and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (1997). The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has it Gone Too Far? In B. S. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg (Eds.), NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Landes, D. S. (1999). The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. New York: W.W. Norton and
Company.
Lee, S., D. McCann, and J. C. Messenger (2007). Working Time Around the World:
Trends in Working Hours, Laws and Policies in a Global Comparative Perspective.
Routledge.
Lehmann, E. and J. P. Romano (2005). Testing Statistical Hypotheses. Springer Texts
in Statistics.
Maddison, A. (2001). The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Development
Centre Studies. Paris: OECD.
McDaniel, C. (2011). Forces Shaping Hours Worked in the OECD, 1960-2004. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3, 27–52.
McGrattan, E. R. and R. Rogerson (2004). Changes in Hours Worked. Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 28(1), 14–33.
28

Minnesota Population Center (2015). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version 6.4. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Ngai, R. L. and C. A. Pissarides (2008). Trends in Hours and Economic Growth. Review
of Economic Dynamics 11(2), 239–56.
Ngai, R. L. and C. A. Pissarides (2011). Taxes, Social Subsidies and the Allocation of
Work Time. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(4), 1–26.
Ohanian, L., A. Raffo, and R. Rogerson (2008). Long-Term Changes in Labor Supply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004. Journal of Monetary
Economics 55(8), 1353–1362.
Parente, S. L., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (2000). Homework in Development Economics: Household Production and the Wealth of Nations. Journal of Political Economy 108(4), 680–687.
Prescott, E. C. (2004). Why do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 28, 2–13.
Ramey, V. A. (2009). Time Spent in Home Production in the 20th Century United States:
New Estimates from Old Data. Journal of Economic History 69(1), 1–47.
Ramey, V. A. and N. Francis (2009). A Century of Work and Leisure. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(2), 189–224.
Rendall, M. (2015). Female Market Work, Tax Regimes, and the Rise of the Service
Sector. Working paper, University of Zurich.
Restuccia, D. and G. Vandenbroucke (2014). Explaining Educational Attainment across
Countries and over Time. Review of Economic Dynamics 17(4), 824–841.
Rogerson, R. (2006). Understanding Differences in Hours Worked. Review of Economic
Dynamics 9(3), 365–409.
Wallenius, J. (2013). Social Security and Cross-Country Differences in Hours: A General Equilibrium Analysis. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37, 2466–
2482.

29

Tables and Figures
Table 1: Average Hours Worked Per Adult
Panel A: Means
Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
Core Countries
Core + Partial-Year
All Countries

28.5

22.2

18.9

(11)

(15)

(22)

26.7

22.4

19.4

(16)

(32)

(25)

26.9

22.6

19.6

(18)

(35)

(27)

# Countries
(48)
(73)
(80)

Panel B: Tests of Differences in Means

Core Countries
Core + Partial-Year
All Countries

Country Income Group
Low-Middle
Middle-High
∗∗∗
6.3
3.3∗∗∗
4.3∗∗∗
3.0∗∗∗
4.3∗∗∗
3.0∗∗∗

Low-High
9.6∗∗∗
7.3∗∗∗
7.3∗∗∗

Note: Panel A reports average weekly hours worked per adult by country income group in the core countries,
the core countries plus those with partial-year surveys, and in our full set of countries. The number of countries
in each group is in parentheses. Panel B reports differences in mean hours among pairs of country income
groups. The stars represent the p-values from a permutation test of the hypothesis that the distribution of hours
worked is the same in the two groups in question: *** means a p-value less than 0.01, ** means a p-value less
than 0.05, and * means a p-value less than 0.10.

30

Table 2: Employment Rates and Hours Per Employed

Hours Per Adult
Employment Rate
Hours Per Worker

Low

Country Income Group
Middle

High

28.5
75.3
38.4

22.2
53.7
41.2

18.9
54.9
34.5

Note: This table reports average weekly hours worked per adult, average employment rates, and average
weekly hours worked per worker in the core countries by country income group.

Table 3: Hours Spent in Production of Home Services

Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
Cooking
Childcare
Cleaning
Collecting Water
Shopping
Total

8.8

8.3

5.8

(4)

(6)

(9)

5.5

6.2

2.8

(6)

(6)

(9)

6.0

7.2

5.8

(5)

(6)

(9)

3.0

2.1

–

(7)

(4)

(0)

2.0

2.0

3.8

(5)

(6)

(9)

25.3

25.8

18.2

Note: Average weekly hours for each activity are computed only over countries in which data have
been collected. The number of countries is in parentheses.

31

Table 4: Average Hours Worked Per Adult by Sex

Sex
All
Women
Men

Low
28.5
24.4
32.7

Country Income Group
Middle
22.2
16.3
28.4

High
18.9
14.6
23.5

Note: This table reports average weekly hours worked per adult among the core countries by sex
and country income group.

Table 5: Average Hours Worked Per Adult by Education Level

Education
All Ages
Ages 25+ (Non-missing Educ.)
Ages 25+
Less than Secondary
Secondary Completed
More than Secondary

Country Income Group
Low Middle High
28.5
22.2
18.9
33.0
25.7
20.7
31.8
37.3
39.5

19.8
29.3
31.7

12.2
23.4
26.9

Note: This table reports average weekly hours worked per adult among the core countries by education
and country income group. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 25 or more for whom the education
status is known, and excludes Turkey, for which education data are unavailable. For comparison, the first
row shows the data for all ages including also observations with a missing education status.

32

Table 6: Average Hours per Worker by Sector

Sector
All
All (Non-missing Sec.)
Agriculture
Manufacturing
Services

Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
38.4
41.2
34.5
40.0
40.9
34.8
36.0
37.7
39.9
44.9
42.7
36.4
47.7
41.6
34.0

Note: This table reports average weekly hours worked per worker among the core countries by
sector of main job and country income group. The sample is restricted to individuals for whom the
sector of employment is known, and excludes Switzerland and Turkey, for which sectoral data are
unavailable. For comparison, the first row shows the data including observations with a missing
sector of employment.

Table 7: Hypothetical Hours with U.S. Composition

Country Income Group
Low Middle High
Actual Hours per Adult
28.5
22.2
18.9
Hypothetical Hours: U.S. Age Composition
29.5
22.2
19.5
Actual Hours per Adult (Ages 25+, Non-miss. Educ.)
33.0
25.7
20.7
Hypothetical Hours (Ages 25+): U.S. Educ. Comp.
38.3
28.2
24.5
Hypothetical Hours (Ages 25+): U.S. Age & Educ. Comp. 34.9
25.2
22.8
Actual Hours per Worker (Non-miss. Sec.)
40.0
40.9
34.8
Hypothetical Hours: U.S. Sectoral Comp.
46.9
41.7
34.6
Note: This table reports hypothetical mean hours using the U.S. composition rather than the actual
country-specific composition. The first row shows actual hours per adult, and the second hypothetical
hours imposing the U.S. age structure (5 year age groups from 15-19 to 95+). The third row shows actual
hours per adult aged 25 or older with education information, the fourth one hypothetical hours imposing
the U.S. education structure, and the fifth hypothetical hours imposing the U.S. age-education structure
(10 year age groups combined with three education groups). The sixth row shows actual hours per worker
with sectoral information, and the seventh hypothetical hours imposing the U.S. sectoral structure.

33

Table 8: Elasticities of Hours to Aggregate and Individual Income
Panel A: Both Sexes
ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.117∗∗∗
–
No
0.081
812,406

ln Hours
–
−0.093∗∗∗
No
0.098
812,406

ln Hours
−0.031
−0.076∗
No
0.100
812,406

ln Hours
–
−0.098∗∗∗
Yes
0.208
812,406

ln Hours
0.025
−0.104∗∗∗
No
0.111
485,159

ln Hours
–
−0.125∗∗∗
Yes
0.225
485,159

ln Hours
−0.074∗
−0.050
No
0.094
327,247

ln Hours
–
−0.088∗∗∗
Yes
0.206
327,247

Panel B: Men
ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.093∗∗∗
–
No
0.069
485,159

ln Hours
–
−0.089∗∗∗
No
0.110
485,159

Panel C: Women
ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.132∗∗∗
–
No
0.087
327,247

ln Hours
–
−0.092∗∗∗
No
0.086
327,247

Note: This table reports the coefficients from an estimation of a variant of equation 2 on a data set containing individual observations from 46 countries. The dependent variable is the logarithm of individual
hours worked per worker. The explanatory variables are the ones listed in each column, plus age and age
squared. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *** means a p-value less than 0.01, ** means
a p-value less than 0.05, and * means a p-value less than 0.10.

34

Table 9: Average Employment Rates by Education Level and Age
Panel A: Prime Aged (25-54)
Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
Men Women Men Women Men Women
Less than Secondary
94.9
80.5
77.5
51.3
73.9
54.7
Secondary Completed 92.9
74.3
85.0
63.4
87.0
73.4
More than Secondary 95.1
82.1
90.2
80.5
92.2
84.4
Panel B: Old (55+)
Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
Men Women Men Women Men Women
Less than Secondary
77.3
63.1
42.2
22.2
22.7
11.7
Secondary Completed 77.4
60.7
48.1
24.8
35.9
24.1
More than Secondary 74.3
62.8
53.1
41.0
47.5
37.9
Note: Panel A reports average employment rates of prime aged men and women (25-54) among the core
countries by education group and country income group. Panel B reports average employment rates of
old men and women (ages 55+) among the core countries by education group and country income group.
The sample is restricted to individuals for whom the education status is known, and excludes Turkey, for
which education data are unavailable.

35

Table 10: Labor Productivity Differences Across Countries

GDP per Worker
GDP per Hour Worked

Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
5.0
36.0
100.0
4.3
29.8
100.0

High/Low
19.9
23.5

Note: Labor productivity is computed as the average labor productivity within each country income
group relative to the average labor productivity of the high-income group, which is normalized to
100. Only core countries are included in the analysis.

Table 11: Consumption-Equivalent Welfare Differences Across Countries

Consumption
+ Hours

Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
8.3
35.4
100
5.2
27.2
100

High/Low
12.1
19.2

Note: Average consumption-equivalent welfare is depicted for each country income group relative to
the welfare of the average high-income country, which is normalized to 100. The first row includes
only consumption and ignores differences in hours. The second row includes differences in hours
worked. Only core countries are included in the analysis.

36

Figure 1: Average Hours Worked per Adult in Core Countries
50
45
40

KHM

Hours per Week

35

TZA VNM
KEN
LAO

30
25

GHA
TLS
UGA
MWI RWA

PER
ECU
MNG
COL
IDN
PAK

20
15

IRQ

USA
BWA
CYP
CZE
LVA
CHE
EST PRT
TUR
MUS
SVN
SVK
GRC DNK
NAM ROM
LTU
AUT
GBR
FIN
POL HUN
SWE
DEU
IRL
ESP NLD
FRA
BGR
ITA
BEL

10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

Figure 2: Average Hours per Adult – Core Countries vs. U.S. Time-Series
50
45

Hours per Week

40

KHM

35

TZA
KEN

30

VNM

PER

LAO

1900
GHA

25

MNG

TLS
MWI

ECU

1944
COL

IDN

RWA

USA

PAK

UGA

BWA

1933

20

NAM

ROM

LVA
TUREST
MUS
LTU SVK
HUN
POL

BGR

15

CYP
CZE
PRT
SVN
GRC

2005
CHE

DNK
AUT
GBR
FIN
SWE IRL
ESP DEU
NLD
FRA
ITA BEL

IRQ

10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

Core Countries

10

10.5

11

U.S. Time-Series (1900-2005)

Note: The hours data for the U.S. Time-Series come from Ramey and Francis (2009).

37

Figure 3: Extensive and Intensive Margins in Core Countries
(a) Employment Rate
100
90

MWI

Employment Rate (in %)

80

KHM
UGA
LAO
RWA KENVNM
TZA

PER
ECU

70

TLS

GHA

CHE
DNK
NLD USA
GBR
CYP
SWE
PRT
COL
SVN FIN
AUT
IRL
EST CZE ESPDEU
MUS
LVA
LTU
FRA
ROMBWA
SVK
BEL
GRC
NAM
ITA
TURHUN
BGR POL

MNGIDN

60
50

PAK

40
IRQ

30
20
10
0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

(b) Hours per Worker
50
KHM
TZA
VNM
GHA
KEN

45
40

LAO

TLS

PAK

COL BWA
TUR
MNG
ECU PER
NAM
IRQ IDN ROM
BGR

Hours per Week

35
30
25

LVA
GRC
POLSVK
EST
HUN CZE
MUS
LTU
CYP
SVN
PRT

USA

AUT
ITA
DEU
ESP
FIN
IRL CHE
GBR
FRA
BEL
DNK
SWE

RWA
UGA

NLD

MWI

20
15
10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

38

10

10.5

11

0

10

Hours per Week
20
30

40

Figure 4: Average Hours per Adult over the Life Cycle

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

Age
Low-Income

Middle-Income

High-Income

90

Figure 5: Hours By Wage Deciles For Paid Employees

70

80

TZA

Hours per Week
30 40 50 60

KEN
UGA
GHA

BWA

TUR

ECU
MNG
COL
KHM
PAK IRQ
IDN
VNM
ROM
PERMUS POL
LTU
LVA

TLS
RWA

SVK CZE
HUN
GBR
SVN
DEU
PRT
AUT
CYP
FIN
FRA
ESP
DNKIRL
BEL
GRC
SWE
ITA
NLD

BGR

0

10

20

MWI

-6

-5

-4

-3

Low-Income

-2
-1
0
ln(Hourly Wage)
Middle-Income

39

1

2

3

4

High-Income

Figure 6: Country-Specific Elasticities of Hours to Wages

.1

.2

(a) Men

USA

0

USA-1991

βw

BGR
RWA

KHM

-.1

MWI

VNM
TZA

TLS

FIN
USA-1973
SVK PRT
ITA
USA-1895
ESP
POL
PER BWA
COL
PAK
CYP
MUS
GRC
IDN
MNG
ECU
IRQ
ROM

-.3

-.2

KEN
GHA
UGA

GBR
BEL
FRA
LVA
IRL
AUT
EST CZE
DNK
SWE CHE
LTU
HUN SVN DEU
NLD

TUR

7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

.2

(b) Women

GBR

0

.1

USA-1991 DEU
BEL

BGR

PAK

NLD
AUT
USA-1973
IRL
SWE
FRA
HUN CZE
DNK CHE
SVN
EST
SVK
LVA

ROM
KHM
VNM

TLS

UGA
KEN
TZA
GHA

-.2

-.1

βw

RWA
MWI

PER
IDN COL

USA-1895

PRT

LTU

ITA
ECU

-.3

IRQ

7.5

ESPFIN
CYP

BWA
MUS

POL
GRC

MNG

7

USA

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

TUR

10

10.5

11

Note: The figures show the country-specific elasticities of hours to wages, represented by the coefficient βw from
a regression of individual hours worked on individual wages, controlling for age and age squared. The upper panel
shows results for a sample of men only, and the lower panel of women only. The red (gray if printed in black
and white) data points are corresponding coefficients from US samples of different years (1890s, 1973, and 1991)
reported in Costa (2000).
40

Appendix (For Online Publication Only)

A. Data Appendix
A.1. Survey Time Coverage
Our core countries have the restriction that their surveys cover the entire calendar year. Because surveys
are structured differently across countries, this classification is however not as straightforward as one may
think. We categorize the surveys as follows, based on how much we know about the timing of household
interviews:
(a) For any individual interview the week is known.
(b) For any individual interview the month is known, but not the week.
(c) Any individual interview falls within a period longer than a month and shorter than a quarter, but
neither the week nor the month is known.
(d) Any individual interview falls within a quarter, but neither the week nor the month is known.
(e) Any individual interview falls within a period longer than a quarter, but neither the week nor the
month is known.
Going from (a) to (e), the information about the individual interview date becomes less precise. In order
to qualify as a core country, a country has to either
i. fall in category (a) or (b) and cover each month of the year
ii. fall in category (d) and cover each quarter
iii. fall in category (c) or (e) and cover the entire year.
To give a concrete example, the CPS in the US is conducted in each month but only covers one week
(specifically, the reference week contains the 12th of a month). Hence, the US falls into category (a) and
in our set of core countries. Brazil also falls in category (a) since we know the exact reference week.
However, the Brazilian survey was conducted only in one week of the year, such that Brazil is not a core
country. Except for case i, it may very well be that not each month is covered since we do not know for
sure whether for countries in categories (c) to (e) interviews took place in each month. Of the 43 core
countries four low-income and five middle-income countries fall in categories (c) to (e), though. Figures
A.1 and A.2 split the countries by core and non-core countries, respectively, and show for each country
the relevant category (a) to (e) and the covered weeks. Angola is not a core country despite covering the
entire year since it misses information on actual hours worked.

1

Figure A.1: Survey Coverage – Core Countries

AUT
BEL
BGR
BWA
CHE
COL
CYP
CZE
DEU
DNK
ECU
ESP
EST
FIN
FRA
GBR
GHA
GRC
HUN
IDN
IRL
IRQ
ITA
KEN
KHM
LAO
LTU
LVA
MNG
MUS
MWI
NAM
NLD
PAK
PER
POL
PRT
ROM
RWA
SVK
SVN
SWE
TLS
TUR
TZA
UGA
USA
VNM

0

10

20

30

40

50

Week of the Year
Categorization of observations
Weekly

Monthly

Quarterly

2

> Quarter

Figure A.2: Survey Coverage – Non-core Countries

AGO
ALB
ARM
AUS
BEN
BIH
BOL
BRA
CAN
CHL
ECU
EGY
GTM
IRL
JAM
JOR
KAZ
KEN
KGZ
LSO
MEX
MLI
MWI
MYS
NAM
NIC
PAN
PHL
PRY
RUS
SLV
SRB
TAI
TJK
TLS
TUN
VEN
ZAF

0

10

20

30

40

50

Week of the Year
Categorization of observations
Weekly

Monthly

<Quarter

3

Quarterly

>Quarter

A.2. Measuring Employment and Hours Worked
Our population of interest contains i = 1, ..., N individuals and may be only a subset of all individuals in
our survey data (e.g., only men). For all our calculations, we use individual survey weights, but refrain
from displaying them in the following paragraphs for the ease of notation. To measure employment, we
use the self-reported employment status ei of each individual i. ei takes the value of 1 for anyone reporting
to be employed, which includes self-employed and unpaid family workers, and 0 otherwise. We replace
a missing employment status (including answers like “Don’t know” and “Refuse to Answer”) with 1 if
positive actual hours worked are reported, and leave it missing otherwise. In general, missing employment
status information is not very common in our data, with 38 of the 43 core countries having less than one
percent of observations with missing employment status.
Letting the indicator 1ei =nm (where nm stands for non-missing) take the value of 1 if the employment
status is known and 0 otherwise, the employment rate (ER) is given by
ER =

∑Ni=1 ei 1ei =nm
.
∑Ni=1 1ei =nm

(A.1)

Our measure of hours per worker (H e ) is based on the actual number of hours worked in all jobs hi in the
reference period. This variable is directly available in some surveys, while in other surveys we add up
actual hours in the main job and in all additional jobs. We assign zero hours to non-employed individuals.
Employed individuals may have zero hours if they have been absent from work for the entire reference
period, e.g. because of annual leave or sickness.
We impose a common cap of 112 weekly hours (7 days x 16 hours per day), though slightly lower
country-specific caps may in fact be binding, since the maximum possible hours reported vary by survey.
For example, for the United States, the reported number of actual hours worked in all jobs cannot exceed
99, while in the ELFS the reported actual hours in the main job are capped at 80 and in all additional jobs
at 80 as well. In our data, the number of observations that are top-coded is small and exceeds 0.1 percent
in only seven core countries, with the maximum being 0.87 percent in Tanzania. Bick et al. (2016) show
that capping of hours in all jobs at 80 hours makes little difference for the United States and a subset of
European countries from the ELFS.
Letting 1hi =nm take the value of 1 if actual hours worked in all jobs are available, hours worked employed
are given by
∑N ei hi 1hi =nm
H e = i=1
.
(A.2)
∑Ni=1 ei 1hi =nm
Our measure of hours per adult (H a ) is then obtained by multiplying the extensive (ER) with the intensive
(H e ) margin of labor supply:
H a = ER × H e =

∑Ni=1 ei 1ei =nm ∑Ni=1 ei hi 1hi =nm
× N
,
∑Ni=1 1ei =nm
∑i=1 ei 1hi =nm

(A.3)

which is how Ramey and Francis (2009) measure hours per adult as well. For each country in our data
we use (A.1), (A.2) and (A.3) to compute H a , H e and ER in the aggregate, and by sex, age and education
groups, as well as H e by sector. Note that an alternative approach is to drop all individuals with any
missing data, and to compute H a as the sum of hours over the sum of adults. We prefer our current
approach since it drops fewer observations, though in practice the two approaches provide similar results,
since missing observations are a small fraction of the total in our data.

4

A.3. Decomposing Hours per Adult
There are several ways to calculate the contribution of differences in the employment rate (ER) and hours
per worker (H e ) to the differences in hours per adult (H a ) across country income groups. One possibility
is as follows:


a
a
e
e
ln(Hlow
) − ln(Hhigh
) = [ln(ERlow ) + ln(Hlow
)] − ln(ERhigh ) + ln(Hhigh
)

 

a
a
e
e
ln(Hlow
) − ln(Hhigh
) = ln(ERlow ) − ln(ERhigh ) + ln(Hlow
) − ln(Hhigh
)
e
e
ln(ERlow ) − ln(ERhigh ) ln(Hlow ) − ln(Hhigh )
+
a ) − ln(H a )
a ) − ln(H a )
ln(Hlow
ln(Hlow
high
high
|
{z
} |
{z
}

1=

ER Contribution

(A.4)

H e Contribution

Using the averages for each country-income group yields a contribution of the log employment rate differences of 76.7% and of 25.5% of the log hours per worker differences. Note that the two numbers do
not add up to 100% as suggested by Equation (A.4). This is because average hours per adult in country
income group i are not equal to the product of the average employment rate in country group i and the
average hours per worker in country group i:
Hia =

1 Ni a Ni
1 Ni
1 Ni
Hc = ∑ ERc × Hce 6= ∑ ERc × ∑ Hce ∀ i = low, med, high.
∑
Ni c
Ni c
Ni c
c

If we would do this composition between two countries rather than country groups, the two contributions
would add up to 100%. Obviously, this is not the only possible decomposition. An alternative to the log
hours decomposition via the levels works as follows:
e
e
a
a
− ERhigh × Hhigh
=ERlow × Hlow
− Hhigh
Hlow


e
e
e
a
a
ERlow − ERhigh
+ Hhigh
− Hhigh
=ERlow Hlow
− Hhigh
Hlow



e − He
e
ERlow Hlow
ERlow − ERhigh
Hhigh
high
1=
+
a − Ha
a − Ha
Hlow
Hlow
high
high
|
{z
} |
{z
}
H e Contribution

(A.5)

ER Contribution

Using this specification, the contribution of the employment rate differences to the hours per adult difference is 73.2% and of the contribution of hours per worker is 29.2%. For the same reason as explained
above the two fractions do not add up to 100%. Moreover, this decomposition is not unique. We weight
e . Using as
the hours per employed difference by ERlow and the employment rate difference by Hhigh
e
weights ERhigh and Hlow yields a contribution of the employment rate differences to the hours per adult
difference of 81.3% and of hours per worker of 21.8%. Based on these three possible decompositions,
we conclude that employment rates account for around three quarters of the cross-country differences in
hours per adult, while hours per employed account for around one quarter.

A.4. Hours Data from Penn World Tables and Total Economy Database
Recently, the Penn World Tables (PWT, version 8.1 onwards) and the Total Economy Database (TED),
run by the Conference Board, also released data on annual hours worked per worker, in addition to employment rates, for an unbalanced panel of countries, with the earliest data coming from the year 1950.
The following comparison is based on PWT 8.1 and TED May 2015 Release. Data on hours worked
per worker are missing much more often than data on employment rates. In the recent cross-section of

5

countries, the hours data from both data sources cover less countries from the bottom third of the world
income distribution than we do: compared to our 9 core countries and 20 total countries, the TED covers
only 4 countries (Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam), and the PWT none. Moreover, the four
countries in the TED have an average GDP per capita that is one third higher than the average GDP per
capita in our bottom tercile countries. As such, both data sets are ill suited to answer the question of how
hours worked in poor countries compare to the ones in rich countries nowadays.
Yet, going back in time, both data sources cover more countries that would qualify as low-income countries today. Several notable concerns arose from reading the documentation and the sources cited to
construct these databases, however. The PWT report that hours worked are taken from the TED. Yet, the
PWT apparently decided to include less observations and in many cases, the year-country observations
between both data sets do not coincide, pointing to data revisions. TED itself reports the sources for each
country-year observation. Many of these observations are either interpolated between two years (often
spread a decade apart), or even extrapolated based on average growth rates from countries with available
data in the same continent. Once we exclude these inter- or extrapolated observations, we are left with
215 observations from 14 countries (down from originally 304 observations from 17 countries) that would
qualify as low-income countries today.
Looking further into the sources of these data, we still find extrapolated or interpolated values. For
example, the value for Peru in 1950 is taken from Maddison (1995), who in turn reports that it is set
to the average value of six other available Latin American countries. Most of the 215 observations,
namely 196 observations from 8 countries, come from the Asian Productivity Organization (APO). The
APO, while being generally very careful in constructing total hours worked, itself uses interpolations
and extrapolations to get complete time series of hours for the Asian countries. From conversations
with the APO,1 we got some information on the sources of their data for five out of the eight countries
(China, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam). Only for 42 out of the 113 respective countryyear observations do the original sources include any data on hours. Even for these, the sources might
not necessarily use the same concept of hours across countries, and the hours measurement might not
necessarily cover the entire year, but we have no further information on this. As an example for a richer
country, namely Singapore, Nomura and Amano (2012) report for the APO construction of hours that,
while in theory they would like to use actual hours, they have to rely on “mid-year estimates of usual
weekly hours worked multiplied by 48 weeks per year as a crude assumption”.
Thus, we want to stress that the comparability over time and across countries of data from the TED is
much more questionable than the comparability of our data. Moreover, there are much less independent
observations in the country-year database than a first look suggests.

A.5. Potential Biases Resulting from Survey Methodology
No matter how carefully one tries to ensure comparability of different surveys across countries, there
is still the potential for bias arising from limitations in the survey methodology. One such potential
bias may arise from surveyors avoiding specific regions during periods of peak regional labor demand,
such as harvest times, to maximize participation in the surveys. If anything, we argue that it would bias
downward our measured average hours in low-income countries, which have higher shares of employment
in agriculture. Thus, the actual difference between hours in low- and high-income countries would be even
larger than the one we report above for our core countries. An indication for our prior is that hours in lowincome countries fall if we add countries with partial-year surveys to the set of core countries, as shown in
Table 1. This is much less pronounced in middle- and high-income countries, in which seasonality likely
plays less of a role.
1 We

are extremely grateful to Koji Nomura for providing this information.

6

A second potential bias may arise from vacation periods, such as annual leave and public holidays. As
Bick et al. (2016) show, hours lost due to vacation days and public holidays are likely underreported even
in surveys that cover each week of the year. While data on vacation days across countries are not readily
available, we suspect that vacation days are increasing in GDP per capita, which would imply that hours
worked are likely overstated to a larger degree in high-income countries than in low-income ones.
A third possible bias comes from child labor, i.e. hours worked by individuals under our lower age bound
of fifteen. Since child labor is more prevalent in low-income countries (Basu, 1999), this would mean
that actual hours worked may be even higher in low-income countries compared to rich countries than
our current calculations suggest. Thus, all these three potential biases indicate that our reported hours
difference between low- and high-income countries is likely a lower bound of the true difference.
A fourth potential concern is that innumeracy among survey respondents in poor countries could lead to
potential over- or underestimates of hours worked there. In this regard, it is reassuring that hours worked
per adult are substantially higher in poor countries even for highly educated individuals.

A.6. Constructing Hourly Wages from the Micro Data
A.6.1. The European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions
We use the year 2005 for all countries from the EU-SILC, except for Hungary (2006), Romania and Latvia
(2007), Bulgaria and the UK (2008), Ireland (2009), and Switzerland (2010). For UK and Ireland, these
are the first years in which their ELFS surveys cover the entire year, so we use the same years here as in
the main analysis. For the other countries, these are the first years in which the needed earnings measures
are available in the EU-SILC. There are two earnings measures available in the EU-SILC, though not
both for all countries. The first is a measure of annual earnings from the previous year, distinguishing
between earnings from paid employment and from self-employment; the second is a measure of current
monthly earnings in the main job from paid employment. The EU-SILC only contain a measure of usual
weekly hours worked, not a measure of actual hours worked. Therefore, we use usual hours rather than
actual hours as the variable to construct the wage rate. When we rely on monthly earnings from the main
job, we divide by usual hours from the main job; when we rely on total earnings from all jobs, we divide
by usual hours from all jobs. The question of usual hours refers to the current time period. Therefore, if
available, we use the measure of current monthly earnings in the main job (this is the case for Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and the UK);
only if this variable is not available we recur to annual earnings. To correct for the use of usual hours
rather than actual hours, we multiply individual hours with the country-specific ratio of average actual
hours worked (from the ELFS) to average usual hours worked (from the EU-SILC). Thereby, we make
sure that the average hours measure in each country is the same as in our aggregate analysis. Note that
this correction has no effect on the estimation of individual hours on wages within each country, i.e. the
estimation of equation 2.

A.6.2. Wage from Paid Employment
We exclude Namibia and Laos because of missing earnings data. For Namibia, the data set provides a
measure of total household per capita income, which however amounts on average to almost twice GDP
per worker and thus seems implausible.
Earnings refer to gross earnings whenever available, but in some countries to net earnings, and in many
countries it is not clear whether reported earnings are gross or net. If earnings are provided at another
frequency than monthly, we convert them to monthly earnings by multiplying with an appropriate factor

7

(i.e. 4.33 for weekly earnings, 0.33 for quarterly earnings, etc.). For daily earnings, we multiply with
days worked per week times 4.33 or days worked per month; if none of these are reported, we drop the
observation from the sample, since we do not want to make an assumption how many days an individual
works per month.
Calculating a wage is not always straightforward if an individual has multiple jobs. Our main priority is
to calculate a wage by dividing earnings and hours referring to the same job(s). Both earnings and hours
can in principle be available for (i) main job, (ii) all paid employment jobs, and/or (iii) all jobs, but the
actual availability differs across countries. We proceed in five steps to calculate the best available wage
rate for each individual (referring here always to individuals whose main job is from paid employment):
1. If an individual has only one job, we divide total earnings by total hours.
2. If an individual has multiple jobs, but all of them are from paid employment, we proceed the same
way.
3. If an individual has multiple jobs, but not all of them from paid employment, we divide earnings from all paid employment jobs by hours from all paid employment jobs, i.e. excluding both
earnings and hours from self-employment.
4. If an individual has multiple jobs, but either earnings or hours from a second (or further) job in
paid employment are not available, we divide earnings from the main job by hours from the main
job. Since for the US we know earnings only from the main job, the US falls in this category.
5. Last, for all other individuals, to whom we could not yet assign a wage rate because of missing
information, we divide total earnings from paid employment jobs, or if not available earnings from
main job, by total hours.
In the US we only have earnings in the main job (i.e. the fourth case above), but no actual hours worked
in the main job (only in all jobs). Thus we construct a wage rate dividing earnings in the main job by
usual hours worked in the main job as recommended by NBER in the documentation of the dataset. As
for the European countries, we correct for the use of usual hours rather than actual hours by multiplying
individual hours with the ratio of average actual hours worked to average usual hours worked.
Within each country, we omit the top and bottom one percent of the constructed wage observations.
Table A.1 shows the share of workers in paid employment, as well as average hours of workers in paid
employment, for the three country income groups. Workers in paid employment are clearly a positively
selected sample in the low-income countries.
In the baseline regressions of hours on wages, we always use the same hours variable on the left hand
side that we use to construct the wage rate on the right hand side. Table A.2 shows that our results from
Table 8 are robust to including only individuals with exactly one job, and excluding the top and bottom
decile of wages within each country.

A.6.3. Wage from Paid Employment Plus Self-Employment
For the majority of countries, we have a measure of self-employment earnings on the individual level.
In this case, we calculate the hourly wage as the sum of total earnings from paid and self-employment
divided by total hours in paid and self employment. We now go through the exceptions. In Cambodia,
Iraq, Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda, Timor L’Este, Uganda, and Vietnam, self-employment earnings are only
available at the household level. In Tanzania, agricultural self-employment earnings are available at the
household level, but non-agricultural self-employment earnings (only from the main job) are available at
the individual level, and we sum all self-employment earnings up at the household level. In these nine

8

countries, we calculate total household earnings by adding all individual earnings from paid employment
to the household earnings from self-employment. Total household earnings are then divided by the sum
of the hours worked of all household members to get a household wage rate. Similarly, the sum of
hours worked of all household members is divided by the number of employed household members to get
average household hours conditional on working. Thus, in the end each household is represented with the
same household wage rate and average household hours observation assigned to each working member.
For Indonesia and Mauritius, self-employment earnings only refer to the main job, not all jobs. The
surveys from Pakistan, Turkey, and the US do not include any self-employment earnings, and for these
three countries total earnings are thus equal to earnings from paid employment. For self-employment
from farming activities, we typically calculate earnings as revenues minus costs, which are often reported
for individual crops, animals, etc., and then added up. The value of own consumption of self-produced
goods is mostly explicitly asked for and then added to revenues. Self-employment earnings in the EUSILC are sometimes gross and sometimes net earnings; if both are available in a country, we always take
gross earnings. Since self-employment earnings in the EU-SILC are only available as annual earnings
from the previous year, we also use annual earnings from paid employment from the previous year in this
analysis, even if monthly earnings from paid employment in the current period are available. The only
exception is if someone does not have any additional earnings apart from earnings from paid employment
in the main job; in this case, we continue to work with monthly earnings, if available.
Within each country, we again omit the top and bottom one percent of the constructed wage observations.
Table A.3 shows the share of workers from paid and self employment with missing wages, and the hours
per worker conditional on observing a wage. The cross-country pattern in these hours resembles the one
of hours per worker for the full sample.

A.6.4. Validity Check of Wage Measures
Given that clearly the earnings measures face shortcomings and the underlying data are sometimes of
unclear quality, we conduct a validity check to gauge their general reliability. To do that, we construct a
measure of average earnings per worker in each country, summing up all earnings from paid employment
and dividing by workers in paid employment for the first earnings measure, and summing up all earnings
(including self-employment earnings) and dividing by all individuals working positive hours for the second earnings measure. We then compare the respective average earnings per worker to GDP per worker
reported in the Penn World Tables. Figure A.3 shows these two ratios. Focusing first on the earnings
measure from paid employment, the ratio amounts on average to 0.57 in the low-income countries, 0.29
in the middle-income countries, and 0.34 in the high-income countries. This confirms positive selection
into paid employment jobs in low-income countries. For total earnings, the ratios amount on average to
0.47, 0.27, and 0.38, respectively, for the low-, middle-, and high-income countries. Given that the labor
share of GDP is roughly two thirds, but that the labor share also includes some components not measured
in earnings (e.g. employer contributions to social security), these ratios are somewhat on the low side, but
overall not too far off. While for some individual countries they raise some concerns about the measurement of earnings (e.g. in Kenia the ratio is over 1.2 for earnings from paid employment, but in Malawi
just over 0.1), this validity check shows that our earnings measures are overall reasonable.

A.6.5. Some Evidence on Division Bias
Since individual hours worked are the dependent variable in our regressions, but also feature as a denominator on the right hand side of the regression equation in individual wages, any classical measurement
error in hours leads to a spurious negative correlation between hours and wages, see e.g. Borjas (1980).
To gain some insights into the potential size of this division bias, we conduct a number of robustness

9

checks on a limited sample of countries for which we have an alternative hours variable available. The
main strategy is to run regressions in which the measure of hours on the left hand side is replaced with an
alternative measure (e.g. usual hours worked rather than actual hours worked, which are used to construct
wages). Table A.4 shows results for the US, Turkey, Peru, Mongolia, and Uganda. In all six robustness
checks (2 for Uganda), replacing hours with an alternative measure increases the coefficient βw . Thus,
there is robust evidence for the presence of a division bias. However, the coefficient change is generally
relatively small: with the exception of Peru, the coefficient increases by on average one third, or 0.05 in
absolute terms, and never changes sign. In the Peruvian sample, however, replacing actual hours worked
with usual hours in all jobs increases the coefficient from -0.15 to 0.06.

Table A.1: Hours Worked and Shares of Workers in Paid Employment

Hours per Worker: All Workers
Hours per Worker: Wage Workers (Non-Missing Wages)
Share of Wage Workers (in %)
Share of Workers w/ Missing Status (in %)
Share of Wage Workers w/ Missing Wage (in %)

Country Income Group
Low Middle High
38.4
41.2
34.5
48.2
43.1
33.3
23.4
61.2
83.9
3.7
0.6
0.0
16.1
5.8
2.9

Note: This table shows in row 1 hours per worker from our main sample, and in row 2 hours per worker
from the sample of wage workers for whom we can construct a wage observation. Rows 3 gives the
share of wage workers among all workers, and row 4 gives the share of workers for whom we don’t know
whether they are in paid employment or self-employed; thus, 100 minus the shares in rows 3 and 4 give
the share of self-employed workers. Row 5 gives the share of wage workers for whom we do not observe
a wage among all wage workers.

10

Table A.2: Robustness Exercises on Elasticities of Hours
Panel A: All Individuals with Only One Job

ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.143∗∗∗
–
No
0.093
569,433

ln Hours
–
−0.141∗∗∗
No
0.158
569,433

ln Hours
−0.004
−0.139∗∗∗
No
0.158
569,433

ln Hours
–
−0.138∗∗∗
Yes
0.239
569,433

Panel B: Excl. Individuals with Wage in 1st and 10th Decile in Each Country

ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.118∗∗∗
–
No
0.092
657,607

ln Hours
–
−0.093∗∗∗
No
0.098
657,607

ln Hours
−0.042
−0.065
No
0.100
657,607

ln Hours
–
−0.100∗∗
Yes
0.225
657,607

This table reports the coefficients from estimating equation 2 on a data set containing individual observations of both sexes but with different samples from 42 and 46 countries in Panels A and B, respectively.
The dependent variable is the logarithm of individual hours worked per worker. The explanatory variables
are the ones listed in each column, plus age and age squared. The first panel includes only individuals
for which we know that they have exactly one job, which is a job in paid employment. The second panel
excludes the top and bottom decile of individual wage observations within each country. *** means a
p-value less than 0.01, ** means a p-value less than 0.05, and * means a p-value less than 0.10.

Table A.3: Hours Worked and Shares of Workers in Paid or Self Employment

Hours per Worker: All Workers
Hours per Worker: All Workers (Non-Missing Wages)
Share of Workers w/ Missing Wage (in %)

Country Income Group
Low Middle High
38.4
41.2
34.5
39.3
43.5
34.3
2.7
9.4
0.3

Note: This table shows in row 1 hours per worker from our main sample, and in row 2 hours per worker
from the sample of workers for whom we can construct a wage observation from paid or self-employment.
Row 3 gives the share of workers for whom we do not observe a wage.

11

Table A.4: Evidence on Division Bias

Dep. Var.: Hours

Obs.

βw
∗∗∗

Baseline - USA
Robustness

Usual Main J.
Usual Main J.
Actual J.

0.125
0.124∗∗∗
0.125∗∗∗

162,283

Baseline - Turkey
Robustness

Actual
Actual
Usual Main J.

−0.303∗∗∗
−0.303∗∗∗
−0.211∗∗∗

88,138

Actual
Actual
Usual All J.

−0.108∗∗∗
−0.150∗∗∗
0.056∗∗∗

15,356

Baseline - Mongolia
Robustness

Actual
Actual
Usual Main J.

−0.212∗∗∗
−0.212∗∗∗
−0.188∗∗∗

1,223

Baseline - Uganda
Robustness

Actual
Actual
Usual All J.
Usual Main J.

−0.176∗∗∗
−0.155∗∗∗
−0.055∗
−0.070∗∗

671

Baseline - Peru
Robustness

156,351

88,138

3,262

1,223

360

Note: This table reports the coefficient βw from an estimation of the log of individual hours
worked on the log of the individual wage in data from the US, Turkey, Peru, Mongolia,
and Uganda, including age and age squared as explanatory variables. The first row for
each country shows baseline results, in which the dependent hours variable corresponds
to the one used to construct hourly wages. The second row for each country repeats the
baseline estimation on a restricted sample of individuals for whom an alternative hours
measure to the one used in the baseline estimation is available. The third row then shows
results if the alternative hours measure is used as the dependent variable. For Turkey, Peru,
Mongolia, and Uganda, the baseline hours measure is a measure of actual hours worked,
while the alternative one is a measure of usual hours worked (either in the main job or in
all jobs). For the US, it is the other way round. For Uganda, there are two alternative hours
measures. *** means a p-value less than 0.01, ** means a p-value less than 0.05, and *
means a p-value less than 0.10.

12

Figure A.3: Ratio of Income per Worker over GDP per Worker

Income per Worker/GDP per Worker

1.3
KEN

1.2
1.1
1
.9

TZA
KEN

.8

KHM

.7
RWA
UGA VNM
KHM
TZA
VNM
TLS
GHA

.6
.5
.4

RWA
GHA
TLS UGA

.3
.2
.1

MWI
MWI

CHE
DEU
DNK
NLD
GBR
SVN
GBR
DEU
PER
DNK
COL BWA
GRC FIN
BEL
NLD USA
SWE
AUT
CYP
FRA
AUT
ESP
BGR
ITA
GRC
COL
PAK
SVN
BGR
ESP
CYP
FRA
FIN
PRT
CZE
SWE
PER
PAK IRQ
POL
MUS
POL
EST
HUN
MNGIDN
HUNCZE
ROM
LTU
IRQ
TURLVA
LTU
ROM
LVA
SVK
MNG

0
7

7.5

8

Wage Earnings

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

Wages plus Self-Employment Earnings

Note: This figure shows the ratio of income per worker over GDP per worker from the Penn World
Tables, plotted against the logarithm of GDP per capita. Income per worker is defined as earnings from
paid employment divided by number of workers in paid employment for the black dots, and as earnings
from paid employment plus earnings from self-employment divided by the total number of workers for
the grey dots.

13

B. Model Appendix
In the following paragraphs, we first provide more details on the model setup. We then describe the
calibration and model fit.
The household budget constraint amounts to ct + kt+1 = wt ht + (1 + rt )kt , where wt and rt are the return to working and capital kt . There is a representative firm with a Cobb-Douglas production function
yt = At ktθ ht1−θ , where yt denotes output, At the efficiency of production, and θ the capital share. As is
standard, household optimality implies that the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption equals the price ratio. Profit maximization of the representative firm implies that the marginal
product of labor equals the wage. Combining these two conditions yields the following Equation (4),
which we restate here:



ht =  

ct
yt

1−θ 

− yc̄t α

φ
1+φ

.

Rather than solving the full-dynamic model, Prescott (2004) interprets Equation (4) as the equilibrium
value of hours worked given parameters and values for the consumption-output ratio. Our specification
adds values for the subsistence consumption-output ratio as in Ohanian et al. (2008). The consumptionoutput ratio, directly taken from the data, captures the dynamic component of the neo-classical growth
model. The difference between the consumption-output ratio and the subsistence consumption-output
ratio in turn determines the size of the income effect. In the context of our data, the higher is output, y,
the lower is the role of subsistence consumption for determining hours, holding everything else equal.
This naturally generates a decreasing relationship between hours worked and output. Figure B.1 shows
the model inputs for each country, evaluated at the calibrated value of c̄, and Figure B.2 plots the data
and model hours against GDP per capita. One key observation is that for Malawi the calibrated subsistence consumption exceeds actual consumption. As a consequence, Equation (4) does not predict hours
for Malawi. This is however not a problem for our welfare analysis, in which the calibrated value of
subsistence consumption cancels out as it is the same across countries. While we match on average hours
per adult perfectly in low- and high-income countries, the model explains about half of the difference
between middle- and high-income countries. Finally, Figure B.3 plots the ratio of welfare to consumption
in each country.
As a last remark, it is worthwhile to mention that Prescott (2004) and Ohanian et al. (2008) use the above
framework to quantify in how far cross-country differences in consumption taxes, labor income taxes, and
government consumption can account for the differences in hours per adult across countries and over time
in OECD countries. To keep the analysis focused, we abstract from these public policies. In a robustness
exercise for a subset of countries for which we have information on these policies, we find that introducing
them does not substantively change our main conclusions; results are available on request.

14

.6

.8

Figure B.1: Country-specific yc − c̄y

NAM
COL
PER
ECU ROM
BGR

PAK
KHM

LTU
MUS
TUR
LVA
HUN
POLSVK
EST

c/y-cbar/y
.2
.4

IDN

CYP
USA
GRC
GBR
PRT
ESP
ITA AUT
DEU
SVN FRA
BEL
CHE
CZE
NLD
SWE
FIN
DNK

GHA

IRL

KEN

BWA
IRQ
MNG

RWAUGA
TLS

VNM
LAO

0

TZA

-.2

MWI

7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

Figure B.2: Average Hours per Adult – Model vs. Data
50

Hours per Week

40

TZA

TLS
RWA

30
MWI

KHM

LAO
TZA
KEN VNM
LAO
UGA
VNM
MNG
IRQ
MNG

GHA
TLS
KEN
RWA UGA
GHA

20

PER
ECU
IDN

COL
BWA
BWA

PAK

IDN
ROM
BGR
NAM PER
ECU
ROM
NAM COL
BGR

KHM
PAK
IRQ

USA
IRL
CZE CYPFIN
LVA
DNK
CHE
PRT
SWE
EST
TUR
MUS
NLD CHE
CZE
SVN
BEL
SVK
GRC FRA
DNK
SVN
LTUEST
POL
GBR
HUN
AUT
SVK
LVA
ITADEU
TUR
MUS
HUN PRT ESP
POL
LTU
SWE
DEU
IRL USA
ESP FIN
GBR
NLD
GRC
CYP
FRA
ITABEL

10

0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)
Data

15

Model

10

10.5

11

Figure B.3: Welfare vs. Consumption
ITA
BEL

Ratio of Welfare to Consumption

2

FRA

BGR
IRQ

1.5

ESP

MWI
POL
TLS
RWA

1

NAM

LTU

UGA
TZA
KEN
GHA

ROM

VNM
KHM
LAO

.5

PAK

DEU
NLD

HUN

SVK
MUS
TUR
LVAEST

GBR
GRC SWE
FIN
AUT
IRL
DNK
PRT
SVN
CYP
CZE

CHE

MNGIDN
ECU COL BWA
PER

USA

0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

16

10

10.5

11

C. Appendix Tables and Figures
Table C.1: Data Sources
Country

Source

Year

Tercile

Core

Sample Size

Albania

Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS)

2005

2

No

12,979

Angola

Inquerito Integrado sobre o Bem-Estar da Populacao (IBEP)

2008

2

No

30,622

Armenia

Labour Force Survey

2008

2

No

6,065

Australia

Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in
Australia (HILDA-CNEF)

2005

3

No

13,571

Austria

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

168,399

Belgium

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

88,670

Benin

Enquete Modulaire Integree sur les Conditions
de Vie des Menages (EMICOV)

2010

1

No

41,515

Bolivia

Encuesta de Hogares (RIGA)

2005

1

No

10,436

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

Living Standards
(LSMS)

2001

2

No

7,738

Botswana

Labour Force Survey

2005

2

Yes

19,390

Brazil

National Household Sample Survey (PNAD)

2009

2

No

300,734

Bulgaria

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

2

Yes

123,108

Cambodia

Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey (CSES)

2011

1

Yes

11,542

Canada

Census of Canada (IPUMS)

2001

3

No

119,179

Chile

National Socioeconomic Survey (CASEN )

2009

3

No

193,231

Colombia

Integrated Household Survey (GEIH)

2008

2

Yes

593,287

Cyprus

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

31,719

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

213,620

Denmark

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

47,280

Ecuador

Encuesta de Condiciones de Vida (LSMS)

2005

2

Yes

35,947

Egypt

Labor Market Panel Survey

2006

2

No

25,661

El Salvador

VI Population and V Housing Census

2007

2

No

75,106

Estonia

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

15,006

Finland

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

36,544

Czech
public

Re-

Measurement

17

Survey

Table C.1: Data Sources
Country

Source

Year

Tercile

Core

Sample Size

France

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

278,613

Germany

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

406,931

Ghana

Living Standards Survey (LSMS)

1998

1

Yes

15,003

Greece

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

271,319

Guatemala

Encuesta Nacional Sobre Condiciones de Vida
(ENCOVI) (LSMS)

2000

2

No

21,204

Hungary

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

265,945

Indonesia

Sakernas (National Labour Force Survey)

2010

2

Yes

776,344

Iraq

Household Socio-Economic Survey (LSMS)

2007

2

Yes

75,500

Ireland

European Union Labour Force Survey

2009

3

Yes

211,337

Italy

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

605,063

Jamaica

Population Census (IPUMS)

2001

2

No

111,153

Jordan

Population and Housing Census (IPUMS)

2004

2

No

95,908

Kazakhstan

Living Standards
(LSMS)

1996

2

No

5,141

Kenya

Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey

2005

1

Yes

38,732

Kyrgyzstan

Living Standards
(LSMS)

1998

1

No

9,720

Lao PDR

Expenditure and Consumption Survey

2007

1

Yes

29,785

Latvia

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

2

Yes

18,639

Lesotho

Integrated Labour Force Survey

2008

1

No

32,799

Lithuania

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

2

Yes

40,232

Malawi

Integrated Household Survey (LSMS)

2004

1

Yes

27,526

Malaysia

Population and Housing Census (IPUMS)

1991

2

No

110,172

Mali

Permanent Household Survey (EPAM)

2010

1

No

9,383

Mauritius

Continuous Multi Purpose Household Survey
(CMPHS)

2010

2

Yes

31,746

Mexico

Population and Housing Census (IPUMS)
2010

2010

2

No

80,761

Mongolia

Labour Force Survey

2006

2

Yes

10,371

Measurement

Measurement

18

Survey

Survey

Table C.1: Data Sources
Country

Source

Year

Tercile

Core

Sample Size

Namibia

Household Income and Expenditure Survey

2009

2

Yes

27,852

Netherlands

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

359,045

Nicaragua

National Household Survey Measurements on
Living Standards (EMNV) (LSMS)

2005

1

No

97,193

Pakistan

Labor Force Survey

2011

1

Yes

149,566

Panama

Encuesta de Niveles de Vida (ENV) (LSMS)

2008

2

No

18,493

Paraguay

Encuesta de Hogares (Household Survey)

2011

2

No

13,758

Peru

Encuesta Nacional de Hogares (ENAHO)

2010

2

Yes

61,695

Philippines

Labor Force Survey (Jan, Apr, Jul, Oct)

2010

2

No

540,352

Poland

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

2

Yes

186,439

Portugal

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

162,255

Romania

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

2

Yes

234,399

Russia

Russia Longitudinal
(RLMS)

2009

3

No

11,677

Rwanda

Enquete Integrale sur les conditions de vie des
menages 2010-2011

2011

1

Yes

39,197

Serbia

Living Standards
(LSMS)

2007

2

No

14,925

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

97,867

Slovenia

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

62,173

South Africa

Census 2001 (IPUMS)

2001

2

No

75,796

Spain

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

522,325

Sweden

European Union Labour Force Survey

2005

3

Yes

147,131

Switzerland

European Union Labour Force Survey

2010

3

Yes

67,121

Taiwan

Labor Force Survey

2011

3

No

682,792

Tajikistan

Living Standards Survey (LSMS)

2007

1

No

19,032

Tanzania

National Panel Survey (LSMS)

2009

1

Yes

9,519

Timor Leste

Living Standards Survey (LSMS)

2007

1

Yes

14,368

Tunisia

Enquete Nationale sur la Population et
l’Emploi de 2010 (ENPE 2010)

2010

2

No

409,242

Slovak
public

Re-

Monitoring

Measurement

19

Survey

Survey

Table C.1: Data Sources
Country

Source

Year

Tercile

Core

Sample Size

Turkey

Household Labour Force Survey

2010

2

Yes

385,180

Uganda

National Panel Survey (LSMS)

2010

1

Yes

9,050

United Kingdom

European Union Labour Force Survey

2008

3

Yes

156,469

United States

Current Population Survey - Merged Outgoing
Rotation Group (NBER)

2005

3

Yes

322,991

Venezuela

Population and Housing Census (IPUMS)

2001

2

No

76,502

Vietnam

Household Living Standards Survey (LSMS)

2002

1

Yes

92,718

Table C.2: GDP per Capita in 2011 US-Dollar, PPP-adjusted

Sample
Penn World Tables 9.0 (2005)
Core Countries
Core + All non-core Countries

Low
2,130

Country Income Group
Middle
High
9,139
36,284

(60)

(61)

(61)

2,113

11,030

33,059

(11)

(15)

(22)

2,228

9,143

32,590

(18)
(35)
(27)
Note: The number of countries in each group is in parentheses. The last version of the PWT that
includes Timor L’Este is version 7.1. We impute GDP per capita for Timor L’Este as follows. We
use the ratio of GDP per capita (based on rgd pch) in Timor L’Este to GDP per capita in Indonesia
for the year 2007 from PWT 7.1 and then multiply that ratio with GDP per capita (based on rgd pe)
from Indonesia from PWT 9.0 for 2007.

20

Table C.3: Home Production Hours by Individual Country and Category

cooking

cleaning

childcare

shopping

collwf

Tercile

BEN

–

6.9

–

3.9

–

1

GHA

6.9

1.9

8.0

2.8

3.1

1

KGZ

–

–

9.8

–

3.7

1

LSO

–

–

2.1

0.1

1.9

1

MLI

5.1

2.7

3.3

–

3.1

1

PAK

16.4

13.9

7.2

2.1

0.8

1

RWA

6.9

4.3

–

1.3

3.4

1

TLS

–

–

2.6

–

5.0

1

EGY

10.8

9.3

9.6

2.6

0.3

2

GTM

8.6

8.3

10.3

1.7

3.6

2

IRQ

7.3

5.7

3.2

2.1

–

2

KAZ

9.1

8.2

10.1

3.2

–

2

MNG

6.3

4.4

2.0

1.0

4.3

2

ZAF

7.7

7.2

2.2

1.4

0.0

2

AUT

6.6

7.8

3.0

4.4

–

3

DEU

5.5

6.1

2.3

3.7

–

3

ESP

7.3

6.5

2.1

3.3

–

3

FRA

6.4

6.0

2.1

4.4

–

3

GBR

4.8

4.9

3.8

3.9

–

3

ITA

7.6

7.8

1.9

3.9

–

3

NLD

5.9

3.6

2.9

3.8

–

3

RUS

4.6

4.4

3.7

2.4

–

3

USA

3.6

4.9

3.0

4.3

–

3

21

Table C.5: Elasticities of Hours to Aggregate and Individual Income (Incl. Earnings
from Self-Employment)
Panel A: Both Sexes
ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.033
–
No
0.022
1,289,548

ln Hours
–
−0.052∗∗
No
0.041
1,289,548

ln Hours
0.062
−0.086∗∗∗
No
0.047
1,289,548

ln Hours
–
−0.098∗∗∗
Yes
0.154
1,289,548

Panel B: Men
ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.022
–
No
0.024
770,727

ln Hours
–
−0.053∗∗
No
0.050
770,727

ln Hours
0.092∗∗
−0.102∗∗∗
No
0.066
770,727

ln Hours
–
−0.118∗∗∗
Yes
0.194
770,727

ln Hours
0.039
−0.075∗∗∗
No
0.043
518,821

ln Hours
–
−0.094∗∗∗
Yes
0.133
518,821

Panel C: Women
ln (GDP per Hour)
ln (Hourly Wage)
Country Fixed Effects
R2
Obs.

ln Hours
−0.044
–
No
0.025
518,821

ln Hours
–
−0.054∗∗
No
0.040
518,821

Note: This table reports the coefficients from an estimation of a variant of equation 2 on a data set containing individual observations from 46 countries. The dependent variable is the logarithm of individual
hours worked per worker. The explanatory variables are the ones listed in each column, plus age and age
squared. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *** means a p-value less than 0.01, ** means
a p-value less than 0.05, and * means a p-value less than 0.10.

22

Table C.6: Labor Productivity Differences Across Countries Using rgd po Instead of
rgd pe

GDP per Worker
GDP per Hour Worked

Country Income Group
Low
Middle
High
5.6
31.7
100.0
4.8
26.3
100.0

High/Low
17.8
20.7

Note: Labor productivity is computed as the average labor productivity within each country income
group relative to the average labor productivity of the high-income group, which is normalized to
100. Only core countries are included in the analysis. In our baseline exercise, we use rgd pe to
calculate GDP per hour and find 18 percent larger labor productivity differences across countries
than implied by GDP per worker. Feenstra et al. (2015) recommend using rgd po rather than rgd pe
for productivity comparisons across countries. This implies 16 percent larger labor productivity
differences across countries when relying on GDP per hour worked than implied by GDP per worker.

23

Figure C.1: Average Hours Worked per Adult: Core vs. All Non-Core Countries
50
45

Hours per Week

40

KHM

35

TZA VNM
KEN
PER
LAO BOL GTMKAZ
ECU
PRY
BEN
AGO
GHA
MNG MYS
COL PAN
MLI
BRA
TLS
PHL IDN
NIC
TAI USA
MEXRUS
PAK
UGA
BWA
MWI RWA
CAN
ALB
AUS
VEN
EGY
CYP
CHL
SLV
CZE
LSO
CHE
JAM
EST PRT
TUR
MUS
KGZ
SRB LVA
SVN
SVK
TJK
GRC DNK
NAM ROM
LTU
AUT
GBR
TUN
POL HUN
SWE
JOR
DEU
IRL
ESPFIN
ARM
NLD
FRA
ITA
ZAFBGR
BEL
BIH
IRQ

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

Core Countries

10

10.5

11

All non-core Countries

Figure C.2: ln(Hours per Adult) vs. ln(GDP per hour)
3.75
KHM

TZA
VNM
KEN

ln (Hours per Week)

3.5

GHA

3.25

PER
ECU

LAO

MNG

TLS

COL
IDN

UGA
MWI RWA

PAK

BWA

USA

CYP
LVA EST CZE
CHE
TUR PRT
MUS
SVN
ROM
SVK
GRC DNK
NAM
LTU
AUT
GBR
FIN
POL HUN
SWEIRL
ESPDEU
NLD
FRA
BGR
ITABEL

3

2.75

IRQ

2.5
0

1

2
ln(GDP per Hour)

24

3

4

Figure C.3: Average Hours per Adult by Sex
(a) Men
50
45

KHM

40

ECU

PAK

PER
COL

KEN

Hours per Week

35

VNM
LAO

TLS

30
MWI

25

IDN
MNG

TZA
GHA
RWAUGA

TUR
USA
CHE
CYP
CZE
GRC
LVA
PRT
AUT
SVN DNK
GBR
EST
SVK
NLD
ESPDEU
LTU
POL
IRL
HUN
ITA
SWE
FIN
FRA
BEL

BWAMUS
IRQ
NAM ROM

20
BGR

15
10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

(b) Women
50
45
40
TZA

Hours per Week

35

VNM
LAO

30

KEN
GHA

25
20

KHM

PER
MNG
ECU

RWAUGA
MWI TLS

USA
BWA
LVAEST PRT
IDN COL
ROM
CYP
SVN
NAM
LTU
SVK CZE
FIN
DNK
BGR POL HUN
SWE
GBR CHE
AUT
GRC
FRA
MUS
DEUIRL
ESP
NLD
BEL
ITA
TUR

15
10
PAK

5
IRQ

0
7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

25

10

10.5

11

Figure C.4: Average Hours per Adult by Education (Ages 25+ only)
(a) Less than Secondary School
50
45
KHM

40

TZA
KEN VNM
GHA

Hours per Week

35
30
25

RWA
TLS
UGA

MWI

PER

LAO

MNG ECU
IDN

PAK

COL

BWA

NAM

20
15

IRQ

PRT

MUS
LVA EST

ROM

10

HUN
POL
LTU
SVK

BGR

5

GBR
CYP
GRC
USA
SVNESP SWE
IRL CHE
ITA
NLD
DNK
FRA
AUT
FIN
DEU
BEL
CZE

0
7

7.5

8

8.5

9
ln(GDP per Capita)

9.5

10

10.5

11

(b) Secondary School Completed
50
KHM

45

VNM

40

TZA
KEN
UGA GHA

Hours per Week

35
MWI

PER

LAO
ECU

RWA
TLS

PAK

MNG

COL

IDN

BWA

30
NAM

25
IRQ

MUS
LVA
HUN
LTUEST
SVK
POL

ROM
BGR

20

CYP
PRTGRC
CZE
GBR
SVNESP
ITAFIN
SWE
DNK
USA
FRA
AUTIRL
BELNLD
CHE
DEU

15
10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5

9
ln(GDP per Capita)

9.5

10

10.5

11

(c) More than Secondary School
TZA

50
45

Hours per Week

40

KHM
MWI

RWA
TLS

35

GHA
VNM LAO
KEN
UGA

ECU
NAM PER
COL

BWA

MNG
IDN

PAK

30

ROM

LVA SVK
HUN
LTUEST
POL

BGR

25
IRQ

CZE
USA
CHE
PRT CYP
GRC
AUT
GBR
SVN
DEU
ESP
DNK
SWEIRL
FRA
FIN
BEL
ITA
NLD

20
15
10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5

9
ln(GDP per Capita)

26

9.5

10

10.5

11

Figure C.5: Average Hours per Worker by Sector
(a) Agriculture
50
45

COL

TZA
KHM

40

Hours per Week

35

PAK

MWI

MNG

ROM
PER
IDN

30

POL

FIN
GBR
DEU
SVN
CZE
GRC BEL
SWE
ITA
CYP DNK

LTU
MUS

PRT

LVA EST
HUN
SVK

IRQ

VNM
GHA
LAO
KEN

AUT
FRA

BWA

ECU

ESP

USA

NLD

BGR
RWA

25

UGA

20
15
10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5

9
ln(GDP per Capita)

9.5

10

10.5

11

(b) Manufacturing
KHM

50
45

MWI

PAK

KEN VNM
GHA

MNG ECU
IDN

RWA
TZA

40

LAO

COL
PER

BWA
POL
LVA
MUSEST
HUN
LTUSVK

ROM

IRQ

BGR

UGA

Hours per Week

35
30

GRC

USA

CZE
PRT
SVNCYP
GBR
ESP
ITADEU
AUT
FIN
BEL
FRA
DNK
SWE
NLD

25
20
15
10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5

9
ln(GDP per Capita)

9.5

10

10.5

11

(c) Services
RWA

50
45

Hours per Week

40

KEN
KHM
GHA
VNM LAO

PAK

UGA
TZA

IDN
MNG

MWI

IRQ

ECU

COL

BWA

PER
ROM
BGR

35

LVA
POL
MUSEST
SVK
HUN
LTU

30

GRC
CZE
PRT CYP
SVN
ITADEU
AUT
ESP
FIN
FRA
GBR
BEL
DNK
SWE

USA

NLD

25
20
15
10
5
0
7

7.5

8

8.5

9
ln(GDP per Capita)

27

9.5

10

10.5

11

70

80

90

Figure C.6: Hours By Wage (Incl. Earnings from Self-Employment) Deciles For All
Employees

BWA

Hours per Week
30 40 50 60

TUR
TZA

BGR
MNGPAK
COL
IDN
ECU
KHM
IRQ
VNM
POL
MUS
GHAKEN
PER
LVA
LTU
ROM

TLS

HUN
SVK CZE
DEU
SVN
AUT
PRT
GRC
C
YPGBR
FRA
FIN
ESP
IRL
DNK
ITA
BEL
SWE
NLD

UGA RWA

0

10

20

MWI

-6

-5

-4

-3

Low-Income

-2
-1
0
ln(Hourly Wage)
Middle-Income

28

1

2

3

4

High-Income

Figure C.7: Country Fixed Effects from Regression in Column 4 of Table 8

.25

.5

(a) Men

TZA
PAK

KEN
VNM
GHA
UGA

TUR
ECU COL BWA
CHE
PER
DEU USA
GRC
CYP AUT
GBR
IRL
MUS
POL
CZE
ROM
EST
LVA
SVN
IRQ
MNGIDN
BEL
SVK
ESP
HUN PRT
ITA
DNK
FIN
BGR
LTU
FRA
SWE
NLD

TLS
RWA

MWI

-1

-.75

Country Dummy
-.5
-.25
0

KHM

7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

.5

(b) Women

.25

TZA

KHM

Country Dummy
-.5
-.25
0

KEN

VNM

UGA

PAK

GHA
TLS
RWA

COL BWA TUR
ROM
MNG
ECU PER
SVN
LVAEST
HUN CZE
IDN
USA
GRC
BGR POL
SVK
LTU
PRT CYP
MUS
FIN
ITADNK
SWE
ESP
AUT
FRA
BEL
DEU
GBR
IRL CHE
IRQ

-.75

NLD

-1

MWI

7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

Note: The figure plots the country fixed effects from the regression in column 4 of Table 8 against the logarithm of
GDP per adult in each country. The fixed effects for men come from Panel B of Table 8, and the fixed effects for
women from Panel C. A linear fit is included.

29

Figure C.8: Country-Specific Elasticities of Hours to Wages (Incl. Earnings from SelfEmployment)

.1

.2

(a) Men

USA

0

USA-1991

MWI TLS

KHM

-.1

βw

TZAGHA
KEN
RWAUGA

-.3

-.2

VNM

GBR
LVA
EST
DEU
ROM
LTUHUN
DNK
SVN FRA
SWE
CZE
SVK
NLD CHE
USA-1973
AUT
POL
PER
USA-1895
IRL
PRT
ECU
FIN
BWA
BGR
COL
ITA
ESPBEL
MUS
PAK MNGIDN
IRQ
CYP
GRC

TUR

7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

.2

(b) Women

USA-1991

.1

GBR USA
DEU

0

ROM

βw

TLS

-.1

MWI

KHM

PAK

GHA
TZA
KEN

COL

VNM

-.2

UGA
RWA

NLD
USA-1973
SWE
HUN
EST
SVK CZE
SVN FRA
DNK
LVA
IRL CHE
LTU
AUT
BEL
PRT CYP
FIN
ESP

MUS
MNG
BWAPOL
USA-1895
IDN PER
ECU
IRQ
BGR

ITA
GRC

-.3

TUR

7

7.5

8

8.5
9
9.5
ln(GDP per Capita)

10

10.5

11

Note: The figure shows the country-specific elasticities of hours to wages, represented by the coefficient βw from
a regression of individual hours worked on individual wages, controlling for age and age squared. Wages include
earnings from self-employment. The upper panel shows results for a sample of men only, and the lower panel
of women only. The red (gray if printed in black and white) data points are corresponding coefficients from US
samples of different years (1890s, 1973, and 1991) reported in Costa (2000).

30

References
Basu, K. (1999). Child Labor: Cause, Consequence, and Cure, with Remarks on International Labor
Standards. Journal of Economic Literature 37(3), 1083–1117.
Bick, A., B. Brüggemann, and N. Fuchs-Schündeln (2016). Hours Worked in Europe and the US: New
Data, New Answers. Working Paper, Goethe University Frankfurt.
Borjas, G. J. (1980). The Relationship between Wages and Weekly Hours of Work: The Role of Division
Bias. Journal of Human Resources 15(3), 409–423.
Costa, D. L. (2000). The Wage and the Length of the Work Day: From the 1890s to 1991. Journal of
Labor Economics 18(1), 156–181.
Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015). The Next Generation of the Penn World Table.
American Economic Review 105(10), 31503182.
Maddison, A. (1995). Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-1992. Paris: OECD.
Nomura, K. and T. Amano (2012). Labor Productivity and Quality Change in Singapore: Achievements
in 1974-2011 and Prospects for the Next Two Decades. KEO Discussion Paper No. 129.
Ohanian, L., A. Raffo, and R. Rogerson (2008). Long-Term Changes in Labor Supply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004. Journal of Monetary Economics 55(8), 1353–1362.
Prescott, E. C. (2004). Why do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans? Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 28, 2–13.
Ramey, V. A. and N. Francis (2009). A Century of Work and Leisure. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 1(2), 189–224.

31

