                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION

                                             Jeffrey A. Frankel

                                          Working Paper 21878
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w21878


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2016




This paper was written for the 2015 Asia Economic Policy Conference, November 19-20, 2015. Forthcoming,
2016, in Policy Challenges in a Diverging Global Economy, edited by Reuven Glick and Mark Spiegel
(Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco). The author acknowledges comments from Joshua Aizenmann
and Charles Engel. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21878.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
International Coordination
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 21878
January 2016
JEL No. F42

                                              ABSTRACT

After a 30-year absence, calls for international coordination of macroeconomic policy are back. This
time the issues go by names like currency wars, taper tantrums, and fiscal compacts. In traditional
game theory terms, the existence of spillovers implies that countries are potentially better off if they
coordinate policies than under the Nash non-cooperative equilibrium. But what is the nature of the
spillover and the coordination? The paper interprets recent macroeconomic history in terms of four
possible frameworks for proposals to coordinate fiscal policy or monetary policy: the locomotive
game, the discipline game, the competitive depreciation game and the competitive appreciation game.
 (The paper also considers claims that monetary coordination has been made necessary by the zero
lower bound among advanced countries or financial imperfections among emerging markets.) Perceptions
of the sign of spillovers and the direction of proposed coordination vary widely. The existence of
different models and different domestic interests may be as important as the difference between cooperative
and non-cooperative equilibria. In some cases complaints about foreigners’ actions and calls for cooperation
may obscure the need to settle domestic disagreements.


Jeffrey A. Frankel
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, January 30, 2014:
         “International monetary cooperation has broken down… The U.S. should worry about the effects of its
         policies on the rest of the world.”

Brisbane Action Plan, G-20, November 2014:
         “…we have strengthened our policy cooperation. We have a shared assessment of our challenges and
         policy priorities. We are determined to step up our cooperation to: provide significant new momentum to
         the global economy; boost demand and jobs; and achieve sustained and more balanced growth, both
         internally and externally. Our macroeconomic and structural policies are mutually reinforcing and address
         both demand and supply challenges. Our integrated approach is focused on moving towards a more
         balanced policy framework. We will continue our efforts to foster positive spillovers and we recognise the
         need to avoid negative ones.”




    I.   Introduction

       International macroeconomic policy coordination arguably achieved a peak three
decades ago, in the form of a set of initiatives undertaken by G-7 leaders. These initiatives
included the Bonn Summit of 1978, where G-7 leaders agreed cooperatively to reflate their
economies so as to strengthen recovery from the 1974-75 global recession; the Plaza Accord of
1985, where G-5 ministers agreed to cooperate to bring down an over-valued dollar; an
agreement at the Tokyo Leaders Summit of 1986 to jointly monitor a set of economic
indicators; and a 1987 G-7 ministers agreement at the Louvre to try to put a floor under the
newly depreciated dollar. A lively academic literature provided theoretical support for such
cooperative solutions, drawing on the tools of game theory.

        Then coordination fell out of favor. Academically, critics found a variety of limitations to
the case for coordination. 1 Historically, the Germans regretted what they had agreed to at the
Bonn Summit, as reflation turned out to be the wrong objective in the inflation-plagued late
1970s. Japanese came to regret the Plaza Accord when the yen reached historic heights. Many
of the other summit communiques never had much effect, for better or worse.

       Another problem was that the structure of the G-7 did not allow a role for the Emerging
Market countries (EMs), whose share of the world economy rose rapidly. Increasingly after
2003 the topic of interest to the United States was manipulation of currencies by China and
other EM countries. It was not very useful to discuss such topics if the countries concerned
were not represented in the room.




1
 For example, Feldstein (1988), Fischer (1988), Frankel (1988), Ghosh and Masson (1988), Kehoe (1987), Oudiz and
Sachs (1984), Rogoff (1985) and Tabellini (1990).

                                                                                                                  2
        A.       The G-20 and the return of coordination as a live policy topic

        Recent years have seen the partial return of international coordination. The
representation problem has been addressed by expanding the membership of the meetings to
include the larger EM countries in the Group of Twenty. A G-20 club of finance ministers and
central bank governors, which had been founded in 1999 to deal with currency crises in East
Asia and other emerging markets, was elevated to the status of leaders’ summits, largely at the
impetus of UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown. The first two G-20 leaders’ summits took place in
Washington in November 14-15, 2008, and London in April 2, 2009. Their immediate task was
dealing with the Global Financial Crisis that had hit in September 2008 and the ensuing global
recession. But those meetings also represented a sea-change for global governance in that the
G-20 had now superseded the G-7, giving a voice to the large EM countries.

        If the G7 members thought that the newly invited members would quietly follow their
lead, then they must have been disappointed. For example, EM representatives declined to
join the US Treasury in pressuring China to appreciate its currency. Instead, Brazilian leaders
accused the Americans of depreciating their currency as much as anyone. They coined the
now-popular term “currency wars.”

         In light of currency war concerns, G-7 ministers in February 2013 agreed to refrain from
unilateral foreign exchange intervention. Though little-heralded at the time, this agreement,
which we might call a cease-fire in the currency wars, is the most important recent example of
international monetary coordination. It is striking to realize that policy coordination today
apparently means agreeing not to intervene in the foreign exchange market to lower the value
of any currency, whereas it meant the opposite at the time of the Plaza Accord. Many would
like to go beyond the G-7 “ceasefire” to achieve an agreement that is more permanent, covers
more countries, prohibits a wider ranging of currency-weakening actions, and imposes serious
penalties against currency manipulation.

        The market “taper tantrum” of 2013 – when US long-term interest rates rose in
response to Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke’s signal that Quantitative Easing would soon be
phased out -- provoked another sort of complaint from Indian Central Bank Governor Raghuram
Rajan: “International monetary cooperation has broken down…The U.S. should worry about the
effects of its policies on the rest of the world” (1/30/14). The monetary part of this paper
considers both kinds of concerns, represented by currency wars and the taper tantrum.

        A few scholars have begun to return to the subject of coordination. 2 Some, such as Rey
(2015), have given new prominence to the point that floating exchange rates do not fully


2
  E.g., Blanchard, Ostry, and Ghosh (2013), Ostry and Ghosh (2013), Subacchi and Van den Noord (2012), Taylor
(2013) and Engel (2014, 2015).

                                                                                                                3
insulate one country from the actions of another, especially if the other is the United States.
This seems to suggest that countries should coordinate in the way that Rajan asks.

       It is too soon to say whether we will see a full-blown return of international
coordination either in the outcomes of meetings of economic policy-makers or in academic
research. But the subject is “live” enough to merit a re-examination in the wake of such
developments as the Global Financial Crisis, unconventional monetary policies, and the
currency wars framing.


        B. Theoretical framework for macroeconomic policy coordination

       International cooperation could be defined broadly, for example to include regular
communication among countries’ policy-makers. If they meet regularly and exchange
information, then they don’t need to wait for a crisis to get acquainted.

       Countries like Brazil, India and China point out that they are not proportionately
adequately represented in global economic governance, even though they have long since
earned a voice through the size of their economies, to say nothing of population. At least the
G-7 has been expanded into the G-20, giving large emerging market countries a seat at the
table. The next reform is to give them a larger weight in governance at the International
Monetary Fund.

        For the purposes of this paper, coordination is defined in the conventional sense of the
Nash cooperative or bargaining solution from game theory, as in the famous “prisoners’
dilemma.” There is scope for coordination if all parties would be better off under an agreement
to put their policy instruments at particular settings, relative to the Nash non-cooperative
equilibrium where each chooses its policies taking the others as given. 3

       The question of international coordination arises in many areas, including trade policy,
energy and environmental issues, public health, and so on. But this paper focuses on
macroeconomic policy coordination.

       As long as there are spillover effects (one country’s actions have an effect on others)
and countries don’t have enough effective policy levers to counteract them (an important point
to which we will return), there is the potential in theory for coordination to benefit everyone.
This paper accepts that there are indeed spillover effects and yet in the end questions the
usefulness of some calls for coordination.



3
 The seminal early applications of basic game theory to international macroeconomic policy coordination were by
Cooper (1969) and Hamada (1976). The rise of game theory was to produce a number of Nobel Prizes in
Economics, notably John Nash in 1994.

                                                                                                              4
        It goes without saying that the interests of one country are not the same as the interests
of another country. That is not enough to imply a role for coordination. It is appropriate to
bemoan a lack of coordination only if a cooperative solution would help each country achieve
what it wants. But what does it want?

        We begin by observing that there is not much purpose in trying to implement
coordination if participants are not clear as to the nature of the failure of the non-cooperative
equilibrium and the direction in which proposed coordination would move the policy levers.
Would coordination consist of an agreement by countries simultaneously to undertake fiscal
expansion? (We call this the locomotive game below.) Or fiscal contraction? There is quite a
difference. Would coordination entail monetary discipline? (This is an example of the
competitive depreciation game, now known as currency wars.) Or monetary stimulus?
Advocates of coordination at various times have had in mind each of those four possibilities,
and others as well.

        It is natural that the character of the spillover and proposed coordination might be
different at different times. Even if the basic model of how the economy works were known
and unchanging, the nature of the cross-border externality and proposed coordination would
be different in the aftermath of a demand shock than a supply shock, say the 2008 Global
Financial Crisis (GFC) versus the 1979 oil shock. Furthermore, the structure of the economy
may in fact evolve over time, with the extent of international integration, the rigidity of labor
and goods markets, and so forth. 4 Some claim that the importance of spillovers and the case
for coordination has been stronger since the GFC because many countries have lost the
freedom to lower their interest rates: industrialized countries because of the Zero Lower
Bound and emerging market countries because of onerous constraints from imperfect
international financial markets.

        But the problem of ambiguous signs of spillovers and ambiguous directions of
coordination is worse than varying shocks or parameters that shift over time. The problem with
the framework may lie in the limited usefulness of the assumption of unified and rational
national actors. Typically the difference between domestic interests and foreign interests is not
the only cleavage, or even the most important one. Disagreement over the correct model can
be just as large. Furthermore domestic political factions typically disagree with each other,
regarding both objectives as well as models, as much as they disagree with other countries.
Blaming problems on foreigners or on lack of international coordination may make it harder to
work out disagreements domestically.

        We will consider four possibilities in sequence -- covering both fiscal policy and
monetary policy, coordinated expansion and coordinated discipline. Ultimately we seek
conclusions about the usefulness of coordination when there is disagreement over what exactly
is being proposed.


4
 Ilzetski and Jin (2013) argue that international transmission from the US to the rest of the world has mysteriously
switched sign in recent years. Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Perri (2013) see the sign of the transmission as
different during periods of financial crisis such as 2008-09 than normal times.

                                                                                                                   5
    II.   Fiscal policy coordination

          We begin with fiscal policy.


          A.     The “locomotive game”: When cooperation means joint expansion

        The classic coordination game is one where the non-cooperative equilibrium is seen as a
general deficiency of demand and cooperation consists of joint stimulus. Coordinated
expansion of this sort was attempted for example by the G-7 at a London Summit in 1977 and
agreed more concretely at the Bonn Summit of 1978. Germany and Japan acceded to US
requests to join it as two more engines or locomotives to pull the global economic train out of
the aftermath of the 1974-75 recession. As often, Germany agreed to fiscal expansion only
reluctantly (bringing forward a tax cut). One explanation of German reluctance was a
difference in perceptions: in their “model,” fiscal expansion would not lead to higher growth. 5

        Joint stimulus was again the conceptual framework at the G-20 London Summit of 2009,
held in response to the Global Financial Crisis. Less well-known is a G-20 meeting in Brisbane,
Australia, in November 2014 after a new slowing of global growth which had possibly been
abetted by austerity moves in Europe, the US and Japan. It agreed to “strengthen policy
cooperation,” including to “boost demand and jobs.”

        Table 1 illustrates the locomotive game. Under the non-cooperative equilibrium, both
the US and Europe pursue contractionary fiscal policies. Each is afraid to undertake fiscal
expansion on its own, because it believes (correctly) that this would lead to a trade deficit.
Each would much prefer that the other country expand, so that it could receive the boost to
demand from exports, rather than from fiscal deficit spending at home. But if everyone
pursues fiscal austerity, the world remains in recession in the upper left square of the 2x2
diagram.
Table 1: The locomotive game

                       US pursues contractionary fiscal            US pursues expansionary fiscal policy
                       policy
Europe                 Non-cooperative “beggar-thy-                US runs trade deficit; complains on behalf
pursues contractionary neighbor” equilibrium: global               of its exporters and import-competing
fiscal policy          recession.                                  firms.
Europe                 Europe complains, on behalf of              Cooperative “locomotive” outcome:
pursues expansionary   their exporters and import-                 nobody achieves a trade surplus, but
fiscal policy          competing firms.                            higher spending lifts all boats.



5
 Branson and Rotemberg (1980) attributed the gap in understanding to a German perception that their aggregate
supply curve was vertical, possibly because of institutions that made real wages rigid. Among the other reasons
why some don’t believe that fiscal expansion leads to higher income are Ricardian equivalence, import leakage,
crowding out via higher interest rates and loss of creditworthiness.

                                                                                                              6
       The cooperative solution is for all parties to agree to simultaneous fiscal stimulus, in the
form of increases in spending or decreases in taxes. They move to the lower right square in the
diagram, where general stimulus leads to general growth, without any country having to
achieve a trade surplus at the expense of anyone else. This logic underlay the Bonn G-7 Summit
of 1978 and the London G-20 Summit of 2009.

        Figure 1 illustrates the standard case for coordination graphically. The horizontal axis
measures the policy setting, which we here define to be fiscal stimulus, for the foreign country.
For concreteness, assume the foreign country is Germany and the year is 1978 or 2009. The
vertical axis measures fiscal expansion for the domestic country. For concreteness, assume the
domestic country is the United States. Assume that at the starting point, N, each country
chooses its fiscal policy independently. (N stands for Nash equilibrium.)




               Figure 1: Coordination entails both countries agreeing to raise their policy settings.



        Figure 1 is meant to illustrate the world as American policymakers saw it in 1978 or
2009: a locomotive model. Hypothetically, if the US could selfishly choose both countries’
policy-settings to suit its own domestic preferences, its optimum would be in the lower right
corner, where Germany and other countries undertake strong expansion, so that the US enjoys

                                                                                                        7
growth led by strong net export demand and is able to hold back on its own fiscal policy and
thereby avoid the problems of future debt. The indifference curves that fan out from that
Domestic Optimum represent successively lower levels of satisfaction. Germany will certainly
choose some lower level of fiscal expansion than that optimum, and the US will adjust
accordingly. The line representing the domestic reaction function is traced out as the sequence
of points where the indifference curves are tangent to vertical lines, because each point
represents the choice of US fiscal policy that achieves the highest level of satisfaction
corresponding to a particular German fiscal policy setting. It slopes downward because the less
demand is supplied by Germany, the more does the US authority need to substitute its own
demand. (They are “strategic substitutes.”) The slope is relatively flat because a given US fiscal
stimulus has a bigger effect on the US economy than the impact of a same-sized German fiscal
stimulus on the US.

        Germany’s optimum would be that it hold back its fiscal policy and instead let the US
carry the burden of the fiscal expansion. Its reaction function starts at the upper left, and
slopes steeply downward. The two reaction functions intersect at point N. This is the Nash
non-cooperative equilibrium, where each has set its policy optimally taking the other’s as given.

         From point N, each country would prefer that the other expand, but each holds back
from expanding itself for fear of the adverse consequences on its trade balance. So the US
exercises some global leadership and proposes at a summit meeting that all parties undertake
fiscal stimulus at the same time, moving northeastward in the graph as indicated by the arrow.
This is the locomotive solution. Nobody needs to experience a change in their trade balance,
but the coordinated expansion pulls the world out of recession. A cooperative program that is
especially well-designed will move the global economy to a point such as that indicated as the
coordination equilibrium in Figure 1: it is one of the points where the two countries’
indifference curves are tangent to each other, indicating that the joint gains are maximized.
(From here, neither country can be made better off without making the other worse off.)

      That is the story as the US and some other countries see it. But it is probably not the
framework through which Germany sees things. (See Figure 2 below.)

        The apparent agreement on the desirability of stimulus at the London Summit of April
2009 was short-lived. The United States and China undertook substantially expansionary
monetary and fiscal policy at that time, but other countries less so. Then when the euro crisis
hit, beginning in Greece in late 2009, the European reaction was that fiscal laxity had caused
the crisis, so austerity must be the treatment. In 2010, fiscal expansion went into reverse in
many countries – including also the US, after the Republicans gained control of the Congress
and decided that the budget deficit was the main problem. This brings us to the discipline
game.




                                                                                                  8
           B.       The discipline game: When cooperation means joint fiscal rectitude


        Some will see the locomotive game as also applicable to the members of the eurozone
in recent years. In this view, fiscal austerity in many countries has exacerbated Europe’s failure
to recover from a steep recession: Germany and other countries should simultaneously
increase spending to stimulate a general recovery. But that is not how the Germans see it (if
one may continue to generalize about an entire nationality, with apologies). It is not just that
they oppose moving to the lower right corner of Table 1. They reject the entire premise of the
locomotive game.

        The German view is that a country’s budget deficit imposes a negative spillover on its
neighbors. We could call this framework the fiscal discipline game. In one version, countries or
their governments are competing for funds in the global marketplace (Chang, 1990). Each
country that runs a deficit puts upward pressure on global interest rates and so makes it harder
for everyone else.

        Another version focuses specifically on the moral hazard issues posed when the
incentive for individual countries to be fiscally prudent is impaired by the likelihood of some
sort of bailout by others in the event of trouble. 6 This may apply globally, if one thinks that an
institution like the IMF is a source of moral hazard, which would explain why the Fund has
traditionally given so much emphasis in its procedures to enforcing budgetary discipline.

       But the best example is the euro-zone. 7 Most citizens of Germany and other members
in Northern Europe are clearly inclined to think that fiscal profligacy among the Mediterranean
members is a negative externality, not a positive one. The suspicion among Northern taxpayers
that they would be called upon to bail out their spendthrift neighbors explains why the
cooperative agreements -- the 1991 Maastricht Treaty, the 1998 Stability and Growth Pact, and
the 2013 Fiscal Compact -- tried to impose limits on countries’ fiscal deficits and debts.


Table 2: The moral hazard game

                      Other euro member runs budget surplus     Other euro member runs budget deficit
Germany runs          Cooperative agreement on fiscal rules,    Germans fear that they will have to bail out
budget surplus        to eliminate moral hazard.                the other member.
Germany runs          Other member fears it will have to bail   Uncoordinated moral hazard equilibrium:
budget deficit        out Germany.                              All run excessive deficits because possibility
                                                                of bailout undermines the disincentive.


       The moral hazard game is illustrated in Table 2. In the absence of internationally agreed
constraints on budget deficits, the knowledge of possible ex post bailouts attenuates the

6
    E.g., Aizenman (1998).
7
    E.g., Glick and Hutchison (1993).

                                                                                                             9
incentive to be prudent ex ante. As a result, everyone runs excessive deficits, in the lower right
corner of the table. In this case, cooperation consists of agreeing to rules to limit budget deficits
and debts, as under the Maastricht Treaty, the Stability and Growth Pact, and its revisions.

         From the G-7 summits of the 1970s to the euro crisis of the 2010s, many observers have
criticized Germany for refusing to cooperate in a move to the lower right cell in Figure 1 under
the locomotive theory. One interpretation might be that Germany is selfishly holding back, so
that it can run a trade surplus (upper right cell in Figure 1). But another interpretation is that
Germany thinks it is playing the moral hazard game, in Table 2. Seen from its eyes, the upper
right cell is the one that results when the Germans alone abide by fiscal rectitude: they
uprightly obey the rules while others cheat. The problem is not a lack of sufficient cooperative
spirit in one or more governments, but rather a difference in perceptions across nationalities. 8




Figure 2: Coordination entails both countries agreeing to lower their policy settings.

        Figure 2 illustrates the coordinated discipline game. We start out point N again, with
the policy settings shown to be the same as at the corresponding point in the preceding graph.
But the only thing on which the two sides agree is where the current policy settings are. 9

8
  Guiso, Herrera, and Morelli (2015) document basic cultural differences between Germans and Greeks in
perceptions regarding cheating.
9
  They may not even agree on what are their current policy settings. In 2009, for example, Germany saw its fiscal
stance as already more expansionary than the US saw it, because a stronger social safety net gives Germany bigger
“built-in stabilizers” than the US, and hence more counter-cyclical fiscal policy, even before any deliberate shifting
of spending or tax policy levers. This is another of many examples of differences in perceptions.

                                                                                                                   10
Germany, which we continue to take as the “foreign country,” is puzzled when its neighbors
fault it for tight fiscal policy. Germany’s view is that it is doing everyone a favor by exercising as
much budgetary discipline as it is and that its neighbors’ budget deficits are imposing a negative
externality. Germany exercises its leadership by proposing a Fiscal Compact, in which every
member agrees to tighten budget discipline simultaneously, moving the economy to the
southwest as shown by the arrow. In its view, everyone will be better off at the coordination
point. Of course from the viewpoint of Figure 1, this all-around fiscal austerity moves everyone
in precisely the wrong direction.

         One must conclude that, regarding spillovers and coordination proposals, one woman’s
fiscal vice is another woman’s fiscal virtue. Perhaps it is clearer what are the nature of the
spillovers and the direction of potential coordination when it comes to monetary policy?



III.   Monetary policy coordination

         The Fed was ahead of other major central banks in easing monetary policy aggressively
in response to the Global Financial Crisis. The ECB, for example, was more reluctant to ease
under President Jean-Claude Trichet, from the start of the recession through the end of his
term in November 2011. So was the Bank of Japan under Governor Masaaki Shirakawa.
Initially the difference in reaction could be explained by the fact that the sub-prime mortgage
crisis and recession had started in the US in 2007. Others hoped their economies might be “de-
coupled” from the effects.

       Complications soon emerged. The crisis was transmitted to other countries. Calls for
coordination began. But, as with fiscal policy, perceptions differed as to what exactly was the
nature of the spillover effects of monetary policy and the desirable direction for coordination.


       A.      Currency wars


               1.      Allegations that foreign monetary policy is too loose (e.g., 2010)

       When Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega came up with a new more colorful way
of saying “competitive depreciation” in September 2010, he was reacting to currency
depreciation in a number of countries against which Brazil competes on global markets. “We’re
in the midst of an international currency war, a general weakening of currency. This threatens
us because it takes away our competitiveness” (9/27/2010). The new “currency wars” phrase
soon came to dominate the discussion of spillover effects from uncoordinated monetary policy.

        At about the same time, the Federal Reserve launched its second round of Quantitative
Easing (in November 2010) and the dollar depreciated (through July 2011). For some G-20
countries like Brazil the fact that US monetary ease sent capital flowing out of the US and into

                                                                                                   11
Brazil, appreciating the real against the dollar, was unwelcome because it left Brazilian
producers less competitive on world markets.

        The US authorities tried to explain that a weak currency that resulted from needed
monetary easing, as was the case for the US dollar in 2009-2011, was fundamentally different
from a weak currency that resulted from foreign exchange intervention, as had been the case
for the Chinese renminbi since 2004. But some did not see the distinction as so important. It
was all competitive depreciation. In April 2012, Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff continued
the currency war accusation, criticizing Quantitative Easing by the US and other advanced
countries as a “monetary tsunami” that had detrimental effects on others via the exchange
rate.

        Next, Japan responded to years of deflation and repeated recessions by following in the
footsteps of the Fed. Abenomics was born when Japan’s parliament was dissolved in
November 2012 and Shinzo Abe was elected Prime Minister on a platform of monetary
stimulus. It featured a target of higher inflation implemented via an announced steep path of
monetary expansion under a program of “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing” by
new Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda, appointed for that purpose in March 2013. The
financial markets reacted immediately. The yen set off on a trend of depreciation. The stock
market also reacted in the right way, prices rising as rapidly as the price of foreign exchange. 10

       After another two years, the European Central Bank, now under President Mario Draghi,
followed suit, responding to renewed recession in the eurozone economy. The ECB began
buying bonds in September 2014 and launched a full version of QE on January 22, 2015. The
euro immediately depreciated, as had the dollar and the yen in their QE episodes, reaching a
low in March 2015.

       There is an appealing correspondence among the three episodes of monetary stimulus:
US 2010-11, Japan 2012-13, and ECB 2014-15. In each case the central bank decided to take
dramatic steps in response to a weak domestic economy, in each case the currency
depreciated, and in each case trading partners complained about competitive depreciation.


Table 3a: The currency war game

                       US pursues contractionary                    US pursues expansionary monetary policy
                       monetary policy
Other country          Superior cooperative equilibrium:            Dollar depreciates. Trading partners
pursues contractionary everyone agrees to refrain from              complain, on behalf of their exporters and
monetary policy        currency warfare.                            import-competing firms.
Other country          Dollar appreciates. US complains,             “Currency war” non-cooperative
pursues expansionary   on behalf of its exporters and               outcome: said to be a bad equilibrium for
monetary policy        import-competing firms.                      all, because nobody achieves depreciation
                                                                    and trade stimulus.

10
  The stimulus seemed to pay off at first, with a rapid return to positive GDP growth in 2013. Growth again turned
sharply negative in the second quarter of 2014, but a rise in the consumption tax seemed the obvious culprit.

                                                                                                               12
        Many observers worried that such money-fueled currency depreciations – and other
similar moves by emerging market and other countries – represented a potentially damaging
currency war. They presumably had in mind a game as is illustrated in Table 3a. Here
coordination would consist of an agreement to refrain from unilateral monetary expansion: a
move from the lower right corner of the two-by-two diagram to the upper left corner.

       To see a graphical version of the currency wars game, we can recycle figure 1, rather
than starting over. Simply define the policy levers on the two axes to be the domestic and
foreign interest rates. At point N, everyone has set their interest rates too low, afraid to raise
them for fear of appreciating their currency and losing trade competitiveness. Coordination
would consist of all parties raising interest rates at the same time.

         Cooperative solutions can be sought in the form of long-term rules instead of short-term
policy adjustments. Another interpretation of the currency wars game is that the solution to
the kind of competitive depreciation illustrated in Table 3a might be a system of fixed exchange
rates. Avoiding competitive devaluation was a motivation for the Bretton Woods system
agreed in 1944. (More in Section 4.1 below.) Frieden (2014) argues that it was also a prime
motivation for European Monetary Union in 1999. But it is ironic if some think that the
cooperative solution to competitive depreciation is a rule that exchange rates should be fixed,
while others think that the solution to the same problem is a rule that exchange rates should
float freely. We now turn to the latter view.


               2.      Ceasefire in the G-7 (2013)

        As noted in the Introduction, the G-7 partners in February 2013 agreed on a Currency
War Ceasefire that represents the most substantive example of international macroeconomic
policy coordination in the last few years. They were responding, under US leadership, to
concerns about the Japanese monetary stimulus that was taking place and particularly about
some remarks by Japanese officials that one channel of transmission would be a weaker yen.

        The first sentence of the 2013 communique delegitimizes foreign exchange
intervention: “We, the G7 Ministers and Governors, reaffirm our longstanding commitment to
market determined exchange rates…” (G7, 2013). The second sentence might seem to accept
the broadening of the definition of manipulation to include other policies that can affect the
exchange rate: “We reaffirm that our fiscal and monetary policies have been and will remain
oriented towards meeting our respective domestic objectives using domestic instruments, and
that we will not target exchange rates.” Interpreted literally, the implication seems to be that
monetary stimulus is valid so long as the authorities are not aware that it is likely to depreciate
their currency, or at least so long as this is not their purpose. Of course the authorities in
practice are fully aware that depreciation is one of the ways that monetary stimulus is likely to
work. But in the absence of mind-reading skills the communique in practice does not
effectively rule out monetary stimulus.

                                                                                                     13
       The G7 Currency War Ceasefire has been not been inconsequential. The language rules
out foreign exchange intervention plus statements by officials to influence currencies. Since
February 2013, G-7 officials have indeed refrained from both.

        The Currency War Ceasefire satisfied few of those who worry about currency
manipulation, presumably because the language did not go far enough, with respect either to
the lack of explicit reference to monetary policy or to the absence of sanctions to enforce the
agreement. Some economists (e.g., Bergsten, 2015, and Gagnon, 2012, 2013), support
provisions regarding currency manipulation, enforced by trade sanctions, while some of us are
opposed (e.g., Bénassy-Quéré, Gourinchas, Martin, and Plantin, 2014; and Frankel, 2015.)

        Some US congressmen in 2015 opposed trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP) that did not include sweeping language about currency manipulation to
prevent trading partners like Japan from doing what it had done under Abenomics. They want
an international agreement that would ban currency manipulation, even in cases when no
foreign currency is purchased, and that would enforce it by trade sanctions. The American auto
industry has been especially vocal on this issue. 11 (Pharmaceutical and other corporations were
on the other side, knowing that insistence on strong currency manipulation language would
doom the TPP.) The US Treasury had to explain that if such a trade agreement had been in
place a few years earlier it could have been used against American Quantitative Easing at that
time as easily as against subsequent QE by Japan. 12


                  3.       Is monetary stimulus a “beggar-thy-neighbor” policy?

       Critics who apply the currency war allegation to general monetary stimulus go too far. It
cannot be that monetary easing, when a country’s authorities judge it warranted by domestic
economic conditions, is per se presumed illegitimate under existing rules or that some new
international agreement should rule it out as a general proposition.

        The phrase “beggar-thy-neighbor” is applied to policies that one country uses to raise
net exports at the expense of its trading partners. But a non-coordinated world in which each
country chooses its monetary policy independently, subject to the choices of other countries, is
very different from the beggar-thy-neighbor problems of a non-coordinated world in which
each country chooses its tariffs independently. Even in the case of deliberate efforts to depress
the value of one’s currency through foreign exchange intervention, currency war worries may
be overblown.

11
   Particularly Ford Motor Company (Bergsten, 2016).
12
   China is of course a more common target of allegations of unfair currency manipulation, although it is not in the
TPP. The renminbi depreciated against the dollar during 2014-15. But this depreciation has been the result of a
slowing Chinese economy, monetary stimulus, and capital outflow, and not the result of intervention by the
People’s Bank of China which (since June 2014) has supported the currency rather than vice versa. Thus China
during the year 2014-15 has been the fourth example in the sequence of the US, Japan and ECB. China is
considered in a separate section below, 4.3, because it is so widely criticized for intervening to keep the value of its
currency down, which is what it did massively during the preceding ten years.

                                                                                                                     14
           3.1 Ambiguous effect on the trade balance

         For one thing, the principle that monetary stimulus in one country shifts the trade
balance in its favor and in this way may hurt other countries is much less clear than many seem
to think. The exchange rate effect of monetary expansion should indeed work that way (the
“expenditure-switching” effect). But there are other effects of monetary expansion: it raises
spending and income. A low interest rate is the most obvious channel of transmission to
spending. The income effect raises demand for imports, and for tradable goods more generally,
which has the opposite effect on the trade balance from the exchange rate effect. The net
effect is ambiguous both in theory and empirically. 13 Empirical models tend to agree only that
the net effect on the trade balance is small.

        It could well be that monetary expansion in one country is transmitted positively to
other economies and that therefore the net effect is beneficial under conditions of excess
supply: weak growth, unemployment, and perhaps even deflation. In that case the proper
game theory analysis would not be a currency war framework like Table 3a. Rather it would be
something more like the locomotive framework of Table 1, where cooperation consists of joint
reflation rather than joint monetary restraint. (The axes in Figure 1 could be interpreted as the
degree of monetary expansion.) We will consider a version appropriate to monetary policy, in
Table 3b.

        But perhaps coordination is not even necessary to achieve this outcome. The 2008
global recession called for easier monetary policy all around than had been appropriate a few
years before. The reaction to Fed easing, capital flows, and upward pressure on other
currencies was a corresponding monetary easing in many of those other countries in order to
dampen or prevent the appreciation of their respective currencies. To that extent, the
objective of global monetary expansion was achieved without the benefit of coordination.

        To consider decisions such as whether central banks should cooperate, modern
monetary theory would prefer to think in terms of the setting of long-term rules rather than the
setting of policies at a particular point in time. 14 But the ambiguity of spillover signs and the
small welfare implications of coordination carry through to the case of cooperative setting of
rules, according to Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002).

           3.2 Asymmetries in appropriate monetary stance

        What if the foreign countries don’t want the sort of monetary stimulus that the
originating country wants, because they aren’t experiencing the same conditions of excess
supply? The Brazilian economy in 2010, for example, could be characterized as suffering from
excess demand, in danger of overheating. The obvious answer for Brazil under such
circumstances is to refrain from monetary ease, or at least to refrain from lowering interest
rates as far as the US and to let its currency appreciate. Such international asymmetries in


13
     E.g., Blanchard, Ostry, Ghosh and Chamon (2015).
14
     E.g., Taylor (1985, 2015).

                                                                                                15
economic conditions are exactly what floating rates are designed to accommodate
automatically.

        For Milton Friedman (1953), one of the great attractions of a system of floating
exchange rates was facilitation of the decentralization of policy-making to the national level. It
would allow each country to take responsibility for managing its own economy. He considered
this appropriate not just economically, but also politically: national officials could be held
democratically accountable by their own citizens.

        The stronger Brazilian real will hurt Brazil’s exporters and importing-competing firms --
cutting into prices, profit margins, output, and employment in those sectors. But if the
economy is indeed up against capacity constraints and suffering from excess demand, there is
no reason to let the sectors of the economy that depend on domestic demand suffer the entire
burden of adjustment via higher interest rates. It makes sense to share the burden between
interest-sensitive sectors (such as construction) and currency-sensitive sectors (such as
agriculture). The latter will complain. But the tension is inherent, and blaming the problems of
exporters on foreigners does not help a country to think clearly about the trade-offs or to deal
with them.

       To be more concrete, Brazil’s structural budget deficit was large in 2010. Taking the
budget as given, somebody in the private sector was going to get crowded out. The question
was who: the tradable sector via a high currency or the nontradable sector via a high interest
rate. The government attempt to blame exporters’ troubles on currency wars or US arrogance
may have distracted from the fundamental problem.

         3.3 Implications of the Zero Lower Bound

       One characteristic of the post-2008 revival of interest in international monetary policy
coordination that is new is the constraint that short-term interest rates in advanced countries
have been near zero and can’t be pushed much lower. 15 The loss of the interest rate
instrument can have important implications for the nature of spillovers and coordination. 16

         If the only channels of transmission of monetary policy were the short-term interest
rate (influencing domestic demand) and the exchange rate (influencing net foreign demand for
domestic goods), then the loss of the former instrument would be momentous indeed. The
ability of a central bank to stimulate domestic spending would be lost; it might be left only with
the ability to switch spending between domestic and foreign goods. Policy would become a
zero-sum game via the trade balance, where one country’s gain was another country’s loss.


15
   Monetary theorists shifted in a few short years from considering Keynes’ liquidity trap to be an irrelevant artifact
of the history of thought to considering the zero lower bound to be virtually the defining characteristic of
monetary policy in the wake of the global financial crisis.
16
   E.g., Chinn (2013), Engel (2014), Portes (2014), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2015), Devereux and Yetman
(2014), and Landmann (2015).



                                                                                                                    16
        Fortunately we don’t live in that world. There are other channels of monetary
transmission to domestic demand beyond the short-term interest rate. Four of the most
important price signals are long-term interest rates, non-government interest rates, equity
prices, and real estate prices. There may also be mechanisms that operate without price signals,
particularly the credit channel.

        These channels can be influenced by the instruments of Unconventional Monetary
Policy. The two broad categories of Unconventional Monetary Policy are forward guidance and
quantitative easing. Forward guidance has the potential to reduce expectations of future short-
term interest rates and thereby to reduce long-term interest rates. Quantitative easing can also
reduce long-term interest rates and can more directly reduce borrowing costs in non-
government sectors, when the central bank buys corporate or asset-backed securities.

        One approach is to announce an inflation target, one that is above the inflation rate that
is already expected. If the announcement is believed, then it will reduce the real interest rate
and thereby stimulate demand, even with the nominal interest rate stuck at the Zero Lower
Bound (ZLB). Absent any other mechanism, it is not clear why an inflation target should be
believed. But given the existence of long-term interest rates and the other aforementioned
channels for boosting demand, they can be reinforced by an explicit intention to let higher
demand show up in higher inflation, thereby reducing the real interest rate. In this sense a
generous inflation target is a complement to the other channels, rather than a substitute for
them.

        The menu of possible channels means that central banks are not confined to the two
channels of the short-term interest rate and the exchange rate. It follows that even when the
interest rate channel is constrained, monetary policy need not be a zero-sum game
internationally. None of these channels is certain, however, so perhaps the ZLB helps explain
the post-2008 fears of currency wars.


               4.     Competitive depreciation/ currency manipulation

       When currency weakness is not just a side-effect of monetary stimulus but is the
deliberate effect, for example, of central bank sales of domestic currency in the foreign
exchange market, is it a clear “beggar-thy-neighbor” policy that calls for enforced rules against
currency manipulation?

        Stipulate -- as we have been assuming -- that because a depreciation of the currency
raises the country’s price competitiveness on world markets, it stimulates the country’s net
exports – perhaps with a delay of a year or two – and thus that it achieves a switching of world
spending toward the goods and services of the originating country, which comes at the expense
of spending on goods and services of other countries. To be careful, notice that we are




                                                                                                17
assuming that the “switching” effects that the exchange rate has via the trade balance
dominate any other contrary effects that the exchange rate may have.17

        It is then easy to see why deliberate steps to depreciate the currency are often viewed
as a classic “beggar-thy-neighbor” policy, analogous to putting up tariffs against imports. And it
might seem a short step from there to the view that everyone would be better off in a
cooperative regime where they all agreed to refrain from deliberate intervention to depreciate
their currencies, by analogy with agreeing to refrain from protectionist trade barriers. But the
analogy may be misplaced.

                 4.1 The precedent of competitive devaluations in the 1930s

       The classic examples of both kinds of beggar-thy-neighbor policies – protectionism and
competitive devaluation -- came in the 1930s. The Smoot-Hawley tariff enacted by the US in
1930 was emulated by other countries, collapsing global trade. Meanwhile, Britain, the US,
France, and others pursued competitive devaluations in the early 1930s, as each in turn took its
currency off the gold standard.

       President Franklin Roosevelt rejected the wishes of the others to cooperate in stabilizing
exchange rates at the London Economic Conference of 1933. 18 The conventional wisdom at the
time and subsequently was that the tariffs and devaluations both represented similar failures of
international cooperation.

        The disasters of the 1930s motivated the architects of the postwar system who met at
Bretton Woods in 1944 to adopt both the principle of free trade and the principle of pegged
exchange rates. Exchange rates were adjustable in the event of fundamental disequilibrium;
but to devalue otherwise would be unfair currency manipulation under IMF Article IV.

         Eichengreen and Sachs (1985, 1986), however, offered a powerful revisionist
interpretation of the exchange rate developments of the 1930s. They argued that, unlike the
tariffs, the devaluations were not collectively damaging but may actually have been beneficial.
Each of these devaluations was not just a reduction in the value of the currency in terms of
other currencies but also in terms of gold. When each country had taken its turn, the net
effects on exchange rates largely canceled out; but the net effects vis-à-vis gold did not. Each
country was left with a currency that was worth less in terms of gold, which is to say that the
price of gold was higher in terms of each currency. As a result the nominal value of gold
reserves was raised. Since gold reserves were the ultimate backing for the money supply, this
allowed an expanded money supply in each country and lower interest rates, which is just what

17
   In some countries, especially emerging markets or developing countries, a depreciation of the currency has
contractionary effects, which may even be big enough to offset the expansionary switching effect on the trade
balance. These include especially balance sheet effects (if the depreciating country has large debts denominated
in foreign currency) and the effect on the local-currency price of oil or other imported inputs. If these
contractionary effects of depreciation were important, it would seem to follow that an appreciation of other
currencies – because the dollar is depreciating – would have expansionary effects on their economies. Beggar-thy-
neighbor would be converted to “enrich-thy-neighbor.”
18
   Eichengreen (2015).

                                                                                                              18
the world needed at the time of the Great Depression.


Table 3b: The Eichengreen interpretation of competitive devaluation

                         US maintains monetary discipline       US devalues and moves to an easier
                         (e.g., stays on the gold standard)     monetary policy (e.g., 1933)
Europe maintains         Tight monetary policy leaves the
monetary discipline      world in recession (e.g., the Great
(e.g., stays on the      Depression)
gold standard)
Europe devalues and                                             All are in fact better off. Each fails to raise
moves to an easier                                              its trade balance; but lower interest rates
monetary policy                                                 stimulate global recovery (e.g., via a higher
                                                                value of gold)


        Some version of this dynamic may also have applied in the aftermath of the 2008 Global
Financial Crisis, as noted above: after the Federal Reserve aggressively eased, the efforts by
other countries to dampen the appreciation of their own currencies against the dollar had the
effect of propagating monetary easing worldwide. 19

        4.2 Origins of the language of manipulation

       Calls for international cooperation to prevent competitive depreciation often take the
form of proposals to adopt strictly enforced rules against currency manipulation. Language on
currency manipulation, for better or worse, was internationally agreed long ago.

         Article IV of the IMF Articles of Agreement deals with Obligations Concerning Exchange
Arrangements. After the Members of the Fund ratified the move to floating exchange rates in
the Jamaica Communique of January 1976, they agreed a framework for mutual surveillance
under what is called the “1977 Decision on Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies,” and they
amended Article IV in 1978. Principle (A) of the 1977 Decision and Clause 3 of Section 1 of
Article IV both require that each member shall “avoid manipulating exchange rates or the
international monetary system in order to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or
to gain an unfair competitive advantage over other members.” 20



19
  Eichengreen (2013).
20
  In principle, Keynes got his way at Bretton Woods in one respect: the obligation is meant to fall on countries
seeking to keep the values of their currencies down so as to preserve a balance of payments surplus, as much as on
those seeking to keep the values of their currencies up thereby preventing adjustment of a balance of payments
deficit. International Monetary Fund (2006, p. 15): “…the term ‘in order to prevent balance of payments
adjustment’ is sufficiently broad to cover situations where a member is manipulating its exchange rate in a manner
that makes it either overvalued or undervalued.” In practice, however, the economic and political pressure on a
surplus country to adjust its currency upward has always been far less than the pressure on a deficit country to
adjust its currency downward.

                                                                                                               19
        Most of the time it is very difficult to tell whether a currency is undervalued, overvalued,
or correctly valued -- even for specialists, let alone politicians. Price criteria such as purchasing
power parity may point one direction, for example, even while measures of external balance
such as the current account or balance of payments can point the opposite direction. It is even
harder to ascertain whether a currency is being deliberately manipulated for unfair competitive
advantage.

           4.3 Manipulation of the renminbi

        The United States has since 2003 been pressuring China to allow the value of the
renminbi (RMB) to be determined more freely in the foreign exchange market and to allow the
currency to appreciate against the dollar. 21 These two objectives were consistent from 2003
until 2014: the country ran surpluses on the current account and the financial account and so
the People’s Bank of China bought reserves in the foreign exchange market to resist market-
driven appreciation of the currency. Many have claimed that China’s refusal to allow
appreciation in 2003-04 and its intervention to dampen appreciation thereafter constituted
unfair manipulation of the currency for competitive advantage. The animus stems from
concerns over the US trade deficit, where China is following in the path that was earlier tread
by Japan (villain to some, scapegoat to others).

       Studies have also fingered other countries for having intervened excessively to
counteract market-induced appreciation, including in recent years Switzerland, Korea, and
Singapore. But China continues to be the overwhelming focus of concern, at least among
American politicians.

        The meaning of the word “manipulation” is open to dispute, since it plays no role in
economic theory. The 1977 IMF Decision refers to the intent behind the actions of the
authorities. Etymologically, the root of the word is the Latin for “hand,” which suggests active
steps rather than a passive acceptance of developments. Some claim that a country that has in
the past chosen a fixed exchange rate regime cannot now be accused of manipulation just
because it doesn’t allow appreciation: No deliberate action has been taken.

         In this view, if a country opts to peg, it cannot be accused of manipulation. This is so
even when future developments leave the currency “undervalued,” whether because such
factors as the Balassa-Samuelson effect or low inflation have rendered a once-appropriate
exchange rate level no longer appropriate, or because the anchor currency, in this case the
dollar, has in the meantime depreciated against other relevant currencies. A fixed exchange
rate is a legitimate choice for any country under Article IV. It is pointed out that smaller
countries with long-time fixed exchange rates are seldom accused of manipulation.

       Many, on the other side, claim that China’s decision to cling to a peg when the currency
could as easily be allowed to appreciate was a deliberate choice with the intent to gain
competitive advantage on world markets, and that it frustrates balance of payments
adjustment, with adverse effects on the rest of the world. They point out that “protracted

21
     Frankel and Wei (2007) consider US pressure on China that began in 2003 regarding the exchange rate.

                                                                                                            20
large-scale intervention in one direction in the exchange market” is one of the criteria the 1977
Decision specifies the Fund shall consider “as among those which might indicate the need for
discussion” with a member over its exchange rate policy. 22

         Frankel and Wei (2007) tested econometrically two competing hypotheses regarding the
Treasury’s biannual reports on whether individual trading partners are manipulating currencies
for unfair advantage. The first hypothesis is that the determinants are legitimate economic
variables consistent with Article IV. The second hypothesis is that the determinants of the
Treasury decisions are variables suggestive of domestic American political expediency. The
econometric results suggest that the Treasury verdicts are driven heavily by the US bilateral
deficit with the country in question, though some of the other legitimate variables also turn out
to be quite important. The US Congress did legally mandate in 1988 that the bilateral balance
should be an important consideration. But the bilateral balance does not appear as one of the
criteria in the 1977 Decision or Article IV of the International Monetary Fund, the original
source of the “manipulation” language.

        The value of the renminbi was sufficiently low in 2000-05 that it could be judged as
undervalued by a variety of criteria -- a rare instance of such clarity. For example, international
price comparisons (the purchasing power parity criterion) showed it to be undervalued even if
one took into account the Balassa-Samuelson relationship, which observes that goods and
services tend to be cheaper in lower income countries. Estimates of the undervaluation were in
the range of about 25%-35%. 23 But the currency did appreciate between 2005 and 2011, by
25% in nominal terms against the dollar and more in real terms. International price comparison
data for 2011 suggested that the renminbi was no longer too cheap. 24 The IMF (2015)
confirmed that the renminbi was indeed no longer undervalued.

       Whether because of the end of undervaluation or for other reasons, capital began to
flow out of China rather than in. Perhaps investors were beginning to conclude that the period
of export-driven super-high growth in China was coming to an end. By mid-2014, China was
running a deficit on the overall balance of payments. This meant that it was no longer gaining
reserves – intervening to resist market-driven appreciation as it had over the decade 2003-13.
Rather in July 2014 the People’s Bank of China started to lose reserves, intervening to resist
market-driven depreciation.

       Despite this sea-change in China’s external accounts, some Americans continued to
accuse China of currency manipulation. They continued to ask that China move toward a
market-driven exchange rate and that it appreciate its currency, failing to notice that these two
requests had become contradictory under the new circumstances. For a few days in August
2015, the Chinese authorities allowed the exchange rate to move more strongly in the direction
that the market was pushing – precisely as the Americans had been long asking. Unsurprisingly,

22
   E.g., Goldstein and Lardy (2005). China is not the only one. Ted Truman coined the phrase “competitive non-
appreciation” to describe the non-cooperative equilibrium in which countries intervene to prevent market-driven
appreciation of their currencies, but are not actually depreciating.
23
   E.g., Frankel (2005) and Subramanian (2010).
24
   Kessler and Subramanian (2014).

                                                                                                              21
the result was a depreciation of the renminbi against the dollar. Even with this demonstration
that their thinking had gone wrong somewhere, American politicians continued to accuse China
of keeping its currency artificially low and continued to demand that President Obama
negotiate enforceable prohibitions on currency manipulation in international agreements.



        B.       “Competitive appreciation” game


       Fears at times that countries are keeping their interest rates too low or otherwise
seeking to depreciate their currencies have a mirror image in fears at times that countries are
keeping their interest rates too high or otherwise seeking to appreciate their currencies. We
now consider the latter case.

                 1.       Concerns that monetary policy is too tight

        Sometimes concerns about lack of cooperation in monetary policy take the form of fears
that US monetary policy is too tight and that there is unwelcome downward pressure on non-
dollar currencies. Consider what provoked Reserve Bank of India Governor Raghuram Rajan to
make the 2014 complaint that is epigrammed at the top of this paper. In the aftermath of the
2013 “taper tantrum,” he was displeased at spillover effects on emerging markets as the result
of a Fed exit from QE and an increase in US longer term interest rates:
        “Central banks should assess spillover effects from their own actions… For example, this would mean that
        while exiting from unconventional policies, central banks would pay attention to conditions in emerging
        markets… [T]he Fed policy statement in January 2014, with no mention of concern about the emerging
        market situation, and with no indication Fed policy would be sensitive to conditions in those markets sent
        the probably unintended message that those markets were on their own.” 4/10/2014.

       Fears of the coming Fed decision to raise US short-term interest rates continued to land
blows on emerging market countries in 2014 and 2015: lower EM equity prices, bond prices,
currency values, and dollar commodity prices. 25

        One can see in history the reason for concern. The Volcker tightening of 1980-82 helped
precipitate the international debt crisis of 1982 and the Greenspan tightening of 1994 helped
precipitate the Mexican peso crisis later that year. 26 In response to such crises, cooperation
might call for generalized monetary ease, in the manner of simultaneous interest rate
reductions of 1987 (post stock market crash), 1998 (post Asia crisis), and 2009 (post Global
Financial Crisis).

25
   US monetary tightening is more likely to have a contractionary effect on floating-rate EM economies if they have
previously incurred dollar-denominated debt, because depreciation of their currencies against the dollar has an
adverse balance sheet effect. The lesson to avoid dollar-denominated debt is one that many of them learned from
the crises of the 1990s. A much more general lesson is the admonition is that each country should “get its own
house in order.”
26
   As Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1996) had predicted. The annual spillover report of the International
Monetary Fund (2015a, pp.6-16) considers the impact of US interest rates and exchange rates on others.

                                                                                                                22
        Rajan’s 2014 worry that Fed tightening would hurt emerging markets is in some sense
the opposite of the Brazilian complaint in 2010 about spillover effects of loose US monetary
policy. That doesn’t necessarily make either one of them wrong. Both could be right: The
externalities could run in different directions at different times. Low US real interest rates
contributed to EM flows in the late 1970s, early 1990s, and early 2000s, before they once again
did so in the aftermath of the 2008-09 global recession. Each was followed by crises in some
emerging markets. Perhaps it is the complete cycle, alternating credit boom and bust, that is
the problem. 27

                  2.       The precedent of the 1985 Plaza Accord

        There are historical precedents among advanced countries as well for concerns
regarding an increase in US interest rates and a resulting appreciation of the dollar. The fear
used to be that the US tightening would come at the expense of exporting inflation to other
countries. This was one interpretation of the strong dollar in the early 1980s, which provoked
complaints among trading partners and eventually led to one of the most renowned
coordination agreements: the Plaza Accord of September 1985, in which G5 ministers agreed to
bring the dollar down. 28

        What had been the motive in the early 1980s for keeping interest rates high? Countries
might have a variety of motivations for seeking to attract foreign capital and appreciate their
currencies, for example to ward off speculative attacks when there is a general contagion in
global financial markets. At the time of the early 1980s, the policy priority was to bring down
inflation. A monetary contraction that appreciates the currency is particularly helpful at putting
downward pressure on the CPI through lower prices of commodities and other imports. 29


Table 4: The “exporting inflation” or competitive appreciation game

                            US raises interest rates                     US keeps interest rates low
Other country               Non-cooperative equilibrium:                 Dollar depreciates, raising US CPI
raises interest rates       High interest rates everywhere. The          inflation
                            world remains stuck in recession.
Other country               Dollar appreciates, lowering US CPI          Cooperative equilibrium: Low interest
keeps interest rates        inflation at the expense of other            rates everywhere. Exchange rates
low                         countries                                    unchanged, but growth is sustained.


        Of course it is not possible for every country to raise its interest rate above everybody
else’s to attract a net capital inflow or to appreciate its currency. The outcome of attempts to

27
   Rajan (2014).
28
    For a consideration of the Plaza Accord on its 30th anniversary, see Frankel (2016) and other papers written for a
conference on that occasion.
29
   Thus Sachs (1985) interpreted high interest rates and the strong dollar in terms of the competitive appreciation
game.

                                                                                                                   23
do so might be a world with too-high interest rates. The corresponding two-by-two game is
illustrated in Table 4. In this telling, cooperation consists of an agreement to simultaneously
lower interest rates.

        For a graphical illustration of the competitive appreciation game, return to Figure 2,
with the axes defined again as the domestic and foreign interest rates. At the non-cooperative
point N, everyone’s interest rate is too high. Coordination consists of everyone agreeing to cut
interest rates.

         Why did the US agree to cooperate in bringing down the dollar in 1985, whereas it had
rebuffed European requests for cooperative foreign exchange intervention at the Versailles and
Williamsburg G-7 summit meetings in the preceding years? One answer is that the new
Treasury Secretary, James Baker, was more open temperamentally to the idea of international
coordination than his predecessor, Don Regan (and the Undersecretary, Beryl Sprinkel). But
another answer is that Regan and Sprinkel did not believe in a model in which the strong dollar
and US trade balance were affected by US monetary policy, fiscal policy, or foreign exchange
intervention or even that that the trade deficit was a problem. Their view was that the trade
deficit and its counterpart, the net flow of capital to the US, were instead the result of a
favorable national climate for market capitalism under President Ronald Reagan; that it was
therefore a good thing; and that in any case sterilized foreign exchange intervention has no
effect on the exchange rate. 30 A third answer is that the domestic interest groups in the
tradable goods sector which were hurt by the strong dollar did not succeed in making enough
political headway to force an accommodation until 1985. 31

       As in the case of the locomotive game, fiscal discipline game, and competitive
depreciation game, the success of the Plaza initiative in 1985 had as much to do with changes
regarding which domestic interest groups and which perceptions held sway as it did with a
Nashian triumph of cooperation over international fractiousness.




        IV. Do we really need international policy coordination?

       It was suggested in section III.A.3 that floating exchange rates could allow each country
to choose whatever monetary policy it deems appropriate for its own economy and thus render
30
   On this last point in particular, a fair number of economists would support their position. There is as little
agreement today on whether sterilized foreign exchange intervention can affect the exchange rate as there ever
was, although that seems surprising in light of recent concerns over currency manipulation by China and other
emerging market countries.
31
   Manufacturing and agriculture interests had been complaining about the strong dollar for several years. Their
complaints and support in congress for action to protect them reached a high pitch in 1984-85. It is not quite as
obvious who were the interest groups on the opposite side from the strong-dollar complaints of the tradable
sector. But it has been suggested that the sectors arrayed in support of the status quo included the banking and
financial sector, real estate, and the defense community. Henning (1990, p.41), Frieden (1991, p.448) and Frankel
(1994, pp.321-327).

                                                                                                               24
international monetary coordination unnecessary. This long-standing textbook proposition,
originally proclaimed to a skeptical world by Friedman (1953), has recently been challenged
anew.

                   1.    Trilemma or dilemma?

        The international economists’ framework of the trilemma or impossible trinity says that
countries can have monetary independence if and only if they are willing either to give up
financial integration or to give up a fixed exchange rate. The logic is that with full financial
integration and full currency integration, a small country has to accept that its interest rate will
be dictated by the foreign interest rate. But if the exchange rate floats, the claim is, a country
can choose its own monetary conditions, and that international coordination may not be
necessary (e.g., Bénassy-Quéré, et al, 2014).

        The impossible trinity has recently been challenged by Rey (2015). She points out that
floating rates have not been sufficient to insulate other countries from a global financial cycle
originating in financial shocks in US interest rates 32 or investor attitudes toward risk. 33 When
the Fed raises interest rates, interest rates in other countries go up as well. 34 International
monetary policy coordination would be one way to address this problem. (Rey herself views
coordination as “out of reach” in practice. 35)

        In other new theoretical models as well, capital market imperfections may prevent
floating rates from performing the shock absorption role claimed in traditional macroeconomic
analysis. 36 Some find that in such circumstances capital controls or macroprudential regulatory
policies can be welfare-improving. But macro-prudential policies may themselves need to be
coordinated internationally. 37 The tightening of capital requirements or other regulations on
domestic banks in one country may cause a "leak" abroad, in the sense that some of the
projects that might previously have been funded by domestic banks may now be financed from
abroad. 38 This suggests one justification for capital controls. Engel (2015a) concludes that the
leakage may call for international coordination of macroprudential policy, as under the Basel III
agreement.



32
   Agrippino and Rey (2014).
33
   Forbes and Warnock (2012).
34
   Among many references: Edwards (2015) and Frankel, Schmukler and Servén (2004). Even countries that claim
to float may in fact care about the exchange rate objective and so choose to tighten when the Fed tightens.
35
   She therefore favors restoring a measure of independence by capital flow management tools, that is, capital
controls or macro-prudential regulation or both.
36
   E.g., Farhi and Werning (2014).
37
   Jeanne (2014).
38
   Aiyar, Calomiris, and Wieladek (2012).

                                                                                                             25
         Others have responded to the attack on the trilemma. Klein and Shambaugh (2013)
adduce evidence supporting the traditional view that “a moderate amount of exchange rate
flexibility does allow for some degree of monetary autonomy, especially in emerging and
developing economies.” Di Giovanni & Shambaugh (2008) find that, while foreign interest rates
have a negative impact on domestic GDP in pegged countries, flexible exchange rates insulate
against them. Aizenman, Chinn and Ito (2010, 2011) find that exchange rate stability is
associated with less monetary independence and more output volatility. Obstfeld (2015) finds
that the correlation between local and US short-term interest rates falls to zero for countries
with flexible exchange rates.

         The proposition that a floating exchange rate fully insulates a country from foreign
shocks is a straw man. It is true that the property may hold in a textbook model without
financial integration. The reason is that trade surpluses and deficits are the most fundamental
channel of transmission across countries; but if there are no private capital flows and no
official reserve transactions, then the exchange rate adjusts to make sure that the trade
balance is continuously zero. This textbook theorem is a straw man in that no country is in fact
cut off from capital flows. For this reason alone, it would be hard to find an economist who
claims that a floating rate guarantees that a country will feel no impact from external shocks.

        The important question is not whether a floating rate is sufficient to insulate a country’s
economy from foreign shocks if its policy-makers are passive. A more important question is
rather whether floating offers enough independence that the officials, after adjusting their
policy settings in response to the shock, can attain their objectives as well as before the shock.

       Even this is a bit of a straw man. An external shock like the Global Financial Crisis or
some other “risk off” shift in financial markets may well hit every country, regardless of its
exchange rate regime (though it is interesting that a floating rate country like Poland came
through 2008-09 so much better than fixed-rate countries like the Baltics). But the question for
coordination is whether the big players like the United States or the eurozone or China would
set macroeconomic policies differently if they were taking into account the interests of other
countries than they do in the pursuit of their own economic interest. Strong economic
performance in the big countries usually benefits the rest of the world as surely as it benefits
themselves.



                 2.    Targets and instruments

      This leads to the task of counting policy instruments and policy goals. A well-known
theorem says that a country in general can attain its goals if it has as many independent policy

                                                                                                 26
instruments as it has goals. Assume first that the country has a single instrument, namely
monetary policy, and a single goal, namely internal balance -- defined as output at potential,
unemployment at the natural rate, or inflation at its target. Then a floating exchange rate
allows it to achieve its goal, better than a fixed rate. Even when impacted by a foreign shock,
the country can adjust its monetary policy setting so as to achieve a desired level of overall
demand, output and inflation.

         That reasoning, however, assumes that the country does not care about the
composition of output, between the sector that is sensitive to domestic demand (particularly as
reflected in the interest rate) and the sector that is sensitive to net foreign demand (particularly
as reflected in the exchange rate). Assume now that the country has a second goal: external
balance, as defined by a target for the trade balance (or it could be the balance of payments).
In this case the single monetary policy instrument is not enough to achieve both goals. 39 A case
for coordination of monetary policy then stands, in theory. But one must ask how important
the trade balance spillover effect is in practice, if neither officials, nor citizens, nor economists
and their models agree on what is the sign of the effect of monetary policy on the trade balance.
We don’t know if the exchange rate effect is larger or smaller than the spending effect. Thus
each country doesn’t really know if it should want its neighbors to adopt looser or tighter
monetary policies. We saw similarly in Part II that countries disagree over whether fiscal
stimulus is a virtue or a vice.

        3. Different models, different interest groups

         The wide range of models wreaks havoc with international coordination in a number of
ways. First, if different countries have fundamentally different models in mind, the officials
might not even be able to carry on a coherent discussion of the potential gains from
coordination and how to achieve them. In graphical terms, if one negotiator sees the world in
terms of Figure 1 and the other in terms of Figure 2, they don’t even understand why their
interlocutors are making the proposals they are making, since they seem to leave everybody
worse off. (Think of the negotiations between the government that was elected in Greece in
January 2015 and its euro partners.) It can be helpful for them to talk, in part because
exchanging views makes it more likely that they will improve their perceptions. But it is not
likely that they will be able to come to an agreement unless it is phrased so vaguely that


39
  What if the country also has a second instrument, such as fiscal policy? That will work for a single country: two
instruments can achieve two goals. But of course one country’s trade surplus is somebody else’s deficit. If two
countries have inconsistent goals for the same trade balance numbers, no amount of policy instruments will solve
the problem. The best that can be done in a world of n countries is to observe that n-1 (smaller) countries can
each achieve their trade balance goals if the nth country (the United States, as conceived under the Bretton Woods
system) is willing and able to be the residual.

                                                                                                                27
everyone can interpret it as they want. 40


        Second, the existence of such a wide variety of models forces us to confront the
likelihood that any given model is very likely to be wrong. Negotiators will be able to come up
with a coordinated package of policy changes that each believes will leave their own country
better off, and perhaps will be able to ignore that they don’t understand why the other side
wants to make the deal. Under these conditions, international coordination can take place.
But it could make things worse – when it moves policy settings in the wrong direction -- as
easily as better. 41

         The optimistic view is that officials may narrow the differences in their perceptions if
they come together to negotiate. But this hope should be counterbalanced by a pessimistic
possibility: Model perceptions could be endogenous with respect to interests. As Ostry and
Ghosh (2015) point out, each country has an incentive to *claim to believe in whatever model
suits its interest in the bargaining process. (If Germany, for example, wants to maximize the
amount of demand for its goods that comes from abroad rather than domestically, it suits its
purposes in international discussions to subscribe to a model in which fiscal expansion has little
effect.) Officials may genuinely come to believe the models that suit their positions; the
psychologists would call this a desire to avoid cognitive dissonance. Thus international
negotiations may actually harden differences in perceptions.

         Even aside from international differences in perceptions, disagreements among
domestic interest groups can also wreak havoc with the basic theory of international
coordination. Within each country the interests of the tradable sector – which usually means
manufacturing and agriculture -- may be in opposition to the interests of other sectors. A
country may suffer from excessive budget deficits due to a failure of political economy. The
consequent crowding out of the private sector may take place not only via a higher interest rate
and its negative effect on domestic demand but also via an appreciation of the currency and a
loss in net exports. The tradeable sector will complain that foreign currencies are undervalued.
But talk of unfair currency manipulation by foreigners or currency wars is likely to be
unproductive in this case. It may prevent a meaningful domestic discussion over the
fundamental problem, the budget deficit.

       Consider the complaints of the tradable sector in Brazil when the real was so strong in
2010. The country’s leaders naturally found it easier to blame the capital inflow and strong

40
   Cooper (2001) has pointed out, by way of precedent, that countries in the 19th century were unable to agree on
any sort of international cooperation regarding public health (e.g., procedures for quarantines), until they
eventually came to believe in a common model of disease (human contagion).
41
   Frankel and Rockett (1998).

                                                                                                               28
real on easy monetary policy on the part of a Federal Reserve that was heedless of international
spillover effects than to admit that its own fiscal policy was too loose and that the interest rate,
capital inflows, currency appreciation, and trade deficit were natural concomitants. It would
have been better to have a clear understanding and debate domestically about the tradeoffs
than to call for international coordination.

       Or consider more recent complaints of the auto industry in the US about unfair currency
manipulation by major trading partners. Associated efforts in the US Congress to put
prohibitions on currency manipulation into international trade agreements may be misguided.
Supporting the idea that the problem may lie in perceptions is the fact that some proponents
do not seem to understand that the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and (since mid-
2014) even the People’s Bank of China, have not in fact been intervening in the foreign
exchange market to depress the value of their currencies.

        These and other examples undermine the calls for international coordination. When
two players sit down at the board, they are unlikely to have a satisfactory game if one of them
thinks they are playing checkers and the other thinks they are playing chess.




References
Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey. 2014. “World Asset Markets and the Global Financial Cycle.” National Bureau of
Economic Research WP No. 21722.

Aiyar, Shekhar, Charles Calomiris and Tomasz Wieladek. 2012. "Does Macro-Pru Leak? Evidence from a U.K. Policy
Experiment," National Bureau of Economic Research WP No. 17822.

Aizenman, Joshua. 1998. "Fiscal Discipline in a Union," The Political Economy of Reform, ed. Federico Sturzenegger
and Marc Tommasi, pp. 185-208. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2010. "The Emerging Global Financial Architecture: Tracing and
Evaluating New Patterns of the Trilemma Configuration." Journal of International Money and Finance 29(4), pp.
615-641.

Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2011. "Surfing the Waves of Globalization: Asia and Financial
Globalization in the Context of the Trilemma," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 25(3), pp. 290-
320.

Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Philippe Martin, and Guillaume Plantin. 2014. "The Euro in the
‘Currency War’," Les Notes du Conseil d’Analyse Économique 11.




                                                                                                                  29
Bergsten, C. Fred. 2015. “The Truth About Currency Manipulation,” Foreign Affairs. January.

Bergsten, C. Fred. 2016. “Time for a Plaza II?” Forthcoming, Currency Policy Then and Now: 30th Anniversary of the
Plaza Accord, edited by C.F. Bergsten and Russell Green (Peterson Institute for International Economics:
Washington DC). Conference at the Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice University, Oct.1, 2015.

Blanchard, Olivier, Jonathan D Ostry and Atish R Ghosh. 2013. “International Policy Coordination: The Loch Ness
Monster.” International Monetary Fund, IMFDirect.

Blanchard, Olivier, Jonathan D Ostry, Atish R Ghosh and Marcos Chamon. 2015. “Are Capital Inflows Expansionary
or Contractionary? Theory, Policy Implications, and Some Evidence,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP No.
21619.

Branson, William, and Julio Rotemberg. 1980. "International Adjustment with Wage Rigidity." European Economic
Review 13(3), pp. 309-341.

Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2015. “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the
ZLB.” National Bureau of Economic Research WP No. 21670.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart. 1996. “Inflows of Capital to Developing Countries in the
1990s," Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(2), pp. 123-139.

Chang, Roberto. 1990. “International Coordination of Fiscal Deficits,” Journal of Monetary Economics 25(3), pp.
347–366.

Chinn, Menzie. 2013. “Global Spillovers and Domestic Monetary Policy,” Bank for International Settlements WP
No. 436, Dec. pp. 1-37.

Cooper, Richard. 1969. “Macroeconomic Policy Adjustment in Interdependent Economies,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 83(1), pp. 1-24.

Cooper, Richard. 1984. “Economic Interdependence and the Coordination of Economic Policies,” in Handbook of
International Economics, ed. Peter Kenen, pp.1195-1234. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Cooper, Richard. 2001. “International Cooperation in Public Health as a Prologue to Macroeconomic Cooperation,”
in Can Nations Agree? Issues in International Economic Cooperation, ed. Richard Cooper et al. Washington DC:
Brookings Institution.

Devereux, Michael, and James Yetman. 2014. “Capital Controls, Global Liquidity Traps and the International Policy
Trilemma,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116 (1), pp.158-189.

Di Giovanni, Julian and Jay Shambaugh. 2008. "The Impact of Foreign Interest Rates on the Economy: The Role of
the Exchange Rate Regime," Journal of International Economics 74, pp. 341–361.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2015. “Monetary Policy Independence under Flexible Exchange Rates: An Illusion?” The World
Economy 38 (5), May, pp.773-787. Also NBER Working Paper 20893.

Eichengreen, Barry. 2013. “Currency War or International Policy Coordination,” Journal of Policy Modeling, 35(3),
pp. 425-433.

Eichengreen, Barry. 2014. “International Policy Coordination: The Long View,” in Globalization in an Age of Crisis:
Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-First Century, eds. Robert Feenstra and Alan Taylor. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


                                                                                                                  30
Eichengreen, Barry. 2015. “Hall of Mirrors: The Great Depression, The Great Recession, and the Used-and Misuses-
of History.” Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. 1985. “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s,” Journal of
Economy History 49, pp. 924-946.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. 1986. “Competitive Devaluation and the Great Depression: A Theoretical
Reassessment,” Economics Letters 22, pp. 67-72.

Engel, Charles. 2014. “Policy Cooperation, Incomplete Markets and Risk Sharing,” IMF Annual Research Conference
International Monetary Fund.

Engel, Charles. 2015a. "Macroprudential Policy in a World of High Capital Mobility: Policy Implications from an
Academic Perspective," National Bureau of Economic Research WP No. 20951.

Engel, Charles. 2015b. “International Coordination of Central Bank Policy,” University of Wisconsin Working Paper.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning. 2014. “Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital Controls and Exchange Rates
with Volatile Capital Flows,” IMF Economic Review, 62 (4), pp. 569-605.

Feldstein, Martin. 1988. “Thinking about international economic coordination.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2,
pp. 3-13.

Fischer, Stanley. 1988. "International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination," in International Economic
Cooperation," ed. by Martin Feldstein, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Forbes, Kristin and Francis Warnock. 2012. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment,” Journal
of International Economics, 88(2), pp. 235-251.

Frankel, Jeffrey. 1988. "Obstacles to International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination." Journal of Public Policy
8(3/4), pp. 353-374.

Frankel, Jeffrey. 2016. “The Plaza Accord, 30 Years Later,” forthcoming, Currency Policy Then and Now: 30th
Anniversary of the Plaza Accord, ed. C.F. Bergsten and Russell Green (Peterson Institute for International
Economics: Washington DC). NBER Working Paper 21813, Dec.2015. HKS Faculty RWP Series RWP15-056,

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Katharine Rockett. 1988. "International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination When Policy-
Makers Do Not Agree On the Model," American Economic Review 78(3), pp. 318-340.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler and Luis Servén. 2004. "Global Transmission of Interest Rates: Monetary
Independence and the Currency Regime," Journal of International Money and Finance, 23(5), Sept., pp. 701-733.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Shang-Jin Wei. 2007. "Assessing China's Exchange Rate Regime," Economic Policy 51,
pp. 575-614.

Frieden, Jeffry. 1991. “Invested Interests: The Politics of National Economic Policies in a World of Global Finance.
International Organization 45(4), pp. 425-51.

Frieden, Jeffry. 2014. Currency Politics: The Political Economy of Exchange Rate Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Friedman, Milton. 1953. “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” In Essays in Positive Economics, ed. Milton
Friedman, pp. 157-203. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Funabashi, Yoichi. 1988. Managing the Dollar: From the Plaza to the Louvre. Institute for International Economics,


                                                                                                                    31
Washington, D.C.

Gagnon, Joseph. 2012. "Combating Widespread Currency Manipulation." Policy Brief in International Economics.
pp. 12-19. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Gagnon, Joseph. 2013. "Currency Wars." The Milken Institute Review 15(1), pp. 47-55.

Ghosh, Atish and Paul Masson. 1988. "International Policy Coordination in a World with Model Uncertainty." IMF
Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, pp. 230-258.

Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchison. 1993. "Fiscal Policy in Monetary Unions: Implications for Europe" Open
Economies Review 4, pp. 39-65.

Goldstein, Morris and Nicholas Lardy. 2005. “China's Role in the Revived Bretton Woods System: A Case of
Mistaken Identity,” Working Paper 05(2). Washington DC: Petersen Institute for International Economics.

G7, 2013. “Statement by G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors,” February 12.
www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm130212.htm.

Guiso, Luigi, Helios Herrera and Massimo Morelli. 2015. “Cultural Differences and Institutional Integration,”
National Bureau of Economic Research International Seminar on Macroeconomics, Zurich, June. Forthcoming,
Journal of International Economics.

Hamada, Koichi. 1976. “A Strategic Analysis of Monetary Interdependence,” Journal of Political Economy 84, pp.
677-700.

Henning, C. Randall. 1990. International Monetary Policymaking within the Countries of the Group of Five.
Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics. August.

Ilzetski, Ethan and Keyu Jin. 2013. “The Puzzling Change in the Transmission of U.S. Macroeconomic Policy Shocks,”
London School of Economics.

International Monetary Fund. 2006. “Article IV of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement: An Overview of the Legal
Framework,” Legal Department, June 28.

International Monetary Fund. 2015a. “2015 Spillover Report,” June 8.

International Monetary Fund, 2015b. “People’s Republic of China : Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV
Consultation,“ 15-234, August 14.

Jeanne, Olivier. 2014. “Macroprudential Policies in a Global Perspective,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 19967.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou and Fabrizio Perri. 2013. "Global Banks and Crisis Transmission,”
Journal of International Economics 89(2), pp. 495-510.

Kehoe, Patrick. 1987. "Coordination of Fiscal Policies in a World Economy." Journal of Monetary Economics 19(3),
pp. 349-376.

Kessler, Martin and Arvind Subramanian. 2014. “Is the Renminbi Still Undervalued? Not According to New PPP
Estimates,” Washington DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics. May 1.

Klein, Michael and Jay Shambaugh. 2013. “Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma: Sources of Monetary
Policy Autonomy,” National Bureau of Economic Research 19461.


                                                                                                                  32
Landmann, Oliver. 2015. “EMU and the Cyclical Behavior of Fiscal Policy: A Suggested Interpretation,” University of
Freiburg Department of International Economics Policy Discussion Paper Series, December.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 2015. “Trilemmas and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization,” in Global Liquidity,
Spillovers to Emerging Markets and Policy Responses, eds. Claudio Raddatz, Diego Saravia and Jaume Ventura, pp.
13-78. Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. 2002. “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary Rules,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(2), pp. 503-535.

Ostry, Jonathan and Atish Rex Ghosh. 2013. “Obstacles to International Policy Coordination and How to Overcome
Them.” International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note SDN/13/11. December.

Oudiz, Gilles and Jeffrey Sachs. 1984. "Macroeconomic Policy Coordination among the Industrial
Economies." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 1-75.

Portes, Richard. 2012. "Monetary Policies and Exchange Rates at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 44 (s1), pp. 157-163.

Putnam, Robert and Nicholas Bayne. 1987. “Hanging Together: The Seven-power Summits.” 2d ed. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Rajan, Raghuram. 2015. "Competitive Monetary Easing: Is It Yesterday Once More?" Macroeconomics and Finance
in Emerging Market Economies 8(1-2), pp. 5-16.

Rey, Hélène. 2015. “Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence,”
National Bureau of Economic Research WP No. 21162.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1985. "Can International Monetary Policy Cooperation be Counterproductive?" Journal of
International Economics 18(3), pp. 199-217.

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1985. “The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1985,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp. 117-86.

Subacchi, Paola and Paul Van den Noord. 2012. "Grappling with Global Imbalances: When Does International
Cooperation Pay?" Oxford Review of Economic Policy 28(3), pp. 444-468.

Subramanian, Arvind. 2010. “New PPP-Based Estimates of Renminbi Undervaluation and Policy Implications,”
Peterson Institute for International Economics Policy Brief 10-8. April.

Tabellini, Guido. 1990. "Domestic Politics and the International Coordination of Fiscal Policies." Journal of
International Economics 28(3), pp. 245-265.

Taylor, John B. 1985. "International Coordination in the Design of Macroeconomic Policy Rules." European
Economic Review 28(1), pp. 53-81.

Taylor, John B. 2013. “International Monetary Policy Coordination: Past, Present and Future,” Bank of International
Settlements Working Paper 437.




                                                                                                                    33
