                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE MICRO ORIGINS OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CYCLE COMOVEMENT

                                          Julian di Giovanni
                                         Andrei A. Levchenko
                                           Isabelle Mejean

                                         Working Paper 21885
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21885


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2016




We would like to thank workshop participants at several institutions for helpful discussions, and Eda
Gulsen for expert research assistance. Di Giovanni gratefully acknowledges the CREI and the Marie
Curie International Incoming Fellowship FP7-PEOPLE-2013-IIF (under Grant Agreement 622959)
for financial support. Méjean gratefully acknowledges support from a public grant overseen by the
French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the “Investissements d’Avenir” program (Idex
Grant Agreement No. ANR-11-IDEX-0003- 02/Labex ECODEC No. ANR-11-LABEX-0047 and
Equipex reference: ANR-10- EQPX-17 Centre d'accès sécurisé aux données CASD). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Julian di Giovanni, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Micro Origins of International Business Cycle Comovement
Julian di Giovanni, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean
NBER Working Paper No. 21885
January 2016
JEL No. F44,F61,F62

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the role of individual firms in international business cycle comovement using
data covering the universe of French firm-level value added, bilateral imports and exports, and cross-border
ownership over the period 1993-2007. At the micro level, controlling for firm and country effects,
trade in goods with a particular foreign country is associated with a significantly higher correlation
between a firm and that foreign country. In addition, foreign multinational affiliates operating in France
are significantly more correlated with the source economy. The impact of direct trade and multinational
linkages on comovement at the micro level has significant macro implications. Because internationally
connected firms are systematically larger than non- internationally connected firms, the firms directly
linked to foreign countries represent only 8% of all firms, but 56% of all value added, and account
for 75% of the observed aggregate comovement. Without those linkages the correlation between France
and foreign countries would fall by about 0.091, or one-third of the observed average business cycle
correlation of 0.29 in our sample of partner countries. These results are evidence of transmission of
business cycle shocks through direct trade and multinational ownership linkages at the firm level.


Julian di Giovanni                                   Isabelle Mejean
Department of Economics and Business                 Département d'Economie
Universitat Pompeu Fabra                             Ecole Polytechnique
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27                             91128 Palaiseau Cedex
08005 Barcelona                                      France
Spain                                                isabelle.mejean@polytechnique.edu
julian.digiovanni@upf.edu

Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu
1        Introduction

Countries that exhibit greater bilateral trade and multinational production linkages have
more correlated business cycles (Frankel and Rose, 1998; Kleinert et al., 2015). While the
empirical literature has repeatedly confirmed the trade-comovement relationship in the data,
its meaning is not well-understood, either empirically or quantitatively. Taken at face value,
the positive association between bilateral trade and multinational linkages and comovement
is often interpreted as evidence of transmission of shocks across countries through those
linkages.
        The empirical literature has faced two related challenges. The first is the critique by Imbs
(2004) that countries that trade more with each other are similar in other ways, and thus
subject to common shocks. Under an extreme version of this view, the trade linkage variable
in the Frankel-Rose specification does not reflect the intensity of transmission of shocks, but
rather is simply a stand-in for the prevalence of common shocks. The second is that even if
one accepts the transmission of shocks interpretation of the Frankel-Rose result, the coarse
nature of the cross-country setting makes it difficult to learn about the micro underpinnings
of the trade-comovement relationship. This lack of understanding is reinforced by the
quantitative literature, which has struggled to capture the trade-comovement relationship.
Kose and Yi (2006) and Johnson (2014) show that even quite sophisticated IRBC models fail
to generate the observed positive association, dubbing it the “trade-comovement puzzle.”1
        Until now the properties of international comovement at the firm level, or its aggregate
implications, have by and large not been studied. This paper provides a forensic account
of international comovement at both the micro and macro levels using data covering the
universe of French firm-level value-added, destination-specific imports and exports, and
cross-border ownership over the period 1993-2007. Examining cross-border comovement at
the firm level has two advantages relative to the traditional approach of looking directly at
GDP correlations. First, at the micro level, the data allow for precise measurement of trade
and multinational linkages – by firm×country – and to control for common shocks using
appropriate fixed effects. This overcomes the common shocks critique and lets us establish
much more firmly that the positive trade-comovement relationship is due at least in part
    1
     The literature on multinationals and international business cycle comovement is more limited, but
shares this feature. Kleinert et al. (2015) show that French regions that contain more multinationals from a
particular foreign country are more correlated with that country. However, Cravino and Levchenko (2015)
show that the observed multinational presence alone cannot generate the level of positive comovement found
in the data. Liao and Santacreu (2015) develop a model in which technology shocks are transmitted between
countries through changes in the mix of imported inputs, and show that allowing for the extensive margin
of trade yields more promising results.


                                                     1
to transmission of shocks at the firm level.
    Second, at the macro level, our approach allows us to capture the aggregate comove-
ment implications of heterogeneity across firms in both size and the extent of international
linkages. Larger firms are disproportionately more likely to trade internationally and own
affiliates in foreign countries. Indeed, in most countries international trade flows are dom-
inated by only a handful of large firms. An emerging research agenda in closed-economy
macro has argued convincingly that modeling and measuring shocks at the micro level (to
firms and sectors), and linkages between them, is essential for understanding aggregate
fluctuations.2 If large firms and firm-to-firm linkages matter for aggregate fluctuations, a
natural conjecture is that they will matter as much if not more for cross-border comovement.
    We begin by estimating a specification inspired by Frankel and Rose (1998), that relates
the correlation of firm total value added growth with foreign GDP growth to firm-level direct
linkages to that country. The data contain, for each firm and potential partner country, four
types of direct linkages: (i) importing from it, (ii) exporting to it, (iii) being a France-based
affiliate of a multinational firm headquartered in that country; (iv) being a French firm with
a foreign affiliate in that country. Because the sample includes many firms and countries,
estimation controls for both firm and country effects. Country effects in particular absorb
the common aggregate shocks affecting France and each foreign country.
    In a sample of firm-level correlations with 10 large trading partners of France, trade
linkages at the firm level are significantly associated with increased comovement between
an individual firm and the country with which it trades. An import link increases the
correlation by 0.012, and an export link by 0.005. This is large relative to the average cor-
relation between an individual firm and foreign GDP, which is 0.024 for directly connected
firms, and essentially zero for non-directly connected ones. By a similar token, affiliates of
foreign multinationals operating in France have a 0.01 higher correlation with their source
countries.
    At the same time, the empirical exercise reveals the importance of common shocks in
the data. In a specification that omits the 10 country fixed effects but still includes the
∼1 million firm effects, the coefficients on the direct linkages variables are 2-5 times larger
in magnitude and all strongly statistically significant. This underscores both the empirical
    2
      Gabaix (2011), di Giovanni and Levchenko (2012), and Carvalho and Grassi (2015) develop models
in which aggregate fluctuations arise from shocks to individual firms, because the firm-size distribution
is extremely fat-tailed (Zipf’s Law). Acemoglu et al. (2012) and Carvalho and Gabaix (2013) argue that
sectoral shocks lead to aggregate fluctuations through interconnections between sectors. Di Giovanni et al.
(2014) and Atalay (2014) provide corresponding empirical evidence on the role of shocks to firms and sectors
in aggregate fluctuations.



                                                     2
relevance of common shocks, and how important it is to control for them in “gravity-macro”
analyses of the effects of bilateral trade and capital flows linkages on aggregate outcomes.
Nonetheless, the results when controlling for common shocks still provide clear evidence of
transmission through direct linkages at the firm level.
   We then use the sector-level Input-Output table together with firm-level information
on input purchases and domestic sales to construct proxies for indirect linkages between
French firms and foreign markets. The measures, inspired by the “network effect” prop-
agation terms in Acemoglu et al. (2015), capture the intensity with which a French firm
interacts with internationally connected firms. The downstream indicator reflects whether
a firm buys intermediate inputs from firms that import from a particular country. The up-
stream indicator captures whether a firm sells its output to firms that export to a particular
country. Both of these measures are firm- and foreign country-specific. We augment the
main specification with these indirect linkage terms, and show that the downstream indirect
linkages do matter significantly for firm-level comovement with foreign markets. Firms that
buy inputs from importers from a particular country are more correlated with that country.
The evidence on upstream linkages is more mixed, with coefficients differing in sign and
significance depending on specification.
   The second half of the analysis examines the macro implications of the micro-level
findings. We start with the observation that the aggregate business cycle correlation between
France and another country is simply an appropriately weighted sum of the correlations of
firm-level total value added with that country. The aggregate business cycle correlation
between France and each country can thus be written as a sum of two terms: the part due
to the directly connected firms, and the part due to the not directly connected firms. For the
10 large trading partners of France in our sample, we show that the large directly connected
firms are important in accounting for aggregate comovement. For a typical foreign partner
country, the directly connected firms represent only about 8% of all firms in our dataset, but
account for 56% of total value added. The directly connected firms are also unconditionally
more correlated with the foreign country. Together these two facts imply that the directly
connected firms account for 75% of the aggregate business cycle correlation observed in the
data for the median country.
   We then use the conditional relationship between direct linkages and firm-level correla-
tions to compute the change in the aggregate correlation between France and each foreign
country that would occur if direct linkages at the firm level disappeared. The aggregation
exercise combines information on the change in the correlation at the firm level from the


                                              3
regression estimates with firm-level weights. If direct linkages at the firm level were sev-
ered, the aggregate correlation would fall by 0.091 on average in our sample of 10 partner
countries. This is a non-negligible change relative to the observed correlations between
France and its main trading partners of 0.29 on average over this period. Since our data
allow us to estimate the coefficients on trade and multinational links separately, we can also
check which ones matter more for generating aggregate comovement. It turns out that the
trade linkages are about 9 times more important in generating aggregate comovement than
multinational linkages, accounting for 0.083 of the overall 0.091 effect.
   Augmenting the aggregate impact with the indirect linkage estimates, we show that
indirect linkages are quantitatively important as well. Accounting for indirect linkages
implies that aggregate correlation would fall by 0.13 on average in the whole economy if
links to the foreign country were severed. Thus, direct and indirect linkages together can
account for nearly half of the average 0.29 observed aggregate correlation. The results
are even stronger in manufacturing. Direct and indirect linkages produce a correlation
of 0.414 between French manufacturing and foreign GDP, accounting for the bulk of the
0.484 average correlation in the data. Indirect linkages have a much larger impact in the
manufacturing sector compared to the whole economy, alone accounting for 0.343 of the
0.414 total impact, more than 80%.
   To summarize, on the one hand the data point clearly to the presence of common shocks,
implying that it is imperative to control for them in the empirical exercise. On the other
hand, even after controlling for common shocks, there is still substantial evidence of trans-
mission of shocks through trade and multinational linkages. Among those linkages, trade
linkages appear to matter more than multinational ones, especially in aggregate. Down-
stream indirect input linkages are both statistically robust and quantitatively important as
well.
   Our paper contributes to the empirical literature on international business cycle comove-
ment. Studies building on Frankel and Rose (1998) have confirmed the positive association
between trade and comovement and examined how it differs across types of goods trade and
sub-samples of countries (see, e.g. Baxter and Kouparitsas, 2005; Calderon et al., 2007; Ng,
2010; Blonigen et al., 2014; Liao and Santacreu, 2015). While the existing empirical litera-
ture has almost exclusively used aggregate GDP correlations as the outcome variable, there
has been comparatively little work on international comovement at more disaggregated lev-
els. Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) estimate the relationship between bilateral trade,
input linkages, and sector-level correlations. This paper’s contribution is to examine the


                                              4
trade-comovement relationship at the firm level, and to derive the aggregate implications
based on micro-level estimates. In this respect, it shares some features with recent papers
such as Kurz and Senses (2015), Boehm et al. (2014), and Cravino and Levchenko (2015),
who perform related exercises.
    An important research agenda, going back to Backus et al. (1995), attempts to under-
stand the positive GDP correlation across countries using representative firm models in
which all shocks are aggregate. Later developments in this literature explored the role of
the production structure, such as input-output linkages (Burstein et al., 2008; Arkolakis
and Ramanarayanan, 2009), or firm heterogeneity (Ghironi and Melitz, 2005; Alessandria
and Choi, 2007) but have similarly been confined to considering only the role of aggregate
productivity shocks in generating cross-country business cycle comovement. Our results
suggest that to fully understand the impact of transmission of shocks for aggregate co-
movement, a quantitative framework must feature a realistic micro-structure that combines
granularity in the firm size distribution and systematic heterogeneity among firms in trade
and multinational linkages.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the conceptual framework
and the empirical exercises performed in the paper. Section 3 describes the data, and
Section 4 the results. Section 5 concludes.


2    Conceptual Framework
                                                                                              P
Total value added Xt by all French firms in year t is by definition given by: Xt ≡               f ∈It   xf t ,
where xf t is defined as the value added of firm f in year t, and It is the set of firms
f operating at t. The growth rate of aggregate value added is then defined simply as
γAt = Xt /Xt−1 − 1, where we assume that Xt−1 and Xt are the aggregate value added of
all firms that exist both at t − 1 and t, i.e. we restrict attention to the intensive margin
of aggregate value added growth. Appendix A develops a complete decomposition of the
total value added growth into extensive and intensive margins, and presents the results for
the relative contributions of the extensive and intensive margins to aggregate comovement
between France and its main trade partners. The main result is that the large majority of
aggregate comovement is accounted for by the intensive margin, with the extensive margin
playing only a minor role.3
   3
     These results are not inconsistent with the empirical findings in Liao and Santacreu (2015), who show
that the extensive margin of trade is positively correlated with bilateral comovement. Those results relate
the cross-sectional variation in the number of products traded between country pairs to bilateral business
cycle comovement. Our extensive margin is the aggregate contribution of entry and exit of French firms


                                                    5
     The growth rate of aggregate value added can be written as a function of individual
firm growth rates and firm shares:
                                                  X
                                          γAt =         wf t−1 γf t ,                                    (1)
                                                   f

where γf t is the growth rate of value added of firm f , and wf t−1 is the share of f ’s value
added in total French value added.
     The object of interest is the correlation between French aggregate growth and foreign
GDP growth. Let γCt be the GDP growth of a foreign country C between t − 1 and t. This
correlation is given by:
                                                        Cov (γAt , γCt )
                                     ρ (γAt , γCt ) =                    ,                               (2)
                                                           σA σC
where σC is the standard deviation of country C growth.
     Combining (1) and (2), the correlation between France and C at time t can be written
as
                                                            P                     
                                                  Cov        f wf t−1 γf t , γCt
                              ρ (γAt , γCt ) =
                                                              σA σC
                                                  X           σf
                                             =          wf t−1 ρ (γf t , γCt ) ,                         (3)
                                                              σA
                                                   f

where σf is the standard deviation of γf t .
     While simply an identity, Equation (3) states the key premise of the paper: the aggregate
correlation between the French economy and another country is an appropriately weighted
sum of the firm-level correlations. The substantial literature on international comovement
has studied empirically and theoretically the left-hand side of this equation – the aggregate
business cycle comovement. This paper provides a picture of aggregate comovement by
examining instead the components of the right-hand side. We proceed by analyzing first
the properties of the individual firm-level correlations ρ (γf t , γCt ), and then the consequences
of aggregation across firms.

2.1    Micro Evidence

Equation (3) emphasizes that the aggregate business cycle correlation between the French
economy and foreign countries is a function of the individual firm-level correlations and
these firms’ weights in the total French economy. We start by establishing whether the
from year to year, an object that has no close relationship to the cross-country differences in the number of
traded varieties.



                                                        6
direct trade and multinational linkages at the firm level to a particular foreign country are
associated with a higher correlation between the firm and that foreign country. To that
end, we estimate the following specification:

       ρ (γf t , γCt ) = α + β1 EXf,C + β2 IMf,C + β3 AF Ff,C + β4 HQf,C + δf + δC + ηf,C .           (4)

In equation (4), the correlation between a firm and a foreign market C is related to binary
indicators of whether the firm exports to there (EXf,C ), imports from there (IMf,C ), is a
French multinational with affiliates in C (HQf,C ), or is an affiliate of a foreign multinational
headquartered in C (AF Ff,C ). Importantly, the specification admits both firm and country
effects, allowing for a precise identification of transmission of shocks through direct linkages.
    The specification is inspired by Frankel and Rose (1998), who were the first to establish
the robust empirical benchmark in this literature: country pairs that trade more with each
other exhibit higher business cycle correlation. However, the interpretation of this stylized
fact and the mechanisms responsible for generating it are still not well-understood. Taken
at face value, the positive association between trade intensity and comovement suggests
transmission of shocks through international trade linkages. However, as argued by Imbs
(2004), an alternative interpretation is that countries that trade more with each other are
similar in other ways, and thus subject to common shocks. Under an extreme version of
this view, the trade linkage variable in the Frankel-Rose specification does not reflect the
intensity of transmission of shocks, but rather is simply a stand-in for similarity between
countries. In addition, even if one accepts the transmission of shocks interpretation of the
Frankel-Rose result, the coarse nature of the cross-country setting makes it difficult to learn
about the micro underpinnings of the trade-comovement relationship.4
    Our firm-level specification leads to qualitatively new insights relative to the traditional
cross-country empirical model. First, comparing firms within the same country and includ-
ing country and firm fixed effects addresses the Imbs (2004) common shock critique. Since
all firms in this specification are in France, country effects will absorb the common shocks
affecting France and country C. As a result, we can establish convincingly that trade and
multinational linkages are indeed a source of transmission of shocks, rather than simply a
stand-in for the presence of common shocks. Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2010) adopt a
related strategy and use data on sector-level trade and comovement together with country-
pair effects that control for common aggregate shocks. At the industry level, a link between
   4
     These difficulties in interpreting the cross-country relationship are underscored by the finding that
traditional international business cycle models have trouble reproducing it quantitatively (Kose and Yi,
2006; Johnson, 2014).


                                                    7
sectoral correlation and sectoral trade intensity does not have a tight interpretation, since
it is not clear that exports from one of the sector-countries in the pair are used by the other
sector-country. Extending this approach to firm-level data is a significant improvement in
measurement, since we observe exactly which firms have direct links with which countries.
While the country effects are useful at absorbing the macro common shocks, the firm effects
allow us to control for heterogeneity at the firm level that varies by firm but not partner
country: size, primary industry of operation, capital or skill intensity, access to external
finance, R&D intensity, and so on.
   Second, estimation at the firm level reveals the micro underpinnings of the aggregate
relationship. Observing cross-border links at the firm level allows us to establish with foren-
sic precision the role of each type of trade and multinational relationship in international
comovement. With very few exceptions (e.g. Kleinert et al., 2015), existing papers do not
combine information on both trade and multinational linkages in the same specification.
This may be important: if both types of linkages potentially matter, not including them
will lead to omitted variable bias. Information at the firm level paired with firm effects also
enables us to control for heterogeneity across firms in volatility and comovement, as well as
for forces that shape a firm’s average comovement with the rest of the world (such as its
domestic linkages, for instance).

2.1.1   Indirect Linkages

It may be that even firms not directly connected to a particular foreign country comove
with that country through indirect linkages, that is, interactions inside the French economy
induced by the directly connected firms. A complete account of all indirect linkages is
not possible in this empirical setting, as those linkages can take a variety of forms, from
purchases/sales of intermediate inputs by the directly connected firms to changes in factor
and goods prices in general equilibrium. Nonetheless, we attempt to capture one type of
indirect linkage, that can be potentially measured: indirect linkages through input-output
relationships inside the French economy. To that end, we construct the following firm-
specific indices of indirect linkages:
                                                     X               N IMi,C
                          DSf,j,C = IN P U T IN Tf            IOij                         (5)
                                                                       Ni
                                                         i

                                                  X                 N EXi,C
                           U Sf,j,C = DOM IN Tf              IOji           .              (6)
                                                                      Ni
                                                     i

   In these expressions, i and j index sectors, and firm f belongs to sector j. IOij is the

                                              8
domestic direct requirement coefficient of the 1995 French Input-Output matrix, defined as
the share of spending on domestically-produced sector i inputs in production in sector j.
N IMi,C is the number of French firms in sector i that import from C, N EXi,C is the number
of French firms in sector i that export to C, and Ni is the total number of firms in sector i.
Each of these numbers is computed excluding firm f itself (which is obviously only relevant
if i = j), and thus are in that sense firm-specific, but we suppress the dependence of those
values on f to economize on notation. Finally, IN P U T IN Tf is the firm’s total input usage
intensity, defined as the total material input spending divided by material input spending
plus wage bill, averaged across years. DOM IN Tf is the domestic sales intensity, defined
as the share of firm f sales that goes to the domestic market, averaged across years.
   These indices are heuristic, but inspired by the formulation of the “network effect” prop-
agation of terms in Acemoglu et al. (2015). The DSf,j,C indicator, short for “downstream,”
is meant to capture the fact that firms in sector j buy inputs from other sectors i in the
economy. To the extent that sector i is populated by firms that import from country C,
country C shocks will propagate to input-buying firms in j through their input purchases of
                                                                    N IMi,C
i. For any individual sector i, the term in the summation, IOij        Ni ,   will be high either if
j uses a lot of sector i inputs (IOij is high), or if a high fraction of sector i firms import from
C. The summation aggregates this information across all the input-supplying sectors of j,
and multiplies it by the firm-specific input intensity, since the importance of downstream
linkages will be higher for firms that spend a lot on inputs.
   The U Sf,j,C (“upstream”) indicator is meant to capture the fact that firms in sector j
supply inputs to other sectors i, and thus will be affected by whether the sector i buying
its inputs has a large population of directly connected firms. Export opportunities in sector
i to country C will propagate to sector j as an increase in exports from i to C will raise
                                                                                       N EXi,C
demand for sector j inputs. For an individual output sector i, the term IOji             Ni      will
be high if either i uses a lot of j inputs, or if a large share of firms in i export to C. The
summation across sectors is multiplied by the share of firm f ’s sales in the domestic market,
since if f does not sell much of its output in France, by construction it must be a relatively
unimportant supplier of inputs to the French market.
   The indices are constructed using sector-level information by necessity, as there is yet
no firm-level Input-Output matrix available for France. If we had firm-level information,
these indices would have a much simpler form, and would exploit information on whether
firm f sources inputs from directly connected firms, or supplies inputs to directly connected




                                                9
firms.5
       Note that while these formulations appear the most natural to us, one can think of other
transmission mechanisms that might be at work. For example, one can build an alternative
DS indicator that instead of counting the number of importing firms in the input-supplying
sector, counts the number of exporting firms. This indicator would be relevant if there are
capacity constraints, and thus greater export opportunities in the input-supplying sector
i reduce those firms’ domestic supply of inputs. We view those alternative indicators as
less compelling and most likely second-order relative to those set out above. An additional
question is whether we should also build propagation indices for multinationals and affiliates.
In this case, it is also unclear in which way do shocks to multinationals propagate to non-
directly connected firms. To avoid a proliferation of regressors, we favor a more parsimonious
specification with only the two indices (5)-(6).
       We add these two variables to the baseline specification (4). Thus, we include the indirect
linkage indicators alongside the direct linkage indicators and country and firm fixed effects:

               ρ (γf t , γCt ) = α + β1 EXf,C + β2 IMf,C + β3 AF Ff,C + β4 HQf,C +
                                    +β5 DSf,j,C + β6 U Sf,j,C + δf + δC + ηf,C .                        (7)

2.2       From Micro to Macro

Next, we investigate the macroeconomic implications of these micro findings. The aggre-
gate correlation as written in (3) is additive in the individual firm-level correlations with
foreign GDP, and thus can be decomposed easily into the various components. Since we are
interested in the impact of individual firms on aggregate correlations, we can decompose
the aggregate growth rate into the contribution of two sets of firms: the directly connected
and the not directly connected to a particular country:
                               X                     X                       X
                       γAt =         wf t−1 γf t =           wf t−1 γf t +            wf t−1 γf t ,
                                f                    f ∈IC                   f ∈ICc

where IC is the set of firms that satisfy at least one of the four criteria included in estimating
equation (4): (i) export to C; (ii) import from C; (iii) is a French affiliate of a multinational
based in C; or (iv) is part of a French multinational that has affiliates in C. Correspondingly,
   5                                                                           ∗     P
     If we had a firm-to-firm IO matrix, we could construct the simple index DSf,C = g IOgf IMg,C , where
IOgf if the share of spending by firm f on inputs supplied by firm g in f ’s total output (the firm-to-firm
direct requirement coefficient), and IMg,C is, as defined above, the indicator for whether g imports from
                            ∗
C. The “ideal” index DSf,C      would be a precise measure of whether firm f sources inputs from directly
connected firms or not. In the absence of firm-to-firm IO information, IN P U T IN Tf IOij is our best guess
                N IM
for IOgf , and Nii,C is an estimate for how likely it is that IMg,C = 1.


                                                        10
ICc is the complement of that set of firms. Then, the aggregate comovement decomposes
additively into two components, one due to the directly connected firms, and the other due
to the rest:
                                                                                    
                            σIC  X                       σICc    X
           ρ (γAt , γCt ) =    ρ    wf t−1 γf t , γCt  +      ρ    wf t−1 γf t , γCt  ,     (8)
                            σA                            σA       c
                                    f ∈IC                                    f ∈IC

                   P                       
where σI2C = Var        f ∈IC wf t−1 γf t       is the variance of the combined value added of the
directly connected terms, and similarly for σI2c .
                                                        C
   By bringing in information on firm weights wf t−1 , this additive decomposition will
provide the first glimpse of whether the directly connected firms combined are a large
enough segment of the economy to play an appreciable role in aggregate comovement. Of
course, this decomposition yields only part of the answer: the direct component can be large
either because the directly connected firms are large, or because they are more correlated.
Estimates of equation (4) provide the means of separating the two.
   For each directly connected firm, we can compute the predicted change in its correlation
with country C if it were no longer connected with C:

c (γf t , γCt ) = −βb1 1 (EXf,C = 1)− βb2 1 (IMf,C = 1)− βb3 1 (AF Ff,C = 1)− βb4 1 (HQf,C = 1) .
∆ρ
                                                                                               (9)
As an example, if firm f only exported to C and had no other links, the predicted change
in the correlation between f and C is simply −βb1 . The formulation (9) allows for every
combination of different types of direct links, and turns off all the existing ones at the same
time.
   Combining (9) with (3), the predicted change in the aggregate business cycle correlation
between France and C if all cross-border links were severed is:
                                                  X             σf c
                           ∆ρ
                           c (γAt , γCt ) =            wf t−1      ∆ρ (γf t , γCt ) .         (10)
                                                                σA
                                                   f

For simplicity, this calculation assumes that the severing of the direct links does not have an
impact on volatilities either at the firm or the aggregate level, or on firm weights. Since in
the data the weights differ across years, below we report the values of ∆ρ
                                                                         c (γAt , γCt ) averaged
across the sample years.
   We next account for the impact of indirect linkages in a similar way. If all the direct
linkages between country C and France were severed, the N IMi,C and N EXi,C terms in
(5)-(6) become zero, and as a result in this comparative static, DSf,j,C = U Sf,j,C = 0 ∀ f .

                                                       11
This means that at the firm level, the change in correlation following elimination of links
with country C is:

            c (γf t , γCt ) = −βb1 1 (EXf,C = 1) − βb2 1 (IMf,C = 1) − βb3 1 (AF Ff,C = 1)
            ∆ρ
                                −βb4 1 (HQf,C = 1) − βb5 DSf,j,C − βb6 U Sf,j,C ,                   (11)

and the change in aggregate correlation is still given by (10). Note that in this formulation,
correlation of a firm with C will change even if it has no direct connections to C. By a
similar token, even directly connected firms will also exhibit indirect connections to C, and
thus the impact in (11) is additive.


3        Data and Basic Patterns

The empirical analysis relies on several firm-level databases. The main object of interest is
the correlation between French and foreign GDP growth. At the most disaggregated level,
it is measured using a database that covers the universe of French firm sales and value added
over the period 1993-2007. The dataset is described in detail in di Giovanni et al. (2014).
Importantly, it covers the entire French economy, manufacturing and non-manufacturing
sectors included. We augment it with information on each firm’s direct trade and multi-
national linkages, disaggregated by foreign partner country. Namely, we use Customs data
to recover bilateral export and import flows, at the level of each individual firm. Finally,
information on the firm ownership linkages is taken from the LIaisons FInancieres (LIFI)
database, an administrative dataset that provides information about the ownership and
nationality of the parent company of firms located in France. Together, these two datasets
provide firm-level information on all possible direct links to each individual foreign country,
whether through cross-border trade or multinational production. Finally, note that we do
not have any information at the plant level.
        The value added data, as well as additional variables, come from the balance sheet
information collected from firms’ tax forms. The original dataset is quasi-exhaustive. How-
ever, the amount of information that has to be provided to the fiscal administration differs
according to the firm’s size. Namely, the French tax system distinguishes three different
regimes, the “normal” regime (called BRN for Bénéfice Réel Normal ), the “simplified”
regime (called RSI for Régime Simplifié d’Imposition) that is restricted to smaller firms,
and the “micro-BIC” regime for entrepreneurs.6 Throughout the exercise, “micro-BIC”
    6
        Under some conditions, firms can choose their tax regime. In 2010, an individual entrepreneur can



                                                     12
and “RSI” firms are excluded. We do not have enough information for “micro-BIC” firms.
We also exclude “RSI” firms, both because their weight in annual sales is negligible and
because it is difficult to harmonize these data with the rest of the sample. In 2007, those
firms represented less than 4% of total sales and about 11% of total employment. Thus, our
sample represents the bulk of the aggregate French economy. In this sample, it is possible
to classify firms according to the sector in which they operate, using information on their
NAF code.7
    The information collected by the tax authorities is combined with the firm-level export
and import data from the French customs authorities. The datasets can be merged using
a unique firm identifier, called SIREN. On top of the firm dimension, the customs data
also detail trade flows by their country of destination (for exports) or the country of origin
(for imports). This information makes it possible to investigate the heterogeneity of trade
linkages within firm across different foreign countries. The customs data are also quasi-
exhaustive. There is a declaration threshold of 1,000 euros for annual exports to and annual
imports from any given destination outside the European Union. Below the threshold, the
customs declaration is not compulsory. Since 1993, intra-EU trade is no longer liable for
any tariff, and as a consequence firms are no longer required to submit the regular customs
form. A new form has however been created that tracks intra-EU trade. Unfortunately, the
declaration threshold for this kind of trade flows in much higher, around 150,000 euros per
year in 2010. A number of firms continue declaring intra-EU trade flows below the threshold
however, either because they don’t know ex ante that they will not reach the 150,000 Euro
limit in a given fiscal year, because they apply the same customs procedure for all export
markets they serve, or because they delegate the customs-related tasks to a third party
(e.g., a transport firm) that systematically fills out the customs form. Below-cutoff trade
flows missing from customs data imply that we might underestimate the contribution of
direct trade linkages as a driver of aggregate comovement.8
decide to enroll in the “micro-BIC” regime if its annual sales are below 80,300 euros. Likewise, a firm can
choose to participate in the RSI rather than the BRN regime if its annual sales are below 766,000 euros
(231,000 euros in services). Those thresholds are adjusted over time, but marginally so.
    7
      “NAF”, Nomenclature d’Activités Française, is the French industrial classification. Our baseline analysis
considers the level of aggregation with 114 sectors. This corresponds to the 3-digit ISIC (Revision 3)
nomenclature. We drop NAF sectors 95 (domestic services), and 99 (activities outside France). We also
have to neglect the banking sector due to important restructuring at the beginning of the 2000s that makes
it difficult to follow individual firms.
    8
      We can judge how many exports we are missing by comparing exports declared on tax forms to exports
declared to customs. It appears that the problem is relatively minor. In 10% of firm-year observations, the
tax form reports exports but the customs data do not. These observations account for 7% of overall exports.
On average, the total exports reported in the tax form but missing from customs (413,000 euros per year)
are an order of magnitude smaller than average exports in the whole sample, which are 3,056,000.


                                                       13
       The customs data include only trade in goods, and thus firm-level information on trade
in services is missing from our analysis. Data on services trade are not collected by customs
authorities and are thus considerably more spotty. According to the OECD, in the later half
of our sample period services trade accounted for about 20% of overall (goods plus services)
French imports and exports. Note that our production, goods trade, and multinational
indicator data include service sector firms, and our indirect transmission measures in (5)
and (6) incorporate domestic service sector linkages. Nonetheless, if there are firms that
trade services but not goods, the analysis below understates the extent of direct linkages to
foreign countries, and thus the contribution of direct linkages to comovement.
       Finally, the LIFI data are used to get information on i) whether each French firm is
an affiliate of a company headquartered in a particular foreign country, or ii) whether each
firm is, or belongs to, a French company that owns foreign affiliates in a particular foreign
country. The LIFI database is constructed by the French statistical institute (INSEE). It
is not exhaustive, but it has a good coverage. All firms with more than 500 employees or a
turnover above 60 million euros, whatever their sector of activity, are included in the survey.
Moreover, the information is complemented with two additional administrative sources that
contain information on a large number of smaller groups. According to the French statistical
institute, a firm is an affiliate of a group if the group has the (direct or indirect) majority
of voting rights. Using this definition, INSEE identifies firms that own affiliates abroad,
together with the nationalities of those affiliates. When the French firm is identified as an
affiliate of a foreign company, the nationality of the parent group is recorded as well.
       The firm-level correlation coefficients are measured using the time dimension of the value
added data, at the firm level. On the other hand, the empirical strategy does not use the
time variability of measures of each firm’s direct links with each destination country. To
construct the dummies for whether a firm exports (EXf,C ), imports (IMf,C ), has affiliates
in the destination (AF Ff,C ) or is an affiliate of a foreign multinational firm (HQf,C ) the
time dimension is thus collapsed. Namely, in the baseline analysis the dummy is set to
1 whenever the firm satisfies the corresponding condition over at least one year in the
period of observation.9 The numbers of firms in each sector that import and export used
in the indirect linkage indicators, N IMi,C and N EXi,C , are defined consistently with the
direct linkage indicators and are simply sector-level summations of those, e.g. N IMi,C =
P
   f ∈i IMf,C .
   9
    The results are robust to instead defining the dummy to equal 1 whenever the firm is connected for at
least 50% of the years it is present in the sample.



                                                   14
   Figure 1 plots the growth rates of aggregate value added, exports, and imports, together
with the growth rate of GDP from IMF’s International Financial Statistics, and total exports
and imports from IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics. The aggregates in our sample of firms
mimic the aggregate data from standard sources quite well.
   Figure 2 reports the scatterplot of the aggregate correlations with the 10 main trading
partner countries implied by our data and the GDP correlations from standard sources,
along with a 45-degree line. It is clear that our data capture both the levels and the
variation in aggregate comovement extremely well. The correlation between the business
cycle comovement implied by our data and by standard GDP data is 0.992.
   Table 1 presents the basic stylized facts on the composition of the sample. Panel A
reports the summary statistics for the whole economy, and Panel B for the manufacturing
sector only. The first columns reports the number of firms in the dataset. There are about
a million firms in total. The rest of the panel reports the summary statistics for exporters,
importers, affiliates of foreign multinationals, and French firms with foreign affiliates. These
four categories are of course not mutually exclusive. The table reports the total numbers
of observations and firms, the mean and median value added in each category, and the
percentage of total value added captured by each category of firms.
   As expected, firms engaged in an international activity represent a small share of the
population of French firms. Around 20% of French firms export or import at all. There
are an order of magnitude more exporters and importers than multinational firms: about
200 thousand of importers and exporters, compared to 30 thousand affiliates of foreign
multinationals, and 1786 French firms that have foreign affiliates. Each category of the
internationally connected firms has larger average value added than purely domestic firms.
The largest category on average is French multinationals with affiliates abroad.
   More novel is the information in the last column that reports the share of total value
added in France that is taken up by each category of firms. These statistics have not, to our
knowledge, been previously reported. It turns out that importers account for 72% of total
French value added, and exporters 71%. By contrast, multinational firms account for a
smaller share of economic activity, with about 25% for foreign affiliates in France, and 14%
for French-owned multinationals. Panel B reports the same statistics for the manufacturing
sector. Not surprisingly, the shares of exporters and importers are even larger, at around
93%.
   Table 2 reports the measures of connectedness and firm-level correlations with France’s




                                              15
10 major trading partner countries.10 For each country, the table presents the number of
directly connected firms, the combined share of those firms in total French value added,
and the mean correlation between an individual firm and the GDP growth of that country.
The last three columns report the same statistics for the not directly connected firms.
       The table illustrates the extent to which the aggregate value added in France is dom-
inated by directly connected firms, as those connected firms are on average an order of
magnitude larger than non-connected firms. On average, and for most individual countries,
there are an order of magnitude fewer directly connected firms than non-directly connected
firms. At the mean, there are 77 thousand directly connected, and 890 thousand not di-
rectly connected firms. However, the directly connected firms take up on average 56% of
total French value added. For every single partner country, the directly connected firms are
more correlated with the foreign GDP, with an average difference in correlation of 0.029
between the directly connected and not connected firms in this set of countries.11 The
variation across countries is as expected. In the 4 countries most closely integrated with
France – Belgium, Germany, the UK, and Italy – the directly connected firms account for
about 60% of all French value added. At the other extreme, the firms directly connected
to Brazil, China, and Japan account for 0.385, 0.489, and 0.478 of aggregate French value
added, respectively.
       Panel B reports the same statistics for the manufacturing sector. The role of the directly
connected firms is greater in this sample. On average, the directly connected firms account
for 80% of aggregate manufacturing value added, even though they comprise less than one-
quarter of all the firms in this sample. The average correlations are slightly higher for
manufacturing firms compared to the whole economy, but the difference is not large.
       Table 3 further separates the directly connected firms into importers, exporters, and
foreign and domestic multinationals. Once again, the categories are not mutually exclusive.
There are large differences between the trading firms and the multinationals. Directly
connected exporters and importers account for 45 and 51 percent of aggregate French value
added for this set of foreign countries, or the large majority of the total value added of
connected firms. By contrast, affiliates of foreign multinationals from an individual country
  10
     These countries are 9 of the top 10 trading partners of France plus Brazil, which we included as a major
emerging market to make the sample more diverse and less dominated by European countries.
  11
     The reason that the absolute values of these firm-level correlations are quite small can be gleaned from
Equation (3), which shows that aggregate correlation is a combination of firm-level correlations and the ratio
of firm-level standard deviations to the aggregate standard deviation. Since firm-level standard deviations
of value added growth are much larger than the aggregate (see, e.g. di Giovanni et al., 2014), the individual
correlations must be small to be consistent with the observed aggregate correlations such as those reported
in Figure 2.


                                                     16
take up 2.3% of aggregate value added. French firms with foreign affiliates account for
10.4% of aggregate value added. There are also many fewer multinational firms of both
kinds than trading firms. The manufacturing sector (Panel B) yields similar results.
    Table A1 presents the average standard deviations of firm growth rates across sectors,
along with the shares of each sector in total value added. The raw volatility of value
added growth varies across sectors, with the standard deviation ranging from a low of
0.2557 (Health and social work) to a high of 0.4157 (Research and development), and a
cross-sectoral mean standard deviation of 0.3365. The wholesale and retail trade sector
has by far the highest share in aggregate value added, at nearly 18% of the total. While
the standard deviation of value added growth, at 0.3221, is quite typical of the rest of the
economy, clearly wholesale and retail trade is quite special in other ways. To establish the
robustness of the results, all of the analysis below is carried out both on the whole economy
and on the manufacturing sector.
    Throughout the analysis, we winsorize the firm-level growth rates to be bounded by
+100% and −50% to reduce the impact of outliers.


4     Main Results
4.1   Firm-Level Linkages and Correlations

Table 4 reports the results of estimating Equation (4). The baseline sample includes all
firms, and performs the analysis on the growth rates of value added. The standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. The first column presents the basic estimation without any fixed
effects. All four forms of connectedness are positive and strongly significant. The coefficient
magnitudes are sizeable as well. Importing or exporting is associated with increases in the
correlation of 0.030 and 0.036 respectively. Being a French multinational with affiliates in
a particular country increases correlation with that country by 0.02. Foreign affiliates in
France have a 0.030 higher correlation with the parent country. The next column adds firm
fixed effects. In this specification, the coefficients are estimated from the variation within
the same firm across the 10 partner countries. Some of the point estimates fall somewhat,
but all four types of connectedness remain positive and strongly significant.
    The next column adds country effects. Given that this specification adds only 10 dummy
variables to a regression with nearly 9 million observations, it is remarkable how dramatically
the coefficients change. The importer coefficient falls by a factor of 2, and the exporter
coefficient by a factor of 4. Both multinational coefficients decrease and one of them ceases



                                              17
to be statistically significant. This change in the coefficients is a stark illustration of the key
tension in the Frankel-Rose type estimation: disentangling transmission of shocks through
trade from common shocks.
   Taken at face value, the Frankel and Rose (1998) result that countries with greater
bilateral trade are more correlated appears to suggest that trade linkages transmit shocks
across countries. However, as argued forcefully by Imbs (2004), trade intensity at the
bilateral country level could simply be a proxy for a greater prevalence of common shocks
(see also the discussion in di Giovanni and Levchenko, 2010). By using firm-level data, we
can control much better for the common shocks that affect France and its trading partners.
The contrast between the specifications with and without country effects shows why it is
important to do so. Without country effects (and even after including firm effects), it looks
like directly connected firms are strongly correlated with the markets with which they are
linked. However, it is clear that a large part of these estimated coefficients is due to the fact
that firms are more likely to establish direct links with more correlated markets. Adding
country effects controls for the average correlation between French firms and each country,
and reduces the estimated impact of direct connectedness considerably.
   Nonetheless, column 3 shows that even after controlling for common shocks, direct
linkages increase comovement between a firm and the foreign country. A direct importing
link is associated with an increase in the firm-level correlation of 0.012, and an exporting
link of 0.005. Foreign affiliates in France have 0.010 higher correlation with their parent
country. Relative to the mean correlation of about 0.024 for the directly connected firms,
these coefficients are still sizeable.
   The rest of the table checks robustness of the results to alternative specifications. Col-
umn 4 checks whether the results are driven by omitted regional variation within France, by
using foreign country×département effects instead of foreign country effects. A département
is a relatively small French region: there are 96 départements in metropolitan France. These
fixed effects control for any differences in correlation between firms in individual French re-
gions and foreign countries. Column 5 instead adds foreign country×sector effects. These
control for any differences between how individual French sectors are correlated with foreign
countries. In both cases the results are virtually identical to the baseline. Column 6 uses
the correlation of firm sales instead of value added. The results are stronger than in the
baseline. Table 5 replicates all the results using the sample of manufacturing firms. All the
patterns of significance and substantive conclusions are unchanged.
   Table 6 presents the results of estimating Equation (7), that includes indirect linkages.


                                                18
The two panels report estimates for the whole economy and the manufacturing sector,
respectively. Columns 1 and 3 present the baseline specification with firm and country
effects. The coefficients on the indirect linkage variables are strongly significant. The
coefficient on DSf,j,C (“Indirect importers”) is positive in both samples, indicating that
foreign shocks transmitted through the firm’s input suppliers that import from abroad
increase comovement. The coefficient on U Sf,j,C (“Indirect exporters”) is positive for the
manufacturing sector, but actually negative (though small in magnitude) for the whole
economy. To understand the results better, columns 2 and 4 report the estimates including
country×sector effects. These will further absorb the variation across sectors, but are very
demanding for the purposes of estimating the impact of DSf,j,C and U Sf,j,C , since those
indicators are constructed from largely sector-level variation. The coefficients in DSf,j,C
continue to be positive and significant, but fall considerably in magnitude. The coefficient
on U Sf,j,C flips sign and becomes positive and significant in the whole economy, but becomes
insignificant in the manufacturing sample. We conclude that the impact of downstream
indirect linkages is clearly detectable in the data and robustly positive. On the other hand,
the importance of upstream linkages (i.e., supplying inputs to exporting firms) is less clear
in the data, with the sign and significance sensitive to sample and fixed effects configuration.
As a side note, including indirect linkages has virtually no impact on the size and pattern
of significance of the direct linkage coefficients.
   An interesting question is whether connectedness through trade and multinational links
interact in important ways. One may conjecture, for instance, that firms that are part of
the same multinational will comove more when they trade compared to firms that trade at
arm’s length. Table 7 checks this possibility. In order to avoid an excessively large set of
interaction terms that is possible between 4 variables, we condense the set of indicators to
two: whether the firm trades with a country and whether it is a part of a multinational
with a presence in that country. Columns 1 and 3 check whether these coarser indicators
significantly increase the correlation with the foreign GDP in the whole economy and the
manufacturing samples, respectively. Columns 2 and 4 augment the specification with the
interaction between the two. It seems that there is no prima facie evidence of an interaction
effect: the coefficient is actually negative, but insignificant.
   To summarize, direct connectedness through importing, exporting, and foreign parent
firms is robustly positively associated with greater comovement between a firm and foreign
GDP. This effect is identified from the variation across foreign countries within the firm
(i.e., by comparing the firm’s correlation with a country that it trades with to its correlation


                                                19
with a country that it does not), and after controlling for common aggregate shocks. Thus,
this result can be interpreted as robust evidence for transmission of shocks through trade
and multinational links. In addition, indirect linkages to downstream firms are robustly
positively associated with increased comovement at the firm level.

4.2    Aggregate Implications

Table 8 presents the decomposition in (8). For each country, it reports the aggregate
correlation ρ (γAt , γCt ), as well as the two components of the aggregate correlation on the
right-hand side of Equation (8), namely those due to the directly and not directly connected
firms. The top panel reports the results for the whole economy, and the bottom panel for
the manufacturing sector only.
   In the whole economy, at the median, 75% of the aggregate correlation is taken up by
the directly connected firms. The shares are between zero and one in all but one case (the
UK), implying that the direct and indirect components tend to have the same sign as the
overall correlation. In the manufacturing sector, the observed correlations are on average
higher, and the share taken up by the directly connected firms is larger, at 0.83 at the
median.
   This decomposition is merely suggestive that direct links are responsible for the observed
aggregate comovement. Equation (8) shows that the direct component could be large both
because the directly connected firms account for the large share of the economy, and/or
because they exhibit larger correlations with the foreign country. Table 2 shows indeed that
both of those things are true. However, the higher correlations reported for the directly
connected firms in the table are not necessarily evidence of transmission of shocks. To isolate
the role of the transmission of shocks, we next make use of the econometric estimation
results.
   We first compute, based on each firm’s connectedness values, how much its correlation
with each country would change if it were no longer connected to that country, as in (9).
For all firms that are not connected at all to a particular country, this change is zero. We
then aggregate according to Equation (10). This equation takes into account the interaction
between relative firm sizes (wf ) and connectedness: the impact on aggregate comovement
would be greater, all else equal, if the connected firms take up a larger share of aggregate
value added.
   Table 9 presents the results of computing the change in the aggregate correlation as in
(10). It reports the actual correlation in the data, the predicted change in the correlation


                                              20
if none of the firms were connected, and the standard error for that predicted change in
correlation. On average correlation would decrease by about 0.091 if firms stopped being
connected. By comparison, the mean actual observed correlation is about 0.29. In the
manufacturing sector, the impact is larger, with the severing of direct linkages leading to a
fall in correlation of 0.103 on average, relative to the mean observed correlation of 0.484.
   An interesting question is whether the change in aggregate correlation is driven by trade
in goods or multinational linkages. Examining (9), it is clear that the change in aggregate
correlation is simply additive in the weighted contribution of trade links (captured by the
EX and IM coefficients) and the multinational links. Of course, these are not mutually
exclusive for each firm, as a single firm can be in up to 3 of these categories at the same
time. However, the breakdown of the aggregate effect into those two components can still
be suggestive of the relative importance of those effects.
   Columns 4-7 of Table 9 separate the contribution of trade linkages (denoted by ∆ρA |T rade),
and of the multinational linkages (∆ρA |M N E) to aggregate comovement. It turns out that
the bulk of the aggregate effect is due to trade. On average, trade linkages account for more
than 90% of the total (0.083 out of 0.091). The conclusion is similar in the manufacturing
sector.
   Finally, we check to what extent the fact that the largest firms tend to be systematically
more internationally connected contributes to the aggregate impact of direct linkages. To
that end, we construct the change in the aggregate comovement that would obtain if all
firms were of equal size: wf = 1/N ∀f in Equation (10), with N the total number of firms.
The results are presented in columns 8-9 of Table 9, under ∆ρA |Eq.W . The change in the
aggregate correlation is substantially smaller, 0.022 for the whole economy, and 0.039 for
the manufacturing sector. That is, the fact that the larger firms are systematically more
likely to exhibit international linkages roughly quadruples the impact of direct linkages on
international comovement.
   Table 10 reports the change in aggregate correlation taking indirect linkages into ac-
count. The indirect linkages are incorporated using the coefficients in columns 1 and 3 of
Table 6, and thus in the whole economy sample the impact of upstream linkages is actually
modestly negative. The change in aggregate correlation, −0.13 for the whole economy and
−0.414 for the manufacturing sector, is now larger, considerably more so in manufacturing.
Indeed, the average change in correlation attributed to the regression estimates can account
for the majority of the average observed correlation of the manufacturing sector with foreign
economies, which is 0.484.


                                             21
         There is a pronounced difference between the whole economy and the manufacturing
sector when it comes to the importance of indirect linkages. Columns 4-7 of Table 10
present the breakdown of the change in the aggregate correlation due to direct and indirect
linkages. This exercise uses the direct linkage coefficients from Table 6, and thus column 4
of Table 10 does not match exactly column 2 of Table 9 (though it is close). For the whole
economy, direct linkages account for the majority of the overall effect, an average of −0.074
of the −0.130 total effect. Indirect linkages contribute −0.057 on average.12 By contrast,
indirect linkages are overwhelmingly the most important component in the manufacturing
sector, accounting for 0.343 of the total of 0.414, or more than 80% of the overall effect.
         An important assumption underlying this aggregation exercise is that there are no other
general equilibrium interactions that change firm-level correlations when France’s openness
changes. In particular, the calculation assumes that (i) the change in the correlation of
all directly connected firms is given by (9); and (ii) the change in the correlation of all
not directly connected firms is accounted for by our measures of indirect linkages through
inputs. Thus, it ignores the possibility that a change in France’s overall openness has
feedback effects that move the firm-level correlations away from what is predicted by the
micro-level regressions. These feedbacks are potentially interesting but there are no estab-
lished intuitions or results that could even point to the direction of those effects. Clearly,
general equilibrium feedbacks can only be analyzed within a full general equilibrium model
structure, and are inaccessible to the regression estimation-type approach adopted here.
Nonetheless, by combining micro results on changes in comovement at the firm level with
information on the combined size of the connected firms, our results can be used to bench-
mark the size of the likely aggregate effect, evaluate the relative importance of trade and
multinational ownership links, and demonstrate the role of the fact that directly connected
firms are systematically larger.


5         Conclusion

In order to understand fluctuations at the macro level, we must understand micro-level
behavior. This paper applies this principle to international business cycle comovement by
analyzing this phenomenon at the firm level. Because the largest firms are the most likely
to exhibit direct international linkages, we show that they account for nearly half of French
aggregate value added. We next show that they are more correlated with the countries to
    12
    The two effects do not add up exactly to the total due to rounding error in averaging. Within each
country, they add up exactly.


                                                 22
which they are directly connected through trade. Combining the two, the directly connected
firms account for two-thirds of the observed aggregate correlations between France and its
major trading partners, and if these direct linkages were severed, the aggregate correlations
would fall by about 0.09, or one-third of the observed aggregate correlations in the data.
We provide evidence of downstream linkages as well: firms that buy inputs from French
firms that import from foreign markets tend to be more correlated to those foreign markets.
Direct and indirect linkages combined can account for nearly half of the observed aggregate
comovement between the overall French economy and its trading partners, and for nearly
all the observed comovement between French manufacturing value added and foreign GDP.




                                             23
Appendix A                Intensive and Extensive Margins

This appendix decomposes the growth rate of aggregate value added into the intensive and
extensive components, and shows that the bulk of the aggregate business cycle comovement
between France and its main trading partners is accounted for by the intensive margin. The
intensive component at date t is defined as the growth rate of value added of firms that
had positive value added in both year t and year t − 1. The extensive margin is defined as
the contribution to total value added of the appearance and disappearance of firms. The
log-difference growth rate of total value added can be manipulated to obtain an (exact)
decomposition into intensive and extensive components:
                    X             X
          γ̃At ≡ ln     xf t − ln    xf t−1
                        f ∈It                f ∈It−1
                          P                                   P                        P                      !
                                f ∈It/t−1   xf t               f ∈It/t−1     xf t        f ∈It/t−1   xf t−1
                  = ln P                             −   ln                         − ln P
                                                                                                                  (A.1)
                                                              P
                           f ∈It/t−1    xf t−1                     f ∈It   xf t            f ∈It−1   xf t−1
                                                          πt,t
                  =        γAt               −        ln              ,
                           |{z}                          πt,t−1
                      Intensive margin                | {z }
                                                   Extensive margin

where It/t−1 is the set of firms active in both t and t − 1 and πt,t (πt,t−1 ) is the share of
output produced by this intensive sub-sample of firms in period t (t − 1). Entrants have a
positive impact on growth while exiters push the growth rate down, and the net impact is
proportional to the share of entrants’/exiters’ value added in aggregate value added.13
       Using equation (A.1), aggregate correlation between France and C can be written as
                                                                                 
                                        σA                   σπ        πt,t
                      ρ̃ (γAt , γCt ) =     ρ (γAt , γCt ) +     ρ ln        , γCt ,  (A.2)
                                        σ̃A                  σ̃A      πt,t−1

where σπ is the standard deviation of the extensive margin component of equation (A.1),
σA is the standard deviation of the intensive margin growth rate γAt , and σ̃A is the standard
deviation of the overall growth rate γ̃At .
       Thus, aggregate comovement is simply additive in the correlations of the intensive and
the extensive margins. Table A2 presents the decomposition. On average, the intensive
margin accounts for about 90% the overall correlation. Figure A1 plots the aggregate cor-
relations against the intensive and the extensive margin components, together with the
45-degree line in each case. It is clear that the variation in the business cycle correla-
tion between France and its trading partners is much better accounted for by the intensive
  13
    This decomposition follows the same logic as the decomposition of price indices proposed by Feenstra
(1994).


                                                              24
margin component. The cross-sectional correlation between the overall and intensive mar-
gins (Figure A1a) is 0.96. By contrast, the variation in the extensive margin correlation
across countries is much smaller, and does not explain nearly as well the cross-section of
comovement between France and other countries (Figure A1b).




                                           25
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr, “Networks and the Macroeconomy: An
  Empirical Exploration,” April 2015. Forthcoming, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
  , Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, “The Network Ori-
  gins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, September 2012, 80 (5), 1977–2016.
Alessandria, George and Horag Choi, “Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export
  Dynamics?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (1), 289–336.
Arkolakis, Costas and Ananth Ramanarayanan, “Vertical Specialization and International
  Business Cycle Synchronization,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, December 2009,
  111 (4), 655–680.
Atalay, Enghin, “How Important Are Sectoral Shocks?,” January 2014. mimeo, University
  of Chicago.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, “International Business Cy-
  cles: Theory and Evidence,” in Thomas Cooley, ed., Frontiers of business cycle research,
  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995, pp. 331–356.
Baxter, Marianne and Michael A. Kouparitsas, “Determinants of Business Cycle Momove-
  ment: A Robust Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, January 2005, 52 (1), 113–
  57.
Blonigen, Bruce A., Jeremy Piger, and Nicholas Sly, “Comovement in GDP trends and
  cycles among trading partners,” Journal of International Economics, November 2014, 94
  (2), 239 – 247.
Boehm, Christoph, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai Nayar, “Input Linkages and the
  Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake,” Octo-
  ber 2014. mimeo, University of Michigan.
Burstein, Ariel, Christopher Kurz, and Linda L. Tesar, “Trade, Production Sharing, and the
  International Transmission of Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008,
  55, 775–795.
Calderon, Cesar, Alberto Chong, and Ernesto Stein, “Trade Intensity and Business Cycle
  Synchronization: Are Developing Countries any Different?,” Journal of International
  Economics, 2007, 71 (1), 2–21.
Carvalho, Vasco M. and Basile Grassi, “Large Firm Dynamics and the Business Cycle,”
  May 2015. CEPR Discussion Paper 10587.
   and Xavier Gabaix, “The Great Diversification and its Undoing,” American Economic
  Review, August 2013, 103 (5), 1697–1727.
Cravino, Javier and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Multinational Firms and International Business
  Cycle Transmission,” May 2015. RSIE Discussion Paper 642.
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Putting the Parts Together: Trade, Vertical
   Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
   nomics, April 2010, 2 (2), 95–124.
   and , “Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctuations in Granular
  Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, December 2012, 120 (6), 1083–1132.



                                           26
  , , and Isabelle Méjean, “Firms, Destinations, and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econo-
  metrica, July 2014, 82 (4), 1303–1340.
Feenstra, Robert, “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
  American Economic Review, March 1994, 84 (1), 157–177.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew K. Rose, “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area
  Criteria,” Economic Journal, July 1998, 108 (449), 1009–25.
Gabaix, Xavier, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, May
 2011, 79 (3), 733–772.
Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz, “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
 Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2005, 120 (3), 865–915.
Imbs, Jean, “Trade, Finance, Specialization, and Synchronization,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, August 2004, 86 (3), 723–34.
Johnson, Robert C., “Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comovement,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2014, 6 (4), 39–83.
Kleinert, Jörn, Julien Martin, and Farid Toubal, “The Few Leading the Many: Foreign Affil-
  iates and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  October 2015, 7 (4), 134–159.
Kose, M. Ayhan and Kei-Mu Yi, “Can the Standard International Business Cycle Model
 Explain the Relation Between Trade and Comovement,” Journal of International Eco-
 nomics, March 2006, 68 (2), 267–295.
Kurz, Christopher and Mine Z. Senses, “Importing, Exporting and Firm-Level Employment
 Volatility,” September 2015. Forthcoming, Journal of International Economics.
Liao, Wei and Ana Maria Santacreu, “The Trade Comovement Puzzle and the Margins of
  International Trade,” Journal of International Economics, July 2015, 96 (2), 266–288.
Ng, Eric C.Y., “Production fragmentation and business-cycle comovement,” Journal of
  International Economics, September 2010, 82 (1), 1 – 14.




                                            27
                                  Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                         Panel A: Whole Economy

                                                  No.                Value Added
                                                 firms      Mean     Median Share in total

      All Firms                                 998,504     1,165       211           1.00
      Importers                                 189,852    3,516        515           0.72
      Exporters                                 200,725     3,220       477           0.71
      Affiliates of foreign multinationals       30,651     7,061      1,335          0.25
      Firms with foreign affiliates               1,786    65,833      2,279          0.14

                                                   Panel B: Manufacturing Sector

                                                  No.                Value Added
                                                 firms      Mean     Median Share in total

      All Firms                                 145,594     2,367       382           1.00
      Importers                                  60,402      4444       872           0.93
      Exporters                                  66,536     40523       754           0.93
      Affiliates of foreign mutinationals        8,370      11993      2938           0.38
      Firms with foreign affiliates               378       34787      6993           0.06


Notes: This table reports the summary statistics for the whole economy and the manufacturing sectors. It
reports the number of distinct firms, mean and median value added, and the share of a particular type of
firm in total value added. Value added is reported in millions of euros. The categories of firms are not
mutually exclusive.




                                                  28
               Table 2. Directly Connected and Not Directly Connected Firms

                                                 Panel A: Whole Economy

                                Directly Connected                        Not Directly Connected
 Country                   No.     Combined      Mean                   No.    Combined      Mean
                          firms       share    ρ(γf t , γCt )          firms     share     ρ(γf t , γCt )

 Belgium                113,470         0.626          0.047          853,793        0.374           0.007
 Brazil                 19,966          0.385         -0.013          947,297        0.615          -0.035
 China                  46,929          0.489         -0.064          920,334        0.511          -0.066
 Germany                108,659         0.627          0.039          858,604        0.373          -0.006
 Italy                  105,518         0.607          0.065          861,745        0.393           0.027
 Japan                  39,500          0.478         -0.042          927,763        0.522          -0.059
 Netherlands             82,372         0.590          0.065          884,891        0.410           0.013
 Spain                   93,179         0.590          0.065          874,084        0.414           0.001
 United Kingdom          84,369         0.604          0.046          882,894        0.396           0.021
 United States           80,817         0.604          0.063          886,446        0.396           0.044

 Average                 77,478         0.560          0.024          889,785        0.440          -0.005

                                             Panel B: Manufacturing Sector

                                  Directly Connected                      Not Directly Connected
 Country                   No.       Combined      Mean                 No.    Combined      Mean
                          firms         share    ρ(γf t , γCt )        firms     share     ρ(γf t , γCt )

 Belgium                 43,277         0.887          0.068           96,799        0.113           0.031
 Brazil                  9,854          0.601          0.000          130,222        0.399          -0.016
 China                   17,447         0.689         -0.051          122,629        0.311          -0.049
 Germany                 42,431         0.889          0.060           97,645        0.111           0.024
 Italy                   40,416         0.874          0.082           99,660        0.126           0.060
 Japan                   16,784         0.697         -0.036          123,292        0.303          -0.043
 Netherlands             31,852         0.847          0.083          108,224        0.153           0.051
 Spain                   36,665         0.857          0.035          103,411        0.143           0.016
 United Kingdom          33,372         0.854          0.057          106,704        0.146           0.033
 United States           29,695         0.810          0.065          110,381        0.190           0.047

 Average                 30,179         0.800          0.036          109,897        0.200          0.015


Notes: This table reports the features of directly connected and not directly connected firms for each partner
country. The columns report the number of firms, their combined share in aggregate value added (averaged
across years), and the mean correlation between firm value added growth and the foreign country’s GDP
growth.



                                                     29
                                              Table 3. Directly Connected Firms: by Connection Type

                                                                              Panel A: Whole Economy

                                Exporters                            Importers                     Affiliates of multinationals           Firms with foreign affiliates
     Country            No.    Combined     Mean            No.     Combined     Mean            No. Combined            Mean            No. Combined          Mean
                       firms     share    ρ(γf t , γCt )   firms      share    ρ(γf t , γCt )   firms       share      ρ(γf t , γCt )   firms     share     ρ(γf t , γCt )

     Belgium          68,453     0.514          0.054      87,971     0.591          0.047      3,527       0.016           0.039       396        0.097          0.064
     Brazil           12,761     0.317         -0.007       9,888     0.278         -0.014         4        0.000          -0.016       121        0.072          0.018
     China            16,562     0.372         -0.050      39,154     0.445         -0.069        89        0.000          -0.110       203        0.100         -0.056
     Germany          57,198     0.493          0.050      91,183     0.603          0.040      4,485       0.035           0.052       437        0.124         0.058
     Italy            51,903     0.471          0.073      90,359     0.583          0.066      1,849       0.014           0.068       374        0.124          0.035
     Japan            25,071     0.401         -0.042      22,960     0.413         -0.036       644        0.006          -0.038       105        0.066         -0.073
     Netherlands      42,239     0.451          0.076      63,577     0.551          0.063      4,195       0.039           0.061       141        0.081         0.088
     Spain            52,171     0.477          0.031      72,540     0.543          0.029       957        0.006           0.039       524        0.128          0.044
     United Kingdom   46,790     0.471          0.055      64,160     0.567          0.046      5,142       0.040           0.036       405        0.125         0.059
     United States    46,876     0.496          0.068      56,914     0.563          0.061      5,522       0.071           0.078       430        0.123         0.091




30
     Average          42,002     0.446         0.031       59,871     0.514         0.023       2,641       0.023          0.021        314        0.104         0.033

                                                                          Panel B: Manufacturing Sector

                                Exporters                            Importers                     Affiliates of multinationals           Firms with foreign affiliates
     Country            No.    Combined     Mean            No.     Combined     Mean            No. Combined            Mean            No. Combined          Mean
                       firms     share    ρ(γf t , γCt )   firms      share    ρ(γf t , γCt )   firms       share      ρ(γf t , γCt )   firms     share     ρ(γf t , γCt )

     Belgium          33,266     0.823          0.070      32,929     0.851          0.069      1,065       0.020          0.069        79         0.036         0.061
     Brazil           7,644      0.541          0.001      4,080      0.429          0.003                                               40        0.032         0.019
     China             9,424     0.578         -0.044      13,240     0.613         -0.055        16        0.001          -0.076       59         0.013        -0.045
     Germany          29,131     0.809          0.064      35,926     0.869          0.060      1,375       0.057          0.064        115        0.039         0.092
     Italy            25,988     0.787          0.087      34,401     0.849          0.081       608        0.031           0.064        91        0.037         0.045
     Japan            12,547     0.608         -0.037       9,230     0.603         -0.026       168        0.009           0.007        36        0.011        -0.060
     Netherlands      21,776     0.750          0.088      23,931     0.804          0.081      1,084       0.066           0.065       34         0.030        0.102
     Spain            26,706     0.788          0.039      27,679     0.805          0.033       270        0.009           0.027       122        0.044         0.053
     United Kingdom   24,222     0.776          0.060      25,535     0.817          0.058      1,101       0.050           0.064       96         0.038        0.115
     United States    21,298     0.721          0.067      20,117     0.753          0.066      1,655       0.121          0.073        145        0.043         0.141

     Average          21,200     0.718         0.039       22,706     0.739         0.037       816         0.036          0.040         82        0.032         0.052


        Notes: This table reports the features of different types of directly connected firms. The columns report the number of firms, their combined
        share in aggregate value added (averaged across years), and the mean correlation between firm value added growth and the foreign country’s
        GDP growth.
                                               Table 4. Main Estimation Results, Whole Economy
                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)
                                                      Baseline       Baseline       Baseline       Baseline      Baseline         Sales
                 Dep. Var: ρ (γf t , γCt )
                 Importer                              0.030a         0.024a         0.012a        0.012a         0.011a         0.017a
                                                       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
                 Exporter                              0.036a         0.020a         0.005a        0.005a         0.006a         0.011a
                                                       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
                 French Multinational                   0.024b         0.022b         0.009         0.009          0.009          0.018c
                                                       (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.008)
                 Affiliate of a Foreign MNE            0.030a         0.028a         0.010a        0.010a         0.009a         0.014a
                                                       (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)

                 Observations                         8,687,772     8,687,772      8,687,772      8,687,770      8,687,772     9,272,135
                 Adjusted R2                            0.001          0.294         0.300           0.375          0.376        0.298




31
                 Firm FE                                  No            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
                 Country FE                               No            No            Yes             No             No           Yes
                 Country×Region FE                        No            No             No             Yes            No            No
                 Country×Sector FE                        No            No             No             No             Yes           No
                 # of Xing links                       407,266       407,266        407,266        407,266        407,266       422,620
                 # of Ming links                       579,787       579,787        579,787        579,785        579,787       599,579
                 # of Affiliates                        25,646        25,646         25,646         25,646         25,646        28,053
                 # of HQ links                          3,070          3,070         3,070           3,070          3,070        3,646
                 # of Firm FEs                                       934,021        934,021        934,019        934,021       996,365
                 # of Country FEs                                                      10                                          10
                 # of Country×Region FEs                                                              980
                 # of Country×Sector FEs                                                                           1,110


     Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level. a : significant at the 1% level; b : significant at the 5% level; c : significant at the 10% level.
     This table reports the results of estimating Equation (4) for the whole economy. The independent variables are binary indicators for whether
     the firm imports from a country, exports to it, is an affiliate of a multinational firm from that country, or is a French multinational with affiliates
     in that country.
                                             Table 5. Main Estimation Results, Manufacturing Sector
                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)
                                                      Baseline       Baseline       Baseline       Baseline      Baseline         Sales
                 Dep. Var: ρ (γf t , γCt )
                 Importer                              0.023a         0.030a         0.011a        0.011a         0.008a         0.018a
                                                       (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)
                 Exporter                              0.026a         0.021a         0.005a        0.005a         0.005a         0.011a
                                                       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
                 French Multinational                   0.008          0.009          0.002         0.002          0.006          0.015
                                                       (0.018)        (0.014)        (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.014)
                 Affiliate of a Foreign MNE            0.016a         0.026a         0.013a        0.014a         0.012a          0.010b
                                                       (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)

                 Observations                         1,275,031     1,275,031      1,275,031      1,275,031      1,275,031     1,324,962
                 Adjusted R2                            0.001         0.297          0.301          0.376          0.378         0.302




32
                 Firm FE                                 No            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
                 Country FE                              No            No             Yes            No             No            Yes
                 Country×Region FE                       No            No             No             Yes            No            No
                 Country×Sector FE                       No            No             No             No             Yes           No
                 # of Xing links                       204,722       204,722        204,722        204,722        204,722       209,160
                 # of Ming links                       219,066       219,066        219,066        219,066        219,066       223,463
                 # of Affiliates                        7,163         7,163          7,163          7,163          7,163         7,453
                 # of HQ links                           815           815            815            815            815           839
                 # of Firm FEs                                       135,756        135,756        135,756        135,756       141,185
                 # of Country FEs                                                     10                                           10
                 # of Country×Region FEs                                                              980
                 # of Country×Sector FEs                                                                            610


     Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level. a : significant at the 1% level; b : significant at the 5% level; c : significant at the 10% level.
     This table reports the results of estimating Equation (4) for the manufacturing sector. The independent variables are binary indicators for
     whether the firm imports from a country, exports to it, is an affiliate of a multinational firm from that country, or is a French multinational
     with affiliates in that country.
             Table 6. Estimation Results, Taking Indirect Linkages into Account

                                       (1)          (2)                           (3)            (4)
                                     Panel A: Whole Economy                     Panel B: Manufacturing Sector
 Dep. Var: ρ (γf t , γCt )
 Importer                              0.010a               0.011a                0.008a                 0.007a
                                       (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.002)                (0.001)
 Exporter                               0.003a              0.006a                 0.003b                0.005a
                                       (0.001)              (0.001)               (0.002)                (0.002)
 French Multinational                   0.010                0.009                 0.002                  0.006
                                       (0.009)              (0.008)               (0.013)                (0.013)
 Affiliate of a Foreign MNE             0.011a              0.010a                0.012a                 0.012a
                                       (0.002)              (0.002)               (0.004)                (0.004)
 Indirect importers                     0.204a               0.052b               0.226a                 0.098a
                                       (0.016)              (0.022)               (0.028)                (0.033)
 Indirect exporters                    -0.025a               0.037b               0.311a                  0.120
                                       (0.006)              (0.015)               (0.033)                (0.077)

 Observations                        8,146,907             8,146,907            1,263,024               1,263,024
 Adjusted R2                           0.300                 0.376                0.302                   0.378
 Firm FE                                Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes
 Country FE                             Yes                    No                  Yes                     No
 Country×Sector FE                       No                   Yes                  No                      Yes
 # of Xing links                      405,689               405,705              204,575                 204,575
 # of Ming links                      577,705               577,526              218,931                 218,931
 # of Affiliates                       24,313                24,313               7,134                   7,134
 # of HQ links                         3,043                 3,043                 815                     815
 # of Firm FEs                        871,741               871,741              134,308                 134,308
 # of Country FEs                        10                                        10
 # of Country×Sector FEs                                    1,110                                          610


Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level. a : significant at the 1% level; b : significant at the 5%
level; c : significant at the 10% level. This table reports the results of estimating Equation (7) for the whole
economy in Panel A and for the manufacturing sector in Panel B. The independent variables are binary
indicators for whether the firm imports from a country, exports to it, is an affiliate of a multinational firm
from that country, or is a French multinational with affiliates in that country. “Indirect importers” is the
downstream indirect linkage indicator DSf,j,C defined in (5). “Indirect Exporters” is the upstream indirect
linkage indicator U Sf,j,C defined in (6).




                                                      33
                                                     Table 7. Estimation Results: Interaction Terms
                                                                           (1)          (2)                             (3)            (4)
                                                                         Panel A: Whole Economy                       Panel B: Manufacturing Sector
     Dep. Var: ρ (γf t , γCt )
     Trade dummy (Importer+Exporter≥1)                                     0.010a               0.010a                  0.009a                   0.009a
                                                                           (0.001)              (0.001)                 (0.002)                  (0.002)
     MNE Dummy (French multinational + Affiliate≥1)                        0.012a               0.012a                  0.014a                    0.020c
                                                                           (0.002)              (0.004)                 (0.004)                  (0.012)
     Trade×MNE Dummy                                                                             -0.000                                           -0.009
                                                                                                (0.005)                                          (0.012)

     Observations                                                        8,687,727            8,687,727               1,275,031                1,275,031




34
     R2                                                                    0.300                0.300                   0.301                    0.301
     Firm FE                                                                Yes                  Yes                     Yes                      Yes
     Country FE                                                             Yes                  Yes                     Yes                      Yes
     # of Trade links                                                     735,715              735,715                 289,006                  289,006
     # of MNE links                                                       28,658               28,658                   7,966                    7,966
     # of Firm FEs                                                        934,021              934,021                 135,756                  135,756
     # of Country FEs                                                       10                   10                       10                       10


       Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level. a : significant at the 1% level; b : significant at the 5% level; c : significant at the 10% level. This
       table reports the results of estimating Equation (4), adding an interaction between trade and multinational status. The independent variables
       are binary indicators for whether the firm trades with a country (imports from it or exports to it), has any multinational links with a country
       (is an affiliate of a multinational firm from that country, or is a French multinational with affiliates in that country), and the interactions.
       Table 8. Aggregate Correlations: Contributions of Direct and Indirect Terms

                                             Panel A: Whole Economy
                  Country                    ρA      Directly Not Directly
                                         (observed) Connected  Connected

                  Belgium                   0.758           0.542            0.216
                  Brazil                    -0.269         -0.184           -0.085
                  China                     -0.545         -0.389           -0.157
                  Germany                   0.643           0.445            0.198
                  Italy                     0.630          0.464             0.166
                  Japan                     -0.183         -0.152           -0.032
                  Netherlands               0.618           0.442            0.176
                  Spain                     0.876          0.588             0.288
                  United Kingdom            0.010           0.128           -0.119
                  United States             0.372           0.327            0.045

                  Average                   0.291           0.221           0.070

                                          Panel B: Manufacturing Sector
                  Country                    ρA      Directly Not Directly
                                         (observed) Connected  Connected

                  Belgium                   0.935           0.828           0.107
                  Brazil                    0.177          0.153            0.025
                  China                     -0.190         -0.164           -0.026
                  Germany                   0.695           0.596            0.098
                  Italy                     0.718          0.620             0.098
                  Japan                     0.166          0.138            0.028
                  Netherlands               0.718           0.622           0.096
                  Spain                     0.673          0.587             0.087
                  United Kingdom            0.435           0.428           0.007
                  United States             0.509           0.464            0.045

                  Average                   0.484           0.427           0.056


Notes: This table reports the results of decomposition in Equation (8). The first column reports the actual
correlation in the data.




                                                     35
                                                    Table 9. Changes in Aggregate Correlations

                         (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)              (9)

                                                                           Panel A: Whole Economy
     Country              ρA      ∆ρA     s.e.(∆ρA )   ∆ρA |T rade    s.e.(∆ρA |T rade) ∆ρA |M N E s.e.(∆ρA |M N E)          ∆ρA |Eq.W      s.e.(∆ρA |Eq.W )

     Belgium             0.758   -0.104     0.016         -0.096            0.010            -0.008            0.013            -0.032            0.002
     Brazil             -0.269   -0.049     0.011         -0.045            0.006            -0.004            0.010            -0.004            0.000
     China              -0.545   -0.074     0.015         -0.068            0.008            -0.005            0.013            -0.013            0.001
     Germany             0.643   -0.109     0.019         -0.097            0.010            -0.011            0.017            -0.032            0.002
     Italy               0.630   -0.102     0.019         -0.093            0.010            -0.009            0.017            -0.030            0.002
     Japan              -0.183   -0.071     0.012         -0.067            0.008            -0.004            0.009            -0.010            0.001
     Netherlands         0.618   -0.097     0.014         -0.087            0.009            -0.010            0.011            -0.023            0.002
     Spain               0.876   -0.095     0.020         -0.087            0.010            -0.008            0.017            -0.026            0.002
     United Kingdom      0.010   -0.103     0.019         -0.091            0.010            -0.012            0.017            -0.024            0.002
     United States       0.372   -0.109     0.019         -0.092            0.010            -0.016            0.017            -0.023            0.002




36
     Average            0.291    -0.091                   -0.083                             -0.009                             -0.022

                                                                        Panel B: Manufacturing Sector
     Country              ρA      ∆ρA     s.e.(∆ρA )   ∆ρA |T rade    s.e.(∆ρA |T rade) ∆ρA |M N E s.e.(∆ρA |M N E)          ∆ρA |Eq.W      s.e.(∆ρA |Eq.W )

     Belgium             0.935   -0.116     0.019         -0.113            0.018            -0.003            0.005            -0.058            0.008
     Brazil              0.177   -0.062     0.012         -0.061            0.011            -0.001            0.004            -0.009            0.002
     China              -0.190   -0.080     0.013         -0.080            0.013             0.000            0.002            -0.022            0.003
     Germany             0.695   -0.121     0.019         -0.114            0.018            -0.007            0.006            -0.059            0.008
     Italy               0.718   -0.116     0.019         -0.111            0.018            -0.004            0.005            -0.055            0.008
     Japan               0.166   -0.083     0.013         -0.082            0.013            -0.001            0.002            -0.019            0.003
     Netherlands         0.718   -0.115     0.018         -0.105            0.017            -0.009            0.005            -0.042            0.006
     Spain               0.673   -0.108     0.019         -0.107            0.018            -0.002            0.006            -0.048            0.007
     United Kingdom      0.435   -0.114     0.018         -0.108            0.018            -0.006            0.006            -0.045            0.006
     United States       0.509   -0.115     0.018         -0.100            0.016            -0.015            0.008            -0.039            0.005

     Average            0.484    -0.103                   -0.098                             -0.005                             -0.040


       Notes: This table reports the results of the aggregation exercise in Equation (10). The column labeled s.e.(∆ρA ) reports the standard error
       associated with the estimated change in aggregate correlation. Columns 4-7 present the change in the correlation due to severing of trade
       linkages and multinational linkages separately, along with corresponding standard errors. Columns 8-9 present the change in the correlation due
       to severing of direct linkages assuming that all firms have equal size, along with corresponding standard errors.
                                Table 10. Changes in Aggregate Correlations, Including Indirect Effects
                                   (1)      (2)        (3)          (4)               (5)                (6)                 (7)

                                                                     Panel A: Whole Economy
             Country               ρA      ∆ρA     s.e.(∆ρA )   ∆ρA |Direct s.e.(∆ρA |Direct) ∆ρA |Indirect         s.e.(∆ρA |Indirect)

             Belgium              0.758   -0.161     0.027         -0.083            0.017              -0.078              0.023
             Brazil              -0.269   -0.044     0.012         -0.038            0.011              -0.006              0.005
             China               -0.545   -0.096     0.017         -0.058            0.015              -0.037              0.009
             Germany              0.643   -0.178     0.029         -0.088            0.020              -0.090              0.022
             Italy                0.630   -0.168     0.027         -0.082            0.019              -0.086              0.021
             Japan               -0.183   -0.078     0.014         -0.056            0.012              -0.022              0.009
             Netherlands          0.618   -0.143     0.021         -0.079            0.014              -0.064              0.017
             Spain                0.876   -0.137     0.026         -0.076            0.020              -0.061              0.019
             United Kingdom       0.010   -0.149     0.026         -0.084            0.019              -0.065              0.018
             United States        0.372   -0.148     0.025         -0.089            0.019              -0.059              0.017




37
             Average              0.291   -0.130                   -0.073                               -0.057

                                                                 Panel B: Manufacturing Sector
             Country               ρA      ∆ρA     s.e.(∆ρA )   ∆ρA |Direct s.e.(∆ρA |Direct) ∆ρA |Indirect         s.e.(∆ρA |Indirect)

             Belgium              0.935   -0.576     0.045         -0.080            0.019              -0.496              0.044
             Brazil               0.177   -0.150     0.015         -0.042            0.012              -0.108              0.010
             China               -0.190   -0.246     0.020         -0.055            0.013              -0.191              0.017
             Germany              0.695   -0.570     0.045         -0.084            0.020              -0.486              0.044
             Italy                0.718   -0.528     0.042         -0.080            0.019              -0.448              0.041
             Japan                0.166   -0.238     0.019         -0.057            0.014              -0.181              0.016
             Netherlands          0.718   -0.445     0.035         -0.081            0.018              -0.364              0.033
             Spain                0.673   -0.478     0.038         -0.074            0.019              -0.404              0.036
             United Kingdom       0.435   -0.473     0.037         -0.080            0.019              -0.393              0.035
             United States        0.509   -0.436     0.034         -0.082            0.018              -0.354              0.031

             Average              0.484   -0.414                   -0.071                               -0.343


     Notes: This table reports the results of the aggregation exercise in Equation (10), augmented with indirect linkages. The column labeled
     s.e.(∆ρA ) reports the standard error associated with the estimated change in aggregate correlation. The last 4 columns present the change in
     the correlation due to severing of direct linkages and indirect linkages separately, along with corresponding standard errors.
                    Figure 1. Comparison with Aggregates, Growth Rates
                                               0.06
                                                                                                                                                     IMF IFS
                                                                                                                                                     Sample (Intensive)
                                               0.05


                                               0.04


                                               0.03




                             GDP growth rate
                                               0.02


                                               0.01


                                                          0


                                               -0.01


                                               -0.02


                                               -0.03


                                               -0.04
                                                   1992                                       1994      1996      1998     2000     2002      2004          2006          2008


                                                                                     (a) Aggregate Value Added and GDP

                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                       IMF DOTS
                                                                                                                                                       Sample
                                                                                     0.2



                                                                                   0.15
                                                          Growth rate of Exports




                                                                                     0.1



                                                                                   0.05



                                                                                      0



                                                                                   -0.05



                                                                                    -0.1



                                                                                   -0.15
                                                                                       1992      1994     1996     1998    2000   2002     2004      2006          2008



                                                                                                                 (b) Exports

                                                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                                                      IMF DOTS
                                                                                                                                                      Sample
                                                                                    0.2



                                                                                   0.15
                                                 Growth rate of Imports




                                                                                    0.1



                                                                                   0.05



                                                                                     0



                                                                              -0.05



                                                                                   -0.1



                                                                              -0.15
                                                                                  1992           1994    1996     1998     2000   2002     2004      2006          2008



                                                                                                                 (c) Imports

Notes: The top panel presents the time series of the growth rates of total before-tax value added in our
data and GDP sourced from the IMF International Financial Statistics. The bottom two panels present the
growth rates of total exports and imports, respectively, in our sample and sourced from IMF’s Direction of
Trade Statistics.




                                                                                                                          38
                                Figure 2. Aggregate Correlations: Comparison to Standard Sources
                  1




                                                                                            BEL   ESP
                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                      DEU
                                                                                     NLD
     GDP Correlation, IMF IFS
                        .5




                                                                            USA



                                                           GBR
        0




                                             BRA JAP




                                  CHN
                  −.5




                                  −.5                    0                      .5                      1
                                                       Aggregate Correlation, BRN

Notes: This Figure presents the scatterplot of the aggregate correlations implied by our data and the
correlations in GDP from IMF International Financial Statistics, along with a 45-degree line.




                                                                 39
                                                       Table A1. Firm-Level Volatility by Sector
       NAF      Sector                                         St. Dev.     Share      NAF      Sector                                St. Dev.     Share
       01-05    Agriculture, forestry and fishing              0.3378       0.0069     35       Other transport equipment             0.3461       0.0138
       10-14    Mining and quarrying                           0.3381       0.0049     36-37    Manufacturing n.e.c.                  0.3311       0.0099
       15-16    Food and tobacco                               0.2808       0.0405     40-41    Electricity, gas, water supply        0.3910       0.0409
       17-19    Textile, wearing apparel and leather           0.3296       0.0144     45       Construction                          0.3067       0.0606
       20       Wood products                                  0.2853       0.0050     50-52    Wholesale and retail trade            0.3221       0.1793
       21-22    Paper products, publishing                     0.3383       0.0259     55       Hotels and restaurants                0.3058       0.0233
       23       Coke, refined petroleum, nuclear fuel          0.3402       0.0077     60-63    Transport                             0.3179       0.0745
       24       Chemical industry                              0.3381       0.0411     64       Post and telecommunications           0.4078       0.0529
       25       Rubber and plastics                            0.3102       0.0170     70       Real estate activities                0.4106       0.0379




40
       26       Mineral products                               0.2875       0.0136     71       Rental without operator               0.3804       0.0139
       27       Basic metals                                   0.3074       0.0111     72       Computer services                     0.4096       0.0267
       28       Metal products                                 0.2859       0.0284     73       Research and development              0.4157       0.0028
       29       Machinery and equipment                        0.3112       0.0256     74       Other business services               0.3813       0.1144
       30       Office machinery                               0.3879       0.0045     75       Public administration                 0.3403       0.0006
       31       Electrical equipment                           0.3058       0.0130     80       Education                             0.3651       0.0030
       32       Radio, TV and communication                    0.3475       0.0122     85       Health and social work                0.2557       0.0146
       33       Medical and optical instruments                0.3090       0.0114     90-93    Personal services                     0.3519       0.0291
       34       Motor vehicles                                 0.2985       0.0189

     Notes: This table presents the standard deviations of firm growth rates broken down by sector over 1993–2007. “Share” is the share of the sector in total
     value added. The manufacturing sector covers NAF sectors 15 to 37.
Table A2. Contribution of Intensive and Extensive Margins to Overall Aggregate Corre-
lation

                                            Panel A: Whole Economy
                   Country                   ρ̃A    Intensive Extensive
                                         (observed)  (share)   (share)
                   Belgium                 0.674      1.030     -0.030
                   Brazil                  -0.305     0.808      0.192
                   China                   -0.684     0.731      0.269
                   Germany                 0.379      1.552     -0.552
                   Italy                   0.591      0.977     0.023
                   Japan                   -0.224     0.749      0.251
                   Netherlands             0.469      1.206     -0.206
                   Spain                   0.733      1.094     -0.094
                   United Kingdom          0.193      0.045      0.955
                   United States           0.524      0.651      0.349

                   Average                  0.235        0.884          0.116

                                         Panel B: Manufacturing Sector
                   Country                   ρ̃A    Intensive Extensive
                                         (observed)  (share)   (share)
                   Belgium                 0.882      0.937      0.063
                   Brazil                  0.136      1.149     -0.149
                   China                   -0.291     0.578      0.422
                   Germany                 0.556      1.105     -0.105
                   Italy                   0.720      0.881     0.119
                   Japan                   0.133      1.105     -0.105
                   Netherlands             0.649      0.977      0.023
                   Spain                   0.584      1.020     -0.020
                   United Kingdom          0.547      0.704      0.296
                   United States           0.597      0.754      0.246

                   Average                  0.451        0.921          0.079


Notes: This table presents the correlation of combined aggregate value added (intensive plus extensive
margins), and the share of aggregate correlation due to the intensive and the extensive margins.




                                                 41
        Figure A1. Overall Correlations and the Intensive and Extensive Margins
                                        1

                                                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                     DEU NLD     ITA
                         Intensive Margin Correlation
                                                .5




                                                                                                             USA




                                                                                          GBR
                                  0




                                                                       JAP
                                                                    BRA
                                        −.5




                                                        CHN



                                                              −.5              0                        .5                     1
                                                                              Overall Correlation

                                                                             (a) Intensive
                                         1
                         Extensive Margin Correlation




                                                                                                             USA
                                                .5




                                                                                           GBR
                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                           NLD   ITA
                                                                                                                         ESP
                                 0




                                                                       JAP
                                                                    BRA                              DEU


                                                        CHN
                                         −.5




                                                              −.5               0                       .5                     1
                                                                               Overall Correlation

                                                                          (b) Extensive

Notes: The top panel presents the scatterplot of the overall (intensive plus extensive) correlation against
the intensive margin correlation. The bottom panel presents the scatterplot of overall and the extensive
margins. The 45-degree line is added to both plots.




                                                                                   42
