                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MONEY, IMPERFECT INFORMATION
                 AND ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS




                      Bruce Greenwald

                     Joseph E. Stiglitz




                   Working Paper No. 2188




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                         March 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2188
                                             March 1987




     Money, Imperfect Information and Economic Fluctuations


                              ABSTRACT


    This   paper summarizes the macro—economic and, in particular,

monetary and financial market implications of recent developments
in the micro—economic theory of imperfect information. These
micro—economic models which lead to credit—rationing on the one
hand and limitations in the availability of equity type financing
on the other can account for a wide range of observed business

cycle and monetary phenomena. These include (a) unemployment, (b)
the existence of Keynesian—type multiples, (c) the observed lack
of production smoothing in response to cyclical fluctuations in

demand, (d) the impact of monetary policy on business activity
despite the absence of significant changes in real interest
rates, and Ce) price rigidities which arise from rational firm
decisions (not as an a priori assumption).




  Bruce Greenwald                            Joseph E. Stiglitz
  Bell Communications Research               Princeton University
  Morristown, NJ 07960                       Princeton, NJ 08544
                               Preliminary Draft

             Money, Imperfect Information, and Economic   Fluctuations1
                                       February 1987

                         B. Greenwald and J. E. Stiglitz



      In this paper, we wish to set forth the outlines of a theory of

 macro-economic fluctuations based on informational imperfections in the capital

 market that we and some of our colleagues have been attempting to construct

 over the past few years.2

      It has long been recognized that there is an important connection between

 money and the level of economic activity. Keynes entitled his famous treatise,

 The General Theory of Emulovment. Interest and Money, and more recent

 econometric studies have confirmed the existence of a relationship between

 money and economic activity. At the same time, this relationship has remained

 somewhat of a puzzle for economic theorists. The classical dichotomy suggested

 that the supply of money would affect the level of prices, but nothing real.


     1Paper prepared for the Seminar on Monetary Theory, Taipei,
January 3-8, 1986.   An earlier version was presented at the
CEME Conference on Banking, Nice, June 6, 1985. This paper was
partially written while Stiglitz was a visiting scholar at the
Hoover Institution, Stanford. Financial support of the National
Science Foundation and the Hoover Institution is gratefully
acknowledged.
     Parts of this paper report on joint research undertaken
with A. Weiss and with A. Blinder.

     2See, in particular, Stiglitz and Weiss [1981, 1983, 1985],
Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss [1984], Blinder and Stiglitz
[1983], and Stiglitz [1978].
    Other parts of our research progranine focus on the con-
sequences of imperfect information for labor markets (see
Stiglitz (1976, 1985, 1984a), Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983), Weiss
(1980), and Shapiro and Stiglitz  (1985)); and for product markets
(see, e.g. Stiglitz (l984b)).


                                   1
   Much of macro-economic theory can be interpreted as an attempt to reconcile the

   classical dichotomy with the observed effects.



                      The Inadequacy of the Standard Theories

       Traditional Keynesian analysis has stressed the importance of wage and

  price rigidities. With rigid wages and prices, an increase in the nominal

  money supply is equivalent to an increase in the real money supply. There are

  three mechanisms by which changes in the real money supply are thought to have

  an effect on the economy:

      (a) The real balance effect: the increased "real wealth" of consumers

  leads to increased consumption, increasing aggregate demand and hence national

  income. Both the theoretical foundations and empirical relevance of the real

  balance (or Pigou) effect are suspect: since the money is debt which

  individuals owe to themselves, why should an increase in their real balances

  affect their behavior?      Indeed, a number of irrelevance propositions have

  recently been established,4 which show that in an explicitly dynamic general

  equilibrium model in which people form (rational) expectations about the


     31t is, of course, possible that the distribution of income
changes, and any such changes in (either intra- or inter--
temporal) distribution may have real effects on the economy. The
question is whether these distributional effects are significant
enough to explain the magnitude of macro-economic fluctuations,
and can they explain their patterns. In any case, these distri-
butional effects have not been a central part of at least
traditional explanations of how the real balance effect works.

     4See, for instance, Stiglitz (1982, 1983) and the references
cited there.

     5Actually, the result does not depend on rational ex-
pectations, but on a rather weaker assumption, "consistent"
expectations, where the expectations of certain key variables
remain unchanged in the face of changes in variables (like the
money supply) which are irrelevant to their determination.

                                 2
 uncertain future, public financial structure is irrelevant.6 Any theorem is

 dependent for its validity on its assumptions: here, the key assumptions are

 (a) there is no redistributive effects of the change in public financial

 structure, either intra- or inter-temporally; (b) taxation is

 non-distortionary7; (c) there are no constraints on individuals' ability to

 borrow.

      One of the central problems in macro-economic theory is differentiating

 among the many possible explanations of some phenomena: some "effects," though

 present, are undoubtedly of a sufficiently small magnitude to provide an

 unpersuasive explanation for the phenomena in question. Thus, almost any

 change in public financial policy has some redistributive effect, and there is

 likely to be some change in the aggregate dead weight loss arising from

 distortionary taxation. The question is whether these are important enough to

 explain the seeming potency of monetary policy; we suspect not.

      More generally, the real balance effect, though undoubtedly present, seems

 a weak reed to rest at the foundations of any macro-economic theory: even at

 the fastest rate of deflation of prices, in the Great Depression,. with

 plausible values of the wealth elasticity of demand for consumption goods, it

 would have taken more than a century for demand to be restored to its full


     6An increase in money supply, at fixed prices, is, at least
in the standard theory, equivalent to an unancipated fall in
prices, at a fixed money supply. Thus, if the former change has
no consequences for the economy, neither should the latter.
(This ignores certain important dynamic effects which we note
briefly below.)


     'If taxation is distortionary, associated with any change in
public financial structure there may be a change in the inter-
temporal pattern of tax liabilities, and this, in turn, may alter
the aggregate deadweight loss associated with distortionary taxation.


                                3
  employment level. During that time, presumably, much else that is

  conventionally held constant in macro-economic models would have changed.



       (b) The portfolio effect: with an increased holding of real money,

  individuals' portfolios are out of kilter; in the attempt to balance their

  portfolios, long term interest rates are bid down; and the lower interest rates

  induce greater investment.

  This mechanism is also suspect on both theoretical and empirical grounds.

  Theoretically, the general Public Irrelevance Theorem argues that individuals

  ought to include their future tax liabilities in their portfolio calculations

  (these are uncertain, just as the returns from assets are uncertain); and when

  this is done, a change in public liability structure (e.g. an exchange of short

  term assets for long term assets) has no real effects.      Empirically, what

  should be relevant for investment decisions, in the neoclassical analysis

  underlying most Keynesian and new classical economists' models, are variations

  in the real rate of interest, and these (as measured at least by traditional

  methods) are of a sufficiently small magnitude to provide an unpersuasive basis

  for cyclical fluctuations of the magnitude observed even in the post war

  period.8 Moreover, econometric studies have been strikingly unsuccessful at

  relating such interest rate fluctuations as exist to observed cyclical fluctua-

  tions in the various catagories of investment.

       Of course, the question remains, why did real interest rates not fall


     8Though we couch our discussion in terms of the effects on
real interest rates, we could have equivalently presented it in
terms of Tobin's "q". Then, we would have had to ask, how can we
reconcile the seeming large variations in q with the small
variations in real interest rates? (q is affected, of course, by
variations in expectations as well; but how does monetary policy
affect q other than through effects on real interest rates?)

                               4
 more. The answer provided by Keynes, the liquidity trap,9   is also

 unpersuasive, especially in our present inflationary environment; though it is

 no longer taken seriously, no alternative explanation of the failure of real

 interest rates to fall has gained general acceptance.



      (c) Money as a medium of exchange: real money is necessary to facilitate

 transactions; with a decreased supply of real money, transactions are

 decreased. This is often modelled as a cash-in-advance constraint. The fact

 of the matter is that relatively few transactions require cash-in-advance; nor

 does the theory explain why there should be such a constraint. With perfect

 information concerning an individual's wealth, an exchange requires not the

 transfer of money for goods, but of credit for goods.1° In Italy, the shortage

 of small change lead to the use of candy instead; though this may have had a

 beneficial effect on candy producers, it seems implausible that the shortage of

 coinage lead to major macro-economic effects.



      The theory11 which we wish to expound today is premised on there being a


     91n typical discussions of the liquidity trap, a set of
inconsistent expectational assumptions are made. While the
hypothesis that a consol sells for l/r, where r is the short
rate of interest, requires an assumption of static expectations,
the expectation that the price of a consol will fall when r
becomes very small requires an assumption of "regression towards
the mean"   See Stiglitz (1970).

     10Nor is there a close link between the number of exchanges
and the level of national income: most exchanges are exchanges
of assets, of stocks, not of flows (of goods for labor services)
The link between these two is seldom made clear in the standard
theory.


     The above list of mechanisms by which monetary policy
affects the economy is not meant to be exhaustive. An important

                                5
  close link between money and credit creation, and between credit creation and

  economic activity. We shall attempt both to explain why the links take on the

  form they do, and how this theory provides a more plausible explanation of

  several key phenomena which remain unexplained in the traditional paradigms.



                           The Phenomena to Be Explained

       Among these phenomena are the rigidity of prices themselves: while

  traditional Keynesian theory simply takes this price rigidity as

  institutionally determined, this has always seemed unpersuasive; prices did

  fall in the Great Depression. Why didn't they fall faster? To say that they

  fell at the rate they did for "institutional reasons" seems to beg the

  question.

       A second "paradox" is the absence of much production smoothing over the


strand of recent literature stresses the informational con-
sequences of monetary policy: on the one hand, producers may be
unable to distinguish between monetary shocks and real shocks;
hence, they respond to a perceived change in their nominal demand
curve by increasing production; on the other hand, if monetary
policy responds to certain signals (not otherwise observable),
then monetary policy conveys information, and this too induces
real responses from producers. Neither of these is very convinc-
ing: producers have available to themselves data both concerning
monetary shocks (money supply figures are published in the
newspaper weekly) and concerning real disturbances. And it seems
implausible that the Governors of the Federal Reserve Board have
access to much information that is not publicly available, other
than that concerning what their own monetary policy in the future
will be.
     Still another strand notes that changes in monetary policy
(in the rule that describes the rate of expansion of the money
supply as a function of the state of nature) induce changes
in the real return to holding financial assets; if individuals
are risk averse, this will have real effects. (This argument
requires that, in addition, there be inter-temporal redistribu-
tion consequences to monetary policy.) Though this effect is
undoubtedly present, the question is, can it explain the magni-
tude and patterns of macro-economic fluctuations and the respon-
siveness of the economy to monetary policy?

                               6
 business cycle. If interest rates fell in a recession (or did not rise much),

 and shadow wages fell dramatically (as evidenced by lay-of fs and unemployment),

 then, unless storage costs were very high, firms should find it desirable to

 increase their production and their inventory to sales ratios.

      Similarly, investment and consumption both appear to be more volatile than

 can be explained by the observed fluctuations in real wages and real interest

 rates.12

      There are other phenomena to be explained, including the serial

 correlation among key economic variables. 13   14 We suggested in the previous



        Assume, for instance, that real rates of interest
remained at the low levels they were prior to 1980. Then, even
an individual who was temporarily unemployed would expect to
lose a relatively small proportion of his lifetime income,
sufficiently small that it should have a negligible effect on his
consumption.        We should note that jj aggregate consumption
only depended on the "permanent income" of the aggregate economy,
one might argue that quite the contrary, what is to be explained
is why consumption is not more volatile; for if, as some have
claimed, national income is a random walk, then consumption
should accordingly vary approximately in proportion to income;
and if, as others have claimed, disturbances are positively
correlated (that is, a decline this period in national income,
relative to trend, is likely to be followed by a decline next
period), then the decrease in permanent income associated with a
given decline in current income may exceed the decline in current
income; and accordingly, the decline in consumption should be
more than proportional to the decline in current income. This
kind of aggregate behavior is consistent with individuals fully
integrating the interests of their descendents (and all in-
dividuals having descendents; and if they do not have the same
numbers of descendents, inter-family redistributions having no
 consequences.)   We suspect that when adequate panel data is
 available, it will convincingly reject these hypotheses.


     13  It is, in fact, fairly easy to construct models in which
serial correlation arises: virtually any model with state
variables will do. (Indeed, it seems a far more difficult task
to construct persuasive models in which such serial correlation
does not arise.) Thus, the task is to construct plausible
models, in which the magnitudes of the serial correlation can be

                                7
   subsection that the seeming real effects of monetary policy is another

   phenomenon to be explained by any adequate macro-theory;15 again, what has to

   be explained is not only the presence of these effects, but their magnitude and

   form, e.g. why contractionary monetary policies often seem more effective in

   inducing a curtailment of economic activity than expansionary monetary policies

   seem effective in speeding recovery from a recession.



                                The Basic Premises

       The basic premises underlying our analysis are simple:

  1. Many firms face credit constraints; thus, it is the availability of credit,


accounted for. Thus changes in the aggregate capital stock will
give rise to serial correlation, but we suspect that the traditi-
onal Keynesian approach of ignoring these changes in capital
stock, for short run analysis, is probably correct: the changes
in the aggregate capital stock are just too small to account for
the observed patterns.
     We do not need to take a position here on whether there are
regular business cycles, i.e. whether there is some property of
the economy which systematically results in every boom turning
into a recession, and every recession giving rise to the next
boom; or whether the economy is simply continously being
buffetted by shocks, the cummulative effects of which result in
economic fluctuations.

      14 There are also a host of labor market phenomena to be
explained: not only the level of unemployment, but the pattern
(who gets laid off) and the form (lay-offs rather than work-shar-
ing.)    Even if wages are rigid in some sectors, if there are
sectors with flexible wages, we need to explain why unemployed
workers do not seek employment in those sectors.
     Some of these labor market issues are intimately connected
with capital market problems, as we hint at below, and in
Greenwald-Stiglitz, 1986. For a fuller discussion of these
labor market issues, see, for instance, Stiglitz [1984, 19861.

         While attention has focused on the correlation between
money and output (or between unanticipated money shocks and
changes in output), there are other correlations which may be
equally--or more--significant, e.g. between credit (either some
aggregate credit measure, as in Friedman [   ] or some intermedi-
ate credit measure, as in Nakamura [19861.)

                                8
 not the interest which firms have to pay, which restricts their investment; or

 when it is working capital which is curtailed, which limits their production.

 2. Firms that are not credit constrained may still face an increase in the

 effective cost of capital, which induces them to reduce their investment.

 3. Firms are constrained not only in the amount of capital which they can

 raise but also in the form in which they can raise it. Thus, they are

 frequently constrained from raising additional capital on the equity market.

 This   means that the managers of firms cannot divest themselves of certain
 essential risks.
 3.   The absence of futures markets, combined with the limitations on equity

 markets,16 implies that every production decision is a risk decision. Thus,

 even in the absence of direct credit (borrowing) constraints, firms which

 unexpectedly find their working capital diminished (e.g., as a result of an

 unanticipated decline in prices) might choose to borrow less (or even if they

 borrowed more, they would not borrow enough more to compensate for the

 diminished working capital.) Accordingly, production will decrease.

 4. In the short run, restrictions on high powered money may lead to

 restrictions on the availability of credit, and thus to lower output and

 investment.

 5. There are important multiplier effects arising from credit constraints.

 While   (4)   explains why monetary shocks should have real effects, these

 multiplier effects explain why the economy may amplify any shocks which it

 receives, whether real or monetary.

        Underlying all of the analysis is the assumption that defaults on loans


     16d the obvious fact that for most industrial production,
there is a significant lag between the application of inputs and
the sale. of output

                                   9
  are a real concern of suppliers of credit; that there are significant costs to

  bankruptcy, so that (managers of) firms seek to avoid bankruptcy;17 that

  imperfect information, both concerning the assets and liabilities of borrowers

  and the actions which they take (all of which affect the likelihood and

  consequences of default), is pervasive; and that what Information is available

  to one institution or individual cannot easily be transmitted to another.



       The debt market. In our earlier work (Stiglitz and Weiss 1981, 1983,

  1985) we showed that banks would, under a variety of circumstances, ration

  credit. It was shown that the return to the bank, per dollar loaned, might

  decrease with increases in the interest rate, either because the increase in

  the interest rate had an adverse effect on the mix of applicants, or because at

  higher interest rates, borrowers undertook riskier projects. Thus, it is

  possible that at an interest rate at which the demand for loans equals the

  supply (the Walrasian equilibrium), the return to the bank was lower than at

  lower interest rates; in such circumstances, the bank would reduce its interest

  rate and ration credit. Though the extent of credit rationing might be

  affected by other instruments available to the bank (such as collateral

  requirements), even these are, in general, insufficient to eliminate credit

  rationing. (There may be, for instance, important adverse selection effects

  associated with collateral.)

       Banks and the debt market. Firms could, and do, issue debt directly; but

  a significant fraction of debt is mediated though banking institutions. Credit



     171n some instances, bankruptcy may impose little costs. We
would argue, however, that the managers of most large corpora-
tions perceive themselves as facing a penalty If their firm goes
bankrupt.

                                 10
  rationing could, in principle exist whether there were banks or not. Assume

  all firms looked (to the untrained eye of the investor) identical, but the

  investor knows that the (expected) return per dollar loaned is higher at a 5%

  interest rate than at a 7% interest rate. Clearly, he would buy bonds issued

  at the former interest rate rather than the latter, even though, as a result,

  there might exist an excess demand for funds at the 5% interest rate.

       But banks exist both to screen applicants and to monitor the activities of

  the borrowers. The fact that the borrowers keep funds on deposit puts the bank

  in a position to monitor at least a fraction of the transactions of the

  borrower, and this may give him a signficiant information advantage. (To use

  the currently fashionable language, there may be important economies of scope

  between providing checking services and providing loans.)

       The information gleaned by the bank on small borrowers may be particularly

  important; while information concerning General Motors may be relatively

  widespread in the economy, that concerning a small widget producer is likely

  not to be. 8



       The equity market. A natural question is why firms that are constrained

  in the debt market do not resort to the equity market. Information problems

  appear in that market as well. Indeed, banks, in making     a   loan to a firm, can

  both obtain more information and impose more restrictions than can a typical
  equity owner purchasing shares. (Free rider problems suggest that it will not

     18We do not address here the question of why banks issue
their liabilities in a form which makes them subject to runs,
which may contribute in an important way to credit crises, and
hence to economic fluctuations. But note that even if there were
no banks, there can be credit runs, so long as there is short
term debt.


                               11
   be in the interests of any shareholder, in a widely held firm, to obtain much

   information concerning the firm. (See Stiglitz19 (1985b.))   Suppliers of

   credit must make inferences concerning their likely return to investing in a

   firm attempting to raise new capital through the equity market. Though there

   may be particular information relevant for a particular firm (e.g. that it has

   just made a new discovery, which it wishes to exploit), one of the inferences

   that     be made is that the firm has been unable to raise funds through the

   debt market, or that the terms at which the bankers are willing to lend to it

   are sufficiently onerous that the firm finds it desirable to seek funds

   elsewhere. Elsewhere (Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss, 1984) we have

   constructed a simple, equilibrium model illustrating this; the firms that do

  resort to the equity market are "weaker" firms with both a high probability of

  bankruptcy (the terms at which suppliers of credit are thus willing to supply

  funds reflects this) and actual future earnings prospects which are low

  relative to their publicly observable characteristics (a fact assumed to be

  known to the firm's managers). Issuing equity provides a signal concerning the

  firm, one which has a deleterious effect (under specified circumstances) on the

  value of the firm. This deleterious effect has to be taken into account in the

  firm's decision to raise capital through the equity market. In some cases, it

  will induce the firm not to use the equity market at all, in which case the

  effective cost of capital is the cost of borrowing ulus the cost associated

  with the increased probability of bankruptcy resulting from increased debt. In

  other cases, the firm may resort to the equities market, with the associated

  high cost of raising funds on it.



     19We argue there that banks have developed a set of in-
stitutional arrangements which mitigate these free rider effects.

                               12
                   Credit Markets and Cyclical Fluctuations

     In this section, we wish to explain how a shock to the economy leads to

decreased investment, as a result of increased credit rationing, increased

 costs of raising funds on the equity market, and increased effective marginal

 cost of borrowing funds- -taking into account the increase in the probability of

 default2° (for those who can obtain credit). Consider, as an example, an unan-

 ticipated large increase in the price of oil.   Conventional analysis has

 focused on the effects that this has on the value of different assets (those

 that are energy intensive users decreasing in value, those that are energy

 producers increasing in value.) But in addition, there are two important

 effects.

      First, such an increase in price will usually redistribute equity both

 between firms on the one-hand and "investors" on the other and among firms. In

 the absence of complete futures markets, firms must usually pay for factors of

 production before the output produced by those factors is sold. These payments

 may in some cases, like working capital, occur only a year or less before the

 output is sold. In other cases, like large fixed capital projects financed by

 debt, the conmiitments to pay (and the terms of payment) may be determIned many

 years before the output is sold. Any unanticipated changes in profitably which

 arise in the interim will (unless the firm goes bankrupt) be absorbed by the

 firms' equity stocks. Thus, higher than anticipated input prices and/or lower

 than anticipated final goods prices (or demand) will reduce the equity stocks


     20The marginal cost of borrowing includes a term reflecting
the increase in the probability of default as a result of
borrowing an additional dollar. Thus, what is of concern is how
shocks to the economy effect the increase in the probability of
default as a result of borrowing an additional dollar.

                               13
    of firms which provide a necessary cushion for both managements (and bankers)

    in absorbing the "risks" associated with future levels of production. In a

   perfect information world, the resulting losses of equity captial would be

   readily replaced by new equity issues. However, with restricted access to

   equity markets, firms can replace their now depleted
                                                          equity stocks only slowly
   through higher retained earnings and other asset economies. In the mean time,

   output will be curtailed (with the associated phenomena
                                                             of lay-offs and idle
   capacity) as managers are unwilling to bear the greater risks of bankruptcy

   associated with pre-existing levels of production supported by now depleted

   equity stocks.

        The equity lost by some firms does
                                             not, of course, simply disappear. In a
   case like the oil shock, much of it goes overseas into the hands of oil

   producers. They, in turn, may reinvest it to the original firms. However,

  when they do so, this is likely for informational reasons to take the form of

  new debt rather than new equity to replace that lost
                                                         through the initial price
   increase. The net result of this kind of
                                              recycling is unlikely, therefore, to
  alleviate the initial loss of equity.

       A second group of beneficiaries of the oil shock may be other firms.2

  However, the value of equity in absorbing the risks
                                                        of higher production will,
  in general, be subject to diminishing
                                          returns. Thus higher output from equity
  gaining firms (e.g. oil companies) will only partially offset lower output from

  equity losing firms (with the magnitude of these
                                                     effects being potentially far



     21A third group of beneficiaries may be households. The
consequences then are similar to those analysed above.
                                                        Note, by
contrast, in traditional neoclassical theory, all individuals
can see perfectly through the corporate veil, so these wealth
redistributions have no effects.


                              14
larger than pure wealth effects) and on balance productive activity may be

reduced.

     Exacerbating these effects, a second broad set of forces are brought into

play by the destruction of "informational capital" associated with the original

price shock. Lenders had gathered considerable information concerning the

performance of various borrowers under the old regime; now, there is much

greater uncertainty. They are unlikely to be well informed concerning the

asset composition of the borrower, at least, not as well informed as the

borrower. Thus, a shock such as this effectively increases the degree of

asynmietry   of   information.

     This in turn both decreases the supply of funds available for investment,

and decreases the demand for investment at any   interest   rate.

     Banks (and other lenders) respond to the increased uncertainty in three

ways. First, they refuse to lend to some borrowers to whom they previously

might have lent. This is illustrated in figure 1, where we have depicted the

mean return to the bank as a function of the interest rate charged. Because of

selection and incentive effects, there is an interest rate which maximizes the

return to the bank. There is a curve such as this for every category of loans

(where a category of loans is defined by the set of observable characteristics

of the borrower, e.g. there would be a curve such as this for owner-occupied

mortgages, another curve for a firm with a particular balance sheet, etc.)     The

shock is going to shift the curve; precisely how it shifts it depends on the

precise nature of the shock. In particular, it may shift it downwards.

     Assume that initially, the required rate of return on a loan is p*; thus,

the loan category depicted in figure 1 is just marginal. Now, even if after

the shock the required rate of return is lowered, to p**, the maximal return


                                 15
 may be lowered even more. Thus, borrowers in this category will face credit

 constraints; they will be unable to obtain funds.

      Those that do obtain funds may find that the real interest which they are

 obligated to pay (providing they do not go bankrupt) may either rise or fall.

 In figure 2a we depict a category of loans for which the rate of interest at

 which the return to the bank is maximized has increased, while in figure 2b we

 depict a category of loans for which the rate of interest at which the return

 to the bank is maximized has decreased; in both cases, the increased

 uncertainty resulting from the shock to the economy has lowered the expected

 return to the bank at every rate of interest charged.

     Secondly, even those that do obtain funds may find that the bank imposes

stronger convenants than it previously did; it may insist on a shorter maturity

to the loan. And it may be willing to lend less than it previously did.

     Thirdly, of the funds available to the bank for investing, the bank may

decide to hold more in the form of assets, such as government bonds, rather

than in the form of loans. In our previous work, we modeled the bank as being

risk neutral. But banks are, in many respects, like other firms; and the same

arguments which suggest that managerial firms will act in a risk averse manner

suggest that, in face of increased uncertainty, banks will respond by adjusting

their portfolio. (To the extent that bankruptcy is costless, and banks

maximize their own expected return, increased uncertainty may lead banks to

undertake greater risk; depositors, knowing this, will -   in   the absence of
insurance -   tend to shun banks which do not act, or at least which do not seem
to act, in a risk averse manner.)

    At the same time, even good firms may reduce their demand for loans (at

any interest rate), for two reasons. We postulated earlier that firms are


                              16
 risk averse, and that, in particular, their managers are concerned with

 bankruptcy.23 In the absence of risk, bankruptcy is easy to define: it occurs

 whenever the present discounted value of the firms returns exceeds its

  liabilities (i.e. its net worth is negative.) But, of course, in the absence

 of uncertainty, bankruptcy would never occur: no lender would ever lend so

 much that the firm would go bankrupt, and no borrower would ever borrow so

 much. Bankruptcy occurs in the presence of uncertainty. It occurs not when

 the present discounted value of expected returns to the firm are less than the

  liabilities--for the lender may not be able to capture enough of the returns in

 the goods states to compensate for the lack of returns in the bad states.23

 Loan contracts are written in such a way as to give the lender the right to

 declare the loan in default in certain circumstances; these circumstances are

  "observable" conditions which reflect an expectation (at least from the persp-

  ective of the lender) that the firm will, with a reasonable probability, not be

  able to repay the loan, either now, or sometime in the future. (Thus, a loan


     22Note that our concern is here primarily with the con-
sequences of the anticipation of bankruptcy on economic behavior,
rather than that of the bankruptcy itself.
  In the absence of any informational problems, bankruptcy
itself should give rise to no disruption to the economy; bank-
ruptcy would then represent nothing more than a redistribution
of ownership claims; the assets themselves are not destroyed by
bankruptcy, and there would be no reason why they would not
continue to be used in the most effective manner possible.
  In fact, bankruptcy often represents a significant loss in
organizational capital. Potential purchasers of capital goods
know far less about each machine than its current owners, and it
may take some time for them to learn about the appropriate
disposition of the asset. Moreover, the occurence of bankruptcy
may entail significant transactions costs; these include not
only the lawyers fees, but capital which may be unused while
ownership is being transferred.


     23For further discussion, see Stiglitz [1972J and Eaton-
-Gersovitz-Stiglitz [].

                               17
 can be declared in default even before it is due; the obvious reason for this

 is that there are serious moral hazard problems which arise if the borrower

 believes that there is a reasonably high probability that he will go bankrupt;

 the firm may attempt to increase its returns in those states when it does not

 go bankrupt, at the expense of assets available in the event of bankruptcy.)

 There is some vagueness in this definition: after all, even when the loan is

 initially made, there is some probability of bankruptcy. For now, we can

 simply take the terms of the loan which define whether the loan is in default

 as given.

     Given our assumptions concerning firms' aversion to bankruptcy, we can now

explain why the shock may reduce its demand for investment. First, the shock

may have a direct effect in increasing the uncertainty facing the firm, and, in

particular, in increasing the probability of bankruptcy. Secondly, the shock

may have an indirect effect in increasing the uncertainty facing the firm, as a

result of the greater uncertainty facing its suppliers and those who purchase

its goods. Any firm has a large network of economic relations on which it is

dependent. There may be large costs if it does not receive its supplies of

inputs in a timely way. Moreover, almost every firm is involved in providing

trade credit. The firm is undoubtedly imperfectly informed concerning the

effect of the shock on every supplier and purchaser. But the shock is likely

to increase the probability that some purchaser would not be able to pay its

trade credit; or that some supplier will go bankrupt, and fail to deliver some

essential supply on time.

     Thirdly, the firm may anticipate that even if it does not now face a

credit constraint, it may do so in the future; or it may realize that it may be

able to obtain loans only at very high interest rates, or with restricted


                             18
convenants, which severely limit its discretion. The anticipation of future

credit constraints may have effects similar to the current imposition of credit

constraints.

    Thus, the firm undertakes actions which decrease its probability of

bankruptcy (e.g. reducing production); which decrease the probability of

bankruptcy in the event of a future credit constraint; and which decrease the

probability of the bank imposing credit constraints. The likelihood that a

firm's bank will impose credit constraints (as well as the likelihood that the

bank will declare a loan in default) is related to the firm's balance sheet.

In looking at its balance sheet, the bank assigns greater weight to liquid

assets, which can be easily evaluated and marketed, than to firm specific

assets, about which there is greater uncertainty (greater asyninetries of

information.)

     Firms attempt to improve their balance sheets in two ways: by savings

(i.e. by keeping their retained earnings in liquid forms) and by converting

existing assets to more liquid forms, e.g. by reducing their inventories. They

may also attempt to "liquify" certain liabilities, where they perceive that the

market may assign too much weight to them. Whether a trained worker is a net

asset or a liability may be ambiguous; if an outsider views his skills to be of

little relevance to the future activities of the firm, he is a liability, since

there are always costs associated with discharging him.




Multipliers vs. dampeners; or prices vs. quantities.

    These reactions to a shock give rise to multiplier effects which exacerbate

the effect of the initial shock.   In particular, it should be noted that not

all firms can simultaneously liquify. The attempt by a producer to reduce its


                             19
 inventories of inputs reduces the demands facing its suppliers, and thus

 increases their probability of bankruptcy. Their increased probability of

 bankruptcy, in turn, increases the probability of bankruptcy for all those who

 have supplied that supplier with trade credit. All of these firms, facing

 greater uncertainty, reduce their demand for investment, and this in turn

 increases the probability of bankruptcy facing capital goods manufacturers, who

therefore reduce their investment at any given level of real wages and real

interest rates.

     Credit constraints have similar multiplier effects. The credit

constraints imposed on one firm reduce its demand for investment, which has

repercussions on the demands facing other firms.

     Multipliers abound in macro-economics. This is in marked contrast to

micro-economics, where adjustment processes tend to dampen any initial shock.

It is important to clarify what economic structures give rise to

multiplicative effects, and what economic structures give rise to dampening.

     For instance, in the ordinary demand and supply curve analysis (see figure

3) a shift in the demand curve by the amount dd (so at each price, demand has

increased by dd) leads to an increase in prices; the new equilibrium level of

output is higher,   but   by less than the amount dd. This dampening property is

quite general in stable competitive price models.

     It is the presence of information -    related   externalities (and wage and

price rigidities) which gives rise to the multiplier effects. To see this

and to contrast these multiplier effects with the standard price responses,

consider the following simple model. Let savings be an increasing function of

the rate of interest, SS(r), S' > 0.      Assume initially that investment is only

a function of the rate of interest, I =    ICr).   (Recall that in neoclassical


                                20
theory, it is only relative prices and price expectations which determine

investment decisions, with a strictly convex technology.)

Equilibrium is at the point where

                                          1(r) =   S(r).
Now assume that there is a perturbation, to say, the demand for investment

curve by the amount   a, so
                                     I*(r) =       1(r)   +   a.
Then, in the new equilibrium, investment will have increased by

                                         a(1-D), O<D< 1

where D is the dampening effect resulting from the change in the interest rate:

                                           D1'/I'—S'.
     Now assume that investment of firm i is affected by that of firm j (as

described above, as a result of the effect of each firmts decision on the

probability of the other firmts bankruptcy.) Our investment functions now are

of the form

                              11=   I'(r,    12)

                                         12 = 12(r, P,
Assume, now, that I shifts up by O. The new equiliibrium interest rate is

given by the solution to

                  S(r) =      O   + I1(r,I2(r,I + O)) + 12(r,11+O)

from which follows that in the new equilibrium investment will have increased

by
                                  O[(1+n)/(l-mn)][1 -          D*].
where

                                               n ai1/ai2

                                               m     i2/ai

                                    21
   and

           D* = 111(11   -
                             s1)(I1(l   + n) +   12(1   +   m))/(l   - urn)


   The D* represents the dampening effect of interest rate changes, while l+n/1-mn

   represents the multiplier effect of the investment interaction. Thus, if

   interest rate effects are small, the net effect is a multiplier one.

          The multiplier effect may be seen more clearly in a special case of this

   model, where we can write

                                            1= M(r,I,O)

   aggregate investment demand is a function of the interest rate and aggregate

   investment. Then, at any interest rate,

                    dI/dO=[ aM/aO][l/1-a}f/aI]

  Thus, so long as the indirect effect is positive, but not greater than 1

   (i.e. a,ai < 1), there is a multiplier effect on the investment demand curve.

  A similar multiplier analysis applies for the credit multiplier.



  Welfare multipliers. We have focused our attention on an explanation for why a

  shock to the economy may be amplified, rather than dampened, why the final

  change in output may be a multiple of an initial change in, say, demand. We

  should note the more general prevalence of welfare multipliers. Whenever the

  economy is not at a pareto optimal allocation, small perturbations to the

  system may result in large (relative to the size of the initial perturbation)

  welfare gains. In particular, a perturbation which has a small effect on the

  welfare of a particular individual, or the profits of a particular firm, may

  have significant welfare effects on the economy as a whole. 24 Elsewhere, we



        24 Akerlof and Yellen have emphasized this in their recent
work.

                                    22
 have shown that in fact economies with informational imperfections are almost

 always (constrained) pareto inefficient. 25




 Cyclical variability in the cost of capital. The multiplier effects that we

 have described in the previous section may lead to a significant increase in

 the effective cost of capital during a recession. Consider a firm which is not

 constrained by its bank. Its effective marginal cost of borrowing includes the

 direct cost plus the indirect cost associated with the increased probability of

 bankruptcy resulting from increasing borrowing. Even if the real interest rate

 charged by banks does not increase, the indirect cost may have increased

 significantly. Similarly, its effective cost of borrowing will increase if it

 anticipates a higher probability of being credit constrained in the future.

 Likewise, consider a firm which is presently credit constrained. It has the

 option of raising funds in the equity market; but the recession may lower the

  expected   returns associated with raising those funds on the equity market, and
  this may increase the effective cost of capital raised in that manner. (In any
  case,   there is an effective kink in the supply of capital schedule; raising

  capital on the equity market, as we have noted, provides a signal, which

  adversely affects the value of the firm; thus, many firms which are excluded

  from the debt market simply reduce their investment, limiting it to retained

  earnings.)




     25Though our 1986 paper established this only for economies
with market clearing, subsequent work has confirmed these
results for economies in which there is unemployment and credit
rationing.

                                 23
   Wage/price rigidities. Wage/price rigidities have not played a very important

   role in our exposition. In fact, falling prices may exacerbate the problems we

   have noted, particularly if contracts are not fully indexed. For falling

  prices increase the real value of liabilities and thus increase the probability

  of default of all firms with unindexed net liabilities. Moreover, even if

   liabilities were indexed, falling prices will lead to an increase in the real

  interest rate26; and this too will increase the probability of bankruptcy of

  many firms.27




  Credit and the Quantity Theory of Money. In recent years, there has been

  considerable controversy between the "quantity theorists" and Keynesian

  economists. The former claim that it is the quantity of money which directly

  affects the economy; the latter that the quantity of money only affects the

  economy through interest rate effects. The problem has been that neither

  theory seems really credible: while the quantity theorists have offered no

  really plausible mechanism to explain how the quantity of money directly


      26Assuming, of course, that the nominal interest rate
remains unchanged. The Public Financial Irrelevance Theorems
 (Stiglitz, 1982,1983) establish conditions under which changes in
the rate of inflation have no real effects. In the context of
our model, perfect indexing would require not only indexing of
all financial contracts, but also a full set of future markets,
which would enable firm managers and owners to divest themselves
of all risks arising from the lag between inputs and outputs.
   The fact of the matter is, of course, that there is imper-
fect indexing; and as long as that is the case, falling prices
may exacerbate the problems with which we are concerned here.


     27Though it may decrease the probability of others, it
increases uncertainty and asymmetries of information, and it is
these which give rise to the problems which are of concern here.


                               24
 affects the economy,28 the variations in the real interest rate have been

  (except in recent years) of sufficiently small magnitude as to raise doubts

 whether they play an important role in controlling, say, the level of

  investment or consumption (and, in any event, such variations in real interest

 rates as occur do not appear in econometric models to explain very successfully

 variations in investments). Our theory agrees with the monetarists, arguing

 that variations in real interest rates are not necessarily central; but it

 provides a mechanism- -through the control of credit- -by which monetary policy

  can directly affect the level of economic activity. 2930


     28See our earlier discussion   for why we find some of the
alleged mechanisms unpersuasive.    Further doubt on the trans-
actions mechanism has been raised   by recent financial innova-
tions, which have facilitated the   ability of individuals and
firms essentially to write checks   against a wide variety of
assets.

     29The monetary authorities directly control only the credit
made available by banks. But because of the specific information
concerning borrowers which banks have acquired, the cost of
acquiring funds from other sources (such as on the equity market)
will, in general, be higher than acquiring funds from the bank.
Thus, restricting bank credit may markedly increase the marginal
cost of funds to borrowers, even if the bank does not markedly
increase the interest rate it charges.
     A question is sometimes posed, why do not banks open up
an equities subsidiary, to make use of the information acquired
by the bank. First, the information acquired by the bank is
particularly concerned with the bottom tail of the distribution
of returns, the states in which the firm may go bankrupt.
Secondly, it is easier to impose convenants on loans than on
equities, and since the bank cannot control the actions of the
firm through its equities subsidiary as effectively as it could
when extending credit, it may only be willing to invest at terms
that the firm finds unattractive. Thirdly, the fact that the
bank is not willing to lend to the firm, but is willing to invest
in equity, provides information to the market which may have a
deleterious effect on the firms market price.

     300ur model also provides an explanation for why government
financial policy is not irrelevant: government and individual
borrowing are not perfect substitutes, so long as future receipts
from the government are not collateralizable.

                               25
        This is not the occasion to detail the determinants of the amount (and

  terms) of credit which the banking system makes available, or the mechanisms by

  which the monetary authorities affect the level of credit made available by the

  banking system. Here, we simply note three points:

      (1) The banks are, in many ways, like other firms in the economy; when

  their working capital is reduced, their willingness to lend (which is, after

  all, their "production activity") is reduced.

      (2)    In a decentralized economy, there is no reason that the aggregate

  amount of credit made available by the banking system will necessarily equal

  either the supply of investment goods or the level of (full employment) savings

  at current prices.3' In traditional neoclassical models, the interest rate

  would adjust to ensure that (full employment) equilibrium is attained; in our

  model the real interest does not vary much, and should not play an important

  role in the equilibration of the economy. When the aggregate amount of credit

  is insufficient, so that prices fall in an unanticipated way, working capital

  may be destroyed, and this will have, as we have argued, real effects on the

  economy.

     (3) Our theory is consistent with the observation that monetary policy may

  be more effective in curtailing economic activity in a boom than stimulating it

  in a recession; in a recession, banks may be unwilling to lend, and firms may

  be unwilling to borrow (banks frequently have free reserves in the depths of a

  recession.)




    '    One might be tempted to suggest that this "coordination"
failure could be alleviated by having one central bank make all
loans. But this ignores the central information problem with
which banks are concerned: who are the good borrowers, those
who are most likely to repay the loans.

                               26
     Consequences of increasing real cost of capital. The hypotheses that the

     effective real cost of capital increases in a recession, and that firms attempt

     to liquify their balance sheets, provides a natural explanation of several of

     the until now unexplained patterns of business cycles.

          Our analysis has provided an explanation of why investment and consumption

     fluctuate more than they should, given the limited variation in real wages and

     real interest rates (as distinguished from the real effective cost of capital,

     which we have argued does increase dramatically during a recession.) Indeed,

     even abandoning the neoclassical framework and resorting to a more Keynesian

     framework in which firms face output constraints and workers constraints on the

     amount of labor they can sell, we conjecture that the observed variations in

     consumption and investment can still not be fully accounted for. Our model

     provides such an explanation:        it is not the observed real interest rate which

      is of relevance; rather, it is changes in equity -    working   capital - combined

     with the attempt by firms simultaneously to "liquify" their balance sheet which

      leads to a marked decrease in investment (and an associated marked increase in

      the real effective cost of capital.) Moreover, we have provided a multiplier

      process which multiplies the consequences of any shock.32


         32Though we have focused our attention on firms, a similar
    analysis applies to individuals. Some individuals will face
    credit constraints. Other individuals, fearing future credit
    constraints, will attempt to "liquify" their position, by saving
    more, by postponing the purchase of durables, etc.
         There is another aspect of these cyclical fluctuations
    which should be noted. The question of replacing durables (or
    purchasing any investment good) can be posed as a question of
    optimal timing. If the firm or consumer has chosen his time
    optimally, then the loss in profits (welfare) from postponing
    a repurchase is a second order effect; on the other hand, we
    have argued that shocks typically increase the degree of Un-
•   certainty facing a firm; if it is equally likely that the shock
    has decreased or increased the optimal date, and if some of the
    uncertainty about which has occured will be resolved in the near

                                     27
          Similarly, our analysis explains what would otherwise appear to be an

  anamolous pattern of inventory accumulation and producjion. One of the most

  widely observed phenomena of recessions is labor hoarding: workers seem

  underutilized. This translates into a very low shadow value of their time.

  This, combined with the underutilization of capital, suggests that the cost of

  production are markedly lower in a recession than in a boom. Given plausible

  estimates for storage costs and taking the observed real interest rates as the

  effective cost of capital, one would be lead to expect marked increases in

  inventories (absolutely, as well as relative to sales) during recessions, and

  that these would actually increase as the economy starts to move out of the

  recession (since then the anticipated holding period of such inventories would

  be down.) The actual pattern can only be explained by a significant increase

  in the effective cost of capital in the recession, as our theory claims is the

  case.

          Similarly, our theory explains why unemployed individuals may not be

  willing to accept jobs at prevailing wages in a recession, when those jobs

  entail high training costs, borne by either the firm or the worker. For both,

  the implicit cost of capital in a recession may be very high. Thus, for

  instance, the life time wages that .a firm that hires a worker requiring

  training costs33 in the depths of a recession may be willing to pay may


future, then it will pay the firm to postpone the decision.
There is an "option" value to postponement, whIch is increased as
a result of any shock.
     Though potentially important, we suspect that this cannot
fully explain the observed patterns of investment, consumption,
and production: the reduced cost of production in the recession
are sufficiently great to outweigh the increase in option value.

     33Moreover, the worker is also likely to be unwilling to
deplete his savings to finance the training costs, at such
times when he is more likely to face a financial constraint and

                                 28
 actually be less than the life time wages than if it should hire the worker

 later. Moreover, workers may be unwilling to accept current low wages for high

 future promised wages; those promises are like equity loans, since firms do not

 have fixed commitments; and the argwnents for why suppliers of capital are

 unwilling to provide equity loans apply with equal force here.34



                        Comments on Alternative Theories

      Before concluding, we wish to remark on some of the salient differences

 between our theory and some of the major competing alternative hypotheses. We

 have already indicated what we believe to be some of the crucial inadequacies

 of the standard neoclassical theories' attempts to explain the real effects of

 money,35    and we have suggested that those models, with their implied absence

 of a corporate veil, simply cannot explain the cyclical movements of the key

 economic variables, let alone the persistence of unemployment.


when such investments appear to be particularly risky. See
below.

     34See Greenwald-Stiglitz, 1986 for a more extended dis-
cussion of these issues.

          We do not discuss here the rational expectations
theories. Host of the results of those models depend not so
much on the assumption of rational expectations, as on the
assumption of market clearing; we would argue that one of the
central objectives of macro-economics is to explain unemployment-
- -the seeming failure of the labor market to clear; a theory
which assumes away unemployment thus has little chance of
throwing much light on the central issues. We should note in
passing however that without market clearing assumptions,
rational expectations may actually increase the effectiveness of
government policy, e.g. by increasing multipliers (Neary-Stiglitz
(1982)); and that nowhere in our analysis do we require non--
rational expectations; our analysis of, for instance, cyclical
movements in investment does not require the simple kinds of
extrapolative expectations formation that underlies the usual
analysis of the accelerator.


                               29
 Keynesian Theory. In many respects, our theory has a close affinity to

 traditional Keynesian analysis. Variability in investment, and the inability

 of investment to be stimulated by normal market forces, were central to his

 analysis.36 But Keynes never found an adequate explanation for this; he was

 forced to rely on "animal spirits" to explain the level of investment; and on

 the now discredited liquidity trap to explain why interest rates could not
 fall.

         His problems arose from two sources. First, he was too much of a

neo-classical economist (though whether he would have recognized this epithet

is another matter.) Thus, he wanted to rely on adjustments in the rate of

interest as the equilibrating mechanism. He did not see the central role that

financial structure played. This led him into a series of modelling mistakes:

he aggregated equity and bonds together, thus failing to observe the critical

differences in the risk properties associated with these two forms of raising

capital; he focused on flows, thus failing to observe the critical role played

by the balance sheet (stocks) in determining firm behavior; and he followed the

Marshallian tradition of focusing on a representative firm, thus failing to

recognize the consequences arising from a redistribution of the stock of

working capital among firms.37 (Indeed, several commentators on an earlier

version of this paper noted that Kalecki might more properly be given credit as

the antecedent of the theory expounded here. (See Kalecki [1939].)

     Keynes was again correct in his conclusion that money could have real


        Thus, those fixed price models (such as Malinvaud [1977]) which have
focused almost exclusively on wage rigidities seem to us to leave out an
important part of the Keynesian story.

     37Simjlar criticisms could be leveled at his analysis of aggregate consumption.

                               30
 effects on the economy, but the mechanism he sketched was again too tied to his

 Cambridge roots. He ignored a long literature attempting to relate the

 monetary system and credit availability, and it is in this tradition that our

 theory has its real antecedents.



 Flexible Prices

      Wage/price rigidities were central to Keynes. We believe that these

 rigidities are important. But it should be noted that they have not played a

 very important role in our exposition. In fact, falling prices may exacerbate

 the problems we have noted, particularly if contracts are not fully indexed.

 For falling prices increases the real value of liabilities, and thus increases

 the probability of default of all firms with unindexed net liabilities.

 Moreover, even if liabilities were indexed, falling prices will lead to an

 increase in the real interest rate; and this too will increase the probability

 of bankruptcy of many firms.38

      Finally, our analysis provides part of the explanation of price

 rigidities. It has long been recognized that the Walrasian auctioneer may

 provide a very misleading model of the process of price adjustment. Firms set

 their prices, even in fairly competitive environments. In setting their

 prices, they are concerned not only with the effect on their current customers,

 but also with the recruitment of customers. (Because of costly search, not all

  individuals are searching intensively all the time.) By raising their prices,

 they may make more profits out of current customers, but recruit fewer new

  customers. There is an intertemporal trade off; and an increase in the


     '8Though it may decrease the probability of others, it
increases uncertainty and asyiiinetries of information, and it is
these which give rise to the problems which are of concern here.

                               31
   effective cost of capital tilts the balance towards current profits: firms

   become less concerned with recruiting new customers.39 This results in an

   increase in the mark-up over marginal costs. Thus, even if wages are falling,

   prices are likely not to fall as fast.




                                    Concluding Remarks

        A central problem of economic theory for the last fifty years has been the

   attempt to reconcile macro-economics with traditional micro-economic
                                                                          theory.
   The latter, while providing a simple and seemingly persuasive theory of the

   firm and consumer, predicts that there should be full employment. The

   inconsistency between that prediction and the periodic episodes of unemployment

   in virtually all capitalist economies suggests something--something major- -is

  wrong with that theory.

        Samuelson attempted something of a sleight of hand by introducing what he

  called the "neoclassical synthesis", in which he argued that there were two

  regimes to the economy, an unemployment regime and a full employment regime.

  Though neo-classical principles clearly did not apply to the former, once the

  government had restored the economy to full employment, the relevance of neo--

  classical analysis was simultaneously restored. No convincing argument was

  ever put forward for this neo-classical synthesis: why should whatever the

  imperfections in markets, the underlying causes, simply disappear when the

  level of economic activity increases? Is it not more plausible that they

  remain, that recessions are simply the most obvious and undeniable


     39See Phelps and Winter [1976].   There are, of course,
other explanations of price rigidities, some of them again based
on asymmetries of information. For a survey, see Stiglitz,
1984.



                               32
manifestation of pervasive departures from the neo-classical paradigm?

     More recent attempts by the fixed-price models, though going in the right

direction, are similarly inadequate. They simply postulate wage and price

rigidities, without explaining them. Why should firms, operating in the

competitive manner postulated, solving quite complicated intertemporal maxim-

ization problems, not lower their prices in the face of excess supply?     The

underlying hypotheses are at best ad hoc, at worst inconsistent.         Moreover,

recessions cannot be accounted for by the rigidity of real wages alone:     in the

absence of large supply shocks, or inexplicable changes in preferences for

leisure versus income, the Walrasian real wage should vary very little (just

as market real wages vary little over the cycle.) Implicitly, then, most

versions of the fixed price model attribute the disequilibrium to too high a

level of money wages and prices. This suggests that a fall in money wages and

prices would restore equilibrium.

     Here, we have to agree with Keynes: whether Keynes considered the real

balance effect or not, from our current perspective it is clear that it is

 empirically irrelevant; and indeed, if falling wages and prices generate

 expectations of further declines in wages and prices, even within a

 neo-classical perspective, the short run effects on income and employment may

 be deleterious40. But Keynes seemed to suggest that these decreases in money

 wages and prices would, themselves, directly have a deleterious effect on the

 economy. We have provided a model which explains why this is so.

      The reconciliation of macro-economics with micro-economics requires more

 than just an ad hoc adaptation of the standard Walrasian model. The failures

 of that model run deeper than just its failure to be able to explain phenomena


    40See Neary and Stiglitz [19831.

                              33
   of such central importance as unemployment. It requires the revision of that

  model, taking into account the central role that information, and imperfections

   in information, play. Not only will this enable the development of a

  consistent macro and micro-theory; but both the macro-theory and the

  micro-theory will be better than the current competitive paradigm, which

  systematically ignores these considerations.41

       We hope that, in this paper, we have at least convinced you that

  informatinal imperfections provide the basis of a consistent explanation for

  many hitherto unexplained aspects of macro-economic behavior.




     41For a survey of some recent work attempting to construct such
a theory, see J. E.Stiglitz 11985].

                              34
                                    References



Blinder, A. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Money, Credit Constraints and Economic

     Activity", American Economic Review, May 1983, PP. 297-302.

Friedman, Benjamin H., "The Roles of Honey and Credit in Macro economic

     Analysis", Working Paper No. 831, National Bureau of Economic Research,

     December 1981.

Greenwald, B. A. Weiss and J.E. Stiglitz, "Informational Imperfections in the

     Capital Markets and Macro-economic Fluctuations", American Economic

     Reviów, May 1984, Vol. 74, No. 2, pp. 194-200.

Kalecki, M., Essays in the Theory of Economic Fluctuations, New York, Russell

     and Russell, 1939.

Keynes, J.H., The General Theory of Employment. Interest and Honey, (London:

     Macmillan & Co.), 1961.

Halinvaud, E., The Theory of Unemployment   Reconsidered    (Oxford: Blackwell,

     1977).

Nalebuff, B. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Selection

     Device", mimeo, Princeton University, 1983.

Neary, P. and J. E. Stiglitz, "Towards a Re*construction of Keynesian

     Economics: Expectations and Constrained Equilibria", Ouarterly Journal of

     Economics, Supplement 1983, pp. 199-228.

Phelps, E. S. and S. G. Winter, "Optimal Price Policy Under Atomistic

     Competition" in Microaconornic Foundations of Employment and Inflation

     Theory, E. S. Phips, ed., W. W. Norton and    Co.,   N.Y., 1970.

Shapiro, C. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline

     Device", American Economic Review, June 1984, Vol. 74, No. 3, pp. 350-356.


                               35
 Stiglitz, J.E., "A Consumption Oriented Theory of the Demand for Financial

     Assets and the Term Structure of Interest Rates", Review of Economic

      Studies, Vol. 37, July 1970, PP. 321-251 (presented at the August 1968

     meetings of the Econometric Society, Boulder, Colorado).

Stiglitz, J.E., "Some Aspects of the Pure Theory of Corporate Finance:

     Bankruptcies and Take-overs", Bell Journal of Economics and Mana2ement

     Science, Autumn 1972, pp. 458-482.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Prices and Queues as Screening Devices in Competitive

     Markets", IMSSS Technical Report No. 212, Stanford University, August

     1976.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Lectures in Macro-economics", mimeo, Oxford University,

     1978.

Stiglitz, J.E., "On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial Policy,

     NBER Working Paper No. 1057, April 1982.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Ownership, Control and Efficient Markets: Some Paradoxes in

     the Theory of Capital Markets", in Economic     Regulation: Essays in Honor

     of James R. Nelson, Kenneth Boyer and William Shepherd eds., (Ann Arbor,

     Michigan: Michigan State University Press, 1982, pp. 311-341.

Stiglitz, J.E. "On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial Policy:

     Indexation, Price Rigidities and Optional Monetary Policy", in Inflation.

     Debt and Indexation, R. Dornbusch and M. Simonsen, eds., M.I.T. Press,

     1983, pp 183-222.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Price Rigidities and Market Structure", American Economic

    Review, May 1984, Vol. 74, No. 1, pp. 350-356.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Theories of Wage Rigidity", NBER Working Paper No. 1332,

    September 1984.


                            36
Stiglitz, J.E., "Competivity and the Number of Firms in a Market: Are Duopolies

     More Competitive Than Atomistic Markets",    mimeo, Princeton University,

     October 1984.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Information and Economic Analysis: A Perspective", Economic

     Journal Supplement, Vol. 95, Spring 1985,    pp. 21-42. (Paper presented

     at the Annual Conference of the Association of University Teachers of

     Economics, University of Bath,     1984).

Stiglitz, J.E., Credit Markets and the Control of Capital", Journal of Money.

     Credit and Banking, May 1985, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 133-152.

Stiglitz, J.E., "Equilibrium Wage Distribution", Economic   Journal, September
     1985.

Weiss, A., "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages",

     Journal of Political Economy, 1980, 88, pp. 526-538.

Weiss, A. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect

     Information", American Economic Review, June 1981, Vol. 71, No. 3,

     pp. 393-410.

Weiss, A. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Incentive Effects of Termination:

     Applications to the Credit and Labor Markets", American Economic

     Review, December 1983, Vol. 72, pp. 912-927. Weiss, A. and J.E. Stiglitz,

     "Credit Rationing and Collateral", mimeo, BeliCore, 1984.




                             37
