                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CABLES, SHARKS AND SERVERS:
   TECHNOLOGY AND THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET

                                          Barry Eichengreen
                                          Romain Lafarguette
                                            Arnaud Mehl

                                         Working Paper 21884
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21884


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




We are grateful to Thorsten Beck, Geert Bekaert, Bruno Biais, Jerome Busca, Giancarlo Corsetti, Alexander
Duering, Torsten Ehlers, Jean Imbs, Takatoshi Ito, Philip Lane, Istvan Mak, Guy-Charles Marhic,
Frank Packer, Hashem Pesaran, Andrew Rose and Xavier Vives for comments and discussions, as
well as to seminar participants at the ECB, Goethe University Frankfurt and USC Dornsife and to
participants at the 2015 Clausen Center Conference on Global Economic Issues, Berkeley, for comments.
We are also grateful to Denis Petre and Philip Wooldridge for providing unpublished Bank for International
Settlements data on offshore foreign exchange trading. The views expressed are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect those of the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Barry Eichengreen, Romain Lafarguette, and Arnaud Mehl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cables, Sharks and Servers: Technology and the Geography of the Foreign Exchange Market
Barry Eichengreen, Romain Lafarguette, and Arnaud Mehl
NBER Working Paper No. 21884
January 2016
JEL No. F30

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the impact of technology on production and trade in services, focusing on the foreign exchange
market. We identify exogenous technological changes by the connection of countries to submarine
fiber-optic cables used for electronic trading, but which were not laid for purposes related to the foreign
exchange market. We estimate the impact of cable connections on the share of offshore foreign exchange
transactions. Cable connections between local markets and matching servers in the major financial
centers lower the fixed costs of trading currencies and increase the share of currency trades occurring
onshore. At the same time, however, they attenuate the effect of standard spatial frictions such as
distance, local market liquidity, and restrictive regulations that otherwise prevent transactions from
moving to the major financial centers. Our estimates suggest that the second effect dominates. Technology
dampens the impact of spatial frictions by up to 80 percent and increases, in net terms, the share of
offshore trading by 21 percentage points. Technology also has economically important implications
for the distribution of foreign exchange transactions across financial centers, boosting the share in
global turnover of London, the world’s largest trading venue, by as much as one-third.


Barry Eichengreen                                    Arnaud Mehl
Department of Economics                              European Central Bank
University of California, Berkeley                   Sonnemannstrasse 20
549 Evans Hall 3880                                  60314 Frankfurt am Main
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Arnaud.Mehl@ecb.int
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Romain Lafarguette
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 20
60314 Frankfurt am Main
Romain.Lafarguette@ecb.europa.eu
                     Cables, Sharks and Servers:
    Technology and the Geography of the Foreign Exchange Market
                Barry Eichengreen, Romain Lafarguette and Arnaud Mehl

         1. Introduction

        The impact of technology on services, and specifically on where services are
produced and traded, is one of the great unanswered questions of the post-industrial
age. The cost of everything related to information and communication is dropping
like a stone due to developments in computation, big data, fiber optics and satellite
technology. But the implications for the location of service activities that make
intensive use of information and communication technology (ICT) – activities that are
likely to be a principal source of employment in the post-industrial age – remain
highly uncertain.

        One view is that cheap ICT significantly attenuates the effect of distance and
other trading barriers on the geography of production. 1 Another view is that distance
and other trading barriers still matter significantly. 2

       In this paper we shed light on this debate using the global foreign exchange
market as a case study. Our study thus speaks to the heavily-discussed question of
whether advances in ICT leading to the advent of electronic trading have increased or
reduced the importance of proximity for trading in the foreign exchange market.

        What might be called the “Flat World” hypothesis (after Friedman 2005) is
that location, distance and other aspects of geography no longer matter in a ubiquitous
24-7 FX marketplace. In a world of high-speed communication, foreign exchange
transactions can take place anywhere and should be observed in a growing number of
places, reflecting the availability of relevant inputs (information about domestic


1
  Cairncross (1997), Bakos (1997), Shapiro and Varian (1999) and Friedman (2005) all argue that the
Internet all but eliminates communication, search, and transportation costs, neutralizing the effect of
distance on production decisions for a wide range of activities. Antràs, Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg
(2006) consider offshoring in a knowledge economy and propose a framework that allows them to
examine the impact of offshoring on wages, occupational choices, and the distribution of firm sizes.
For a review of the international trade literature on multinational firms, including offshoring and
outsourcing, see Antràs and Yeaple (2014).
2
  As Ed Leamer puts it, the distance effect on international trade is “possibly the only important finding
that has fully withstood the scrutiny of time and the onslaught of economic technique” in the literatures
of international economics and economic geography (see Leamer 2007, p. 11). Disdier and Head
(2008) find that the estimated negative impact of distance on international trade rose around the middle
of the century and has remained persistently high since then. Blum and Goldfarb (2006) show that the
distance effect holds even in the case of taste-dependent digital goods consumed over the Internet that
have no trading costs. The literature on economic geography similarly finds, in a variety of settings
(within the United States, for example, as in Bartelme 2015), that distance as a proxy for trade costs
retains a robust impact on the location of production and direction of trade.


                                                                                                        1
policies likely to affect the value of the national currency, or information about local
customer tastes, for example).

         Alternatively, what might be called the “Flash Boys” hypothesis (after Lewis
2014) suggests that location matters more importantly than ever in a 21st-century
foreign exchange market characterized by competition between high-frequency
traders for proximity to data-matching servers and in which speed of execution is
critical. 3 In this view, foreign exchange transactions will concentrate in a handful of
locations – those that possess data-matching servers and high-speed communications
with the rest of the world. Proximity to the country whose currency is being traded –
to the individuals and institutions responsible for policies likely to affect the value of
the currency being traded, for example – should no longer matter to the same extent as
before.

        The global foreign exchange market is an appealing case for several other
reasons. First, the foreign exchange market is one of the largest markets in the world
as measured by the volume of transactions, with an average daily turnover in excess
of $5 trillion. Second, the market is “immaterial” in the sense that what are provided
are financial services, as opposed to merchandise, which makes it highly relevant for
thinking about the geographical distribution of activity in a post-industrial age. Third,
the foreign exchange market has undergone a dramatic transformation since the late
1980s, reflecting the availability of cheap and efficient ICT and the growth of
electronic trading.

        We investigate how the geography of the foreign exchange market has been
affected by changes in ICT. Has ICT led to greater concentration of transactions in a
handful of major financial centers such as London, New York and Tokyo by allowing
more market participants to reap the advantages of being close to the matching servers
on which trades are executed electronically? Or has it enhanced the competitive
position of suppliers of these services in other places, who can impart local
knowledge to their customers but also now more easily link to matching servers
located in the major financial centers from afar? Has the landscape of the foreign
exchange market become “flashier” or “flatter,” in other words?

       How to investigate these questions is not obvious. Investments in technology
can affect the geographical distribution of economic activity, but changes in the
geographical distribution of economic activity also provide an incentive for
investments in technology. Examples of sharp, discontinuous, exogenous changes in
information and communication technology would help to pin down the causal effect,
but technological progress tends to be continuous rather than discrete, endogenous
3
  Courtesy of Michael Lewis’ book Flash Boys (Lewis 2014). Proximity means purchasing colocation
services, i.e. the ability of traders to locate their trading applications in the same data center as the
exchange’s matching engines and servers (see e.g. Brogaard et al. 2014; Biais, Foucault and Moinas
forthcoming). If anything, the growth of algorithmic trading (see e.g. Chaboud et al. 2014) has
increased sensitivity to location given the value of proximity to servers for, inter alia, high-frequency
trading.


                                                                                                       2
rather than exogenous. Instances where it is possible to identify the diffusion of
technology shocks over economic and geographical space are even fewer and further
between.

        But in the case of the foreign exchange market, we have just such a source of
exogenous change and spatial variability. This is the laying of submarine cables
starting in the late 1980s. These cables were not laid for purposes related to electronic
foreign exchange trading. Rather, their underwriters foresaw them as efficient and
profitable vehicles for long-distance telegraphic communication, telephone calls, fax
and internet transmission. Only over time was their utility for electronic trading of
foreign exchange and other financial instruments discovered. Moreover, the shape of
the submarine fiber-optical cable network is heavily influenced by geography, in that
cables can only connect terrestrial points with direct access to the ocean. 4 Since
cables were laid and came into use at different points in time, the network of active
submarine cables provides us with a source of exogenous changes that vary over both
space and time. This enables us to identify the causal effects of technology on
international financial transactions. 5

         Our identification strategy capitalizes on the special role in electronic foreign
exchange trading played by three of the largest financial centers: London, New York
and Tokyo. It is in these cities that the matching servers of Electronic Broking
Services (EBS) and Thomson Reuters, the leading platforms for electronic broking
and trading, have been located since the early 1990s. 6 It follows that a country’s
connection to the UK (for London), US (for New York) or Japan (for Tokyo) via a
submarine fiber-optic cable reduces latency time and increases bandwidth. In a world
where data processing needs grow exponentially and high-frequency trading accounts
for a rapidly growing share of FX trading, both bandwidth and latency time are
critically important. Bandwidth refers to the amount of data that can flow through a
cable per unit of time. Latency time refers to the speed in milliseconds at which
trading venues acknowledge an order after the order in question was sent. 7

4
  Landing points are carefully chosen to be in areas with gently sloping, sandy or silty sea-floors and
without strong current to minimize risks of damage. This explains why islands or peninsulas like Hong
Kong and Singapore are hubs where carrier networks interconnect or why Greenland could only be
connected in 2009. The global network of some 350 submarine fiber-optic cables that today make up
the backbone of the internet is shown in Figure 1.
5
  This is in the spirit of recent studies that use geographical attributes and related infrastructure as
sources of exogenous variation, such as Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005), who used direct
access to the Atlantic Ocean, or Acemoglu, García-Jimeno and Robinson (2015), who used colonial
royal roads built in Colombia in the 18th century, as the sources in question.
6
   Electronic trading also takes place on multibank electronic communication networks (such as
Currenex, Hotspot FX and FXall). But since these are typically US-based, they do not change the
story. They should also have a weaker impact on the location of trading than EBS and Thomson
Reuters servers, since in some cases they only provide pricing updates at set intervals. In addition,
other inter-dealer venues tend to restrict the number of quotes per second and demand certain fill ratios
(i.e. the amount of trades completed relative to quotes submitted).
7
  Latency time is sufficiently important that saving only six milliseconds in transmission time is enough
to justify the laying of the first submarine cable in a decade between New York and London, at a cost
of more than $300 million. This project, known as “Hibernia,” was first tested on 24 September 2015.


                                                                                                       3
        We posit that lower latency and greater bandwidth reduce the importance of
spatial frictions such as distance, information asymmetries (as in the analyses of Hau
2001, Bachetta and van Wincoop 2006, Menkhoff and Schmeling 2008, Lyons and
Moore 2009 and Moore and Payne 2011), domestic market liquidity (as in Krugman
and Venables 1995, 1996 and Gabaix and Maggiori forthcoming), and regulatory
frictions like capital controls (as in Friedman 1969). This effect is similar to a
reduction in transportation costs of buy and sell orders involving counterparties in
different locations; this will be attractive to high-frequency traders seeking to exploit
tiny, short-lived price discrepancies at the millisecond level, but also to other traders.
We also posit that lower latency and larger bandwidth reduce the fixed costs of
undertaking transactions electronically, insofar as they reduce the costs of aggregating
and matching buy and sell orders, as well as the costs of processing information and
data more generally.

        If lower latency and greater bandwidth matter, they will affect the geography
of foreign exchange trading, such as the shares of transactions in a currency that occur
onshore (in the issuing country) and offshore (in the major financial centers).
Specifically, the reduction in spatial frictions and transportation costs may encourage
onshore transactions to move offshore to the major financial centers, in the manner of
the standard “home market effect” (Krugman 1980, 1995) and consistent with the
“Flash Boys” hypothesis. The reduction in the fixed costs of trading currencies
locally, in contrast, can be expected to increase the attractiveness of transacting
through local sales desk and to help them retain or repatriate foreign exchange
transactions onshore, in line with the “Flat World” hypothesis.

        As an example of the relevance of submarine fiber-optic cables, consider
Figure 2, which shows the evolution of the volume of offshore foreign exchange
trading in Switzerland (Zurich) and Singapore. 8 As the figure shows, offshore trading
was 60% higher in Singapore as in Zurich in the mid-1990s. But offshore trading is
now more than twice as large in Singapore as in Zurich.

       Standard determinants in the literature on the location of foreign exchange
trading – factors like distance, market liquidity and regulation – are unlikely
explanations. 9 A more appealing explanation is that Singapore, which borders the

Further details are at http://www.hibernianetworks.com/hibernia-express/ (accessed on October 2,
2015). The Hibernia project is the only example of which we are aware of a submarine cable laid for
the purpose of electronic trading. The first cable built for electronic trading purposes seems to have
been Spread Networks’ terrestrial cable between Chicago and New Jersey in 2010; see below.
8
  “Offshore trading” in these centers refers to trading there of currencies other than their respective
national units (the Swiss franc and Singapore dollar, respectively).
9
  Distances between Zurich, Singapore and other markets have not changed. Capital controls in both
cases were and are virtually inexistent. That Zurich cracked down on money laundering and tax
evasion in recent years, under US pressure, is an unlikely culprit insofar as Singapore faced similar
pressure from the G20 (see e.g. OECD, 2009). To be sure, market liquidity – another factor
emphasized in the literature – has changed as trading in Singapore has grown much faster than in
Zurich, but this fact is not unrelated to the very factor whose behavior we are seeking to explain. In


                                                                                                     4
sea, has been a hub for fiber-optic submarine cables since 1999, while Switzerland,
which is landlocked, has not. Singapore took off as a center for foreign exchange
trading in the mid-2000s at the same time as high-frequency trading, while Zurich
missed the boat, as it were. That Singapore was directly connected to the internet
backbone, while Zurich was not, goes a long way toward explaining this difference. 10

        In the paper we estimate the effect of technological progress on the location of
transactions in 55 currencies between 1995 and 2013, utilizing a confidential BIS data
set. BIS statisticians identify the location of foreign exchange transactions on the
basis of the location of the initiating sales desk. They distinguish transactions
between those that are conducted within the borders of the issuing jurisdiction, i.e.
onshore, and those outside these borders, i.e. offshore in major financial centers like
London, New York and Tokyo or other smaller centers. We use these data to estimate
the effect of fiber-optic cable connections on location, operating both directly on the
share of offshore transactions and indirectly by altering the relative importance of
other standard determinants of location such as distance, domestic market liquidity
and regulation.

        We find that cable connections between local markets and matching servers in
the major financial centers lower the fixed costs of trading currencies and increase the
share of currency trades occurring onshore. At the same time, they attenuate standard
spatial frictions such as distance, the effect of local market liquidity, and restrictive
regulations that otherwise prevent transactions from moving offshore to the major
financial centers. Our estimates suggest that the second effect dominates – that the
landscape of the foreign exchange market has become “flashier,” not “flatter.”
Technology dampens the impact of spatial frictions by up to 80 percent and increases,
in net terms, the share of offshore trading by 21 percentage points. It also has
economically important implications for the distribution of foreign exchange
transactions across financial centers, boosting the share in global turnover of London,
the world’s largest trading venue, by as much as one-third.

        These issues matter for both markets and policy. They arose following the
launch of the euro in 1999, when London (the leading regional financial center) and
Frankfurt (where euro area monetary policy was made) competed to attract business
in the single currency. 11 They now arise in discussions of whether Shanghai, Tokyo,
London or another financial center will attract the lion’s share of international
transactions in renminbi or whether this business will be spread across them. They
could again be important for the British referendum on EU membership, insofar as

econometric analysis below we exclude trading of the domestic currency from our measure of domestic
foreign exchange market liquidity in order to minimize the potential problem of endogeneity that might
otherwise flow from this association.
10
   That transactions in Singapore rose strongly over the period rather than simply falling more slowly
than in Zurich would appear to support the “Flash Boys” hypothesis over the “Flat World” hypothesis,
but it will be important to test these hypotheses more systematically.
11
   That trading in the euro occurred heavily offshore, in London, and not in Frankfurt where euro area
monetary policy would again appear to support the “Flash Boys” hypothesis.


                                                                                                    5
“Brexit” could lead to the relocation of foreign exchange trading in euros (and
perhaps other currencies) away from the City of London to a financial center on the
continent or elsewhere. 12

        Section 2 provides a primer on electronic trading of foreign exchange and
submarine fiber-optic cables. Section 3 then describes the data, after which Section 4
presents some stylized facts, while Section 5 presents our identification strategy.
Section 6 discusses our empirical framework and hypotheses. Section 7 reviews the
empirical results. Section 8 reports robustness checks, after which Section 9 gauges
the distributional effects of cable connections across the world’s financial centers.
Section 10 concludes.

        2. Electronic Foreign Exchange Trading and Submarine Cables

       The foreign exchange market has been transformed since the late 1980s by the
advent of electronic broking and trading, reflecting the availability of less expensive
and more efficient information and communications technology. Electronic trading
dominates today’s foreign exchange market, with a share above 50% for all customer
segments and availability for instruments and investors across the globe. 13

        Electronic brokers were introduced in the inter-dealer foreign exchange market
as early as in 1992. Two platforms, EBS and Thomson Reuters, dominated this
market segment. They reduced transaction costs relative to traditional means of
dealing, like voice trading. In voice trading, a dealer would contact other dealers to
obtain information on prices available in the market and, presumably, complete the
deal at the best price offered. With the advent of electronic brokers, dealers could
immediately learn via a computer terminal the best available price and complete the
transaction then and there.

        In contrast to the inter-dealer market, which rapidly migrated to electronic
platforms, as late as 2000 the main trading channel for market participants other than
dealers remained direct contacts with dealers over the phone. As a result, the turn-of-
the-century foreign exchange market was still segmented between the inter-dealer
market (which was heavily electronic) and the retail-dealer market (which was not).
This segmentation was then reduced in the course of the subsequent decade. A multi-
bank trading system providing customers with competing quotes from different
dealers on a single page (Currenex) was launched in 1999. As other multi-bank
platforms such as FXall and Hotspot followed, transparency rose and transactions
costs fell further. Between 2001 and 2006 large dealers launched proprietary single-

12
   On the euro see e.g. HM Treasury (2003) and Cantillon and Pai-Ling (2008); on the renminbi see e.g.
He et al. (2015); on the risks associated with a Brexit for the City of London see e.g. Faulconbridge
(2015).
13
   See Rime and Schrimpf (2013), p. 34. Earlier, in 2001, market sources suggest, half of turnover in
the major currencies was conducted through electronic brokers, up from 40% in 1998 and roughly 10%
in 1995 (see Galati 2001, p. 39 and BIS 2001), although the share of turnover in other currencies was
far less.


                                                                                                    6
bank trading systems for their customers; examples of such systems include Barclays’
BARX, Deutsche Bank’s Autobahn and Citigroup’s Velocity. And starting around
2005, EBS and Thomson Reuters, which previously offered brokerage services to
dealers only, opened up to hedge funds and other traders. Their platforms
consequently evolved into leading venues for high-frequency trading firms.

        A key factor underlying the rise of electronic trading in the foreign exchange
market was the internet and its backbone, i.e. the network of some 350 submarine
fiber-optic cables that connect computers around the world. An important feature of
this network, highly relevant to our analysis, is that it was not laid for purposes related
to electronic foreign exchange trading. Establishing this fact requires us to review
some of the relevant history. 14

        The first submarine cables were laid to carry telegraph signals. Samuel Morse
(of Morse Code fame) submerged a copper cable covered by tarred hemp and rubber
in New York Harbor in 1842 and demonstrated the feasibility of transmitting
telegraphic signals. Cables covered with gutta-percha (gum from gutta-percha trees)
connecting Great Britain with the European continent were then laid starting in the
1850s. A successful transatlantic cable followed, after eight years of failed attempts,
in 1866. Other copper cables (more precisely, cables of copper wire surrounded by
rubber or gutta-percha, in turn surrounded by an outer layer of iron or steel wire)
subsequently connected a growing range of locations.

        Early submarine cables were subject to problems of reliability and capacity.
In the absence of repeater amplifiers, high voltages were required to transmit signals
over long distances, creating distortion, limiting carrying capacity and heightening the
risk of short-circuiting. Thick, costly copper wires were required to slow signal loss.
The physical cables were often weakened or disrupted by storms and damaged by
currents and fishing trawlers.

        Only in the 1890s did the science of transmitting higher frequencies, essential
for data and voice, begin to be established. Another breakthrough essential for long-
distance telephonic communication was development of a practical vacuum-tube-
based repeater amplifier in the opening years of the 20th century. Commercialization
was then delayed by the two world wars and the Great Depression. The first modern
submarine cable, TAT-1 (Transatlantic No. 1), a coaxial cable insulated using
polyethylene (rather than gutta-percha) and utilizing vacuum tubes as repeaters, was
finally laid starting in 1955. TAT-1 connected Oban, Scotland with Clarenville,
Newfoundland. It was underwritten by AT&T, the Canadian Overseas
Telecommunications Corporation, and the UK General Post Office.                  When
inaugurated on September 25, 1956, it had 36 separate channels, enabling it to carry
35 simultaneous telephone calls along with 22 telegraph lines on the 36th channel.
The 1960s saw the development of coaxial cables of somewhat greater reliability and

14
     A detailed account of the early history of submarine cables is Wenzlhuemer (2013).


                                                                                          7
carrying capacity that operated with narrower bandwidths and utilized transistors
rather than vacuum tubes as repeaters. 15

        Coaxial cables were superseded in the 1980s by fiber-optic cables. 16 Fiber-
optic cables transfer data at a speed of 180,000-200,000 kilometers per second (i.e. the
speed of light in glass), resulting in latency per kilometer of 5 to 5.5 microseconds (a
10 to 11 millisecond delay for a roundtrip of 1,000 kilometers); latency time will be
important to our subsequent story. Fiber optic cable connections also increase
bandwidth (i.e. the amount of data that can be put through per unit of time)
significantly relative to coaxial cables. They reduce losses in signal transmission over
long distances. The first submarine fiber-optic cable, TAT-8, entered service in
December 1988. Financed by a consortium led by AT&T, France Télécom (now
Orange) and British Telecom, TAT-8 had a branching unit underwater, off the coast
of Great Britain, enabling it to connect to both the US and France. It had a capacity of
40,000 circuits, allowing it to carry as many as 40,000 simultaneous telephone calls or
similar communications, a tenfold increase relative to coaxial cables.

        Initially, this cable, not unlike its 1850s predecessor, had reliability problems.
The absence of electrical interference shielding caused electrical current it carried to
attract sharks, which attacked the cable. (Sharks are subject to electroreception, the
biological ability to perceive electric current, which sets off feeding frenzies.)
Subsequent cables, starting with PTAT-1 in 1989, were fitted with shark shielding,
enhancing reliability. This is the point in time that we would date the initial
availability of the information and communication technology needed to support long-
distance electronic foreign exchange trading.

        PTAT-1 was also the first fiber optic submarine cable to be financed entirely
privately. It was underwritten by a US company, TelOptik, and by Cable and
Wireless plc in the U.K, which built it – importantly – to carry telephonic traffic in
competition with AT&T and British Telecom.

         The submarine cables laid between 1989 and the early 2000s were
overwhelmingly financed by telecommunication companies to accommodate general
telecommunication needs, namely long-distance telegraphic communication,
telephone calls, fax and internet transmission. They were not underwritten to
facilitate electronic trading (see below and Table A1 for information on the owners of
the cables connected with London, New York and Tokyo in 2002). 17 2010 was a
turning point, when Spread Networks unveiled an 827 miles terrestrial cable running

15
   In coaxial cables, the copper or copper-plated steel wire is surrounded by an insulating layer which is
in turn enclosed by a metallic shield.
16
   Fiber-optic cables are made by stretching glass (or silica) to roughly the diameter of a human hair.
17
    Hibernia Atlantic, which was placed in receivership in 2001, was financed by Tyco Submarine
Systems for 360networks (a telecommunication company) in 2000 for $962 million and only later
purchased by Hibernia (i.e. the same company which more recently has financed the laying of Hibernia
Express between New York and London).


                                                                                                        8
through mountains and under rivers from Chicago (home to the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange where derivatives are traded) to New Jersey (home of the Nasdaq data
center). This cable reduced latency time from 17 to 13 milliseconds (see Lewis,
2014); it is the first example of which we are aware of a terrestrial cable laid for the
sole purpose of electronic trading. Hibernia Express, which was tested in September
2015, is the first submarine cable laid for the express purpose of electronic trading.
The existence of these recent cables does not affect our identification strategy,
however. As we explain in more detail below, we only use for identification
submarine cables laid between 1989 and 2002 (i.e. the year by when all countries in
our sample were connected to either London, New York or Tokyo), i.e. almost a
decade before investors sought to lay them with electronic trading in mind. 18

       By 2006, 99 per cent of international communications traffic was carried by
submarine cables, the remainder carried by satellite. Fiber-optic cables remain the
principal conduit for data transmission for the internet in general and electronic
trading of foreign exchange in particular, because submarine fiber-optic cables still
have much lower latency, larger bandwidth and reliability performance than satellite
transmission.

        Might earlier telephonic cables, before the advent of fiber optics, have had a
similar effect on the location of foreign exchange trades? We doubt this. Electronic
trading developed because market participants gained access to high-speed internet
connections, which are important to high-frequency trading. Such high-frequency
trading was not possible with earlier telephonic cables, which transmitted data and
orders less quickly and reliably. Electronic trading also developed because market
infrastructure (EBS and Thomson Reuters servers) was now able to handle large
numbers of simultaneous orders at high frequency. Such infrastructure was not
feasible (it was non-existent) before the 1990s because it requires large data storage
capacity and fast computing, which were beyond technical capabilities in the earlier
period.

        3. Data

        We take our data on the network of submarine fiber-optic cables from
TeleGeography’s interactive Submarine Cable Map. 19 These data were collected by
Global Bandwidth Research, a consultancy specializing in data and analysis of long-
distance networks and the submarine cable market. They provide information on 368
submarine cables starting in 1989. The information reported includes the cable’s
profile, name, year when it was ready for service, length, owners, and geographical
coordinates of its landing points.
18
   In technical terms, this means that the existence of a cable link can be regarded as econometrically
exogenous with respect to the share of foreign exchange trading occurring offshore. Still more recent
cables, backed by Google, connecting Florida with Brazil, Southeast Asia with Japan, and Japan with
California, are similarly being built with the Internet in mind and not high speed trading.
19
   TeleGeography has made the source code behind the interactive Submarine Cable Map available for
download at https://github.com/telegeography/www.submarinecablemap.com.


                                                                                                     9
        For data on the location of foreign exchange trading, we obtained confidential
estimates of onshore, offshore and global foreign exchange turnover by currency from
the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). We have data for 55 currencies
(including 12 euro legacy currencies) in seven years (1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007,
2010 and 2013). The data were collected in the context of the BIS’s triennial central
bank surveys of foreign exchange and derivatives market activity. 20

        BIS statisticians define foreign exchange turnover as the daily average of the
notional amount (in US dollar equivalents) of all transactions struck in April of the
year of the triennial survey. 21 They produce data in “net-net” terms. In other words,
they adjust for local double-counting – i.e. for transactions between reporting dealers
located in the same country – as well as for cross-border double-counting. 22

        Foreign exchange turnover is allocated across countries according to where the
transaction is arranged. Since 2004, BIS statisticians have specified that they mean
the location of the initiating sales desk (which may not coincide with the location of
the trading desk). 23 For example, when an employee of a savings bank in Berlin asks
his or her foreign exchange dealer at Deutsche Bank Frankfurt to buy Y50 million
against euros, this transaction will be recorded as having taken place in Germany,
because the sales desk is in Germany. Actual trading could take place elsewhere, for
example by traders at Deutsche Bank London. 24 BIS statisticians use the trading desk
to determine the location of a deal when no sales desk is involved. 25 Discussions with


20
   These surveys offer the most comprehensive and internationally consistent information on the size
and structure of the foreign exchange market although, as King and Mallo (2010, p. 71) observe, “the
underlying data remain largely unexplored.” An exception is e.g. He et al. (2015), who do not however
focus on the impact of technology on the location of FX transactions, as here.
21
   A broad array of foreign exchange instruments are covered, including spot transactions, outright
forwards, foreign exchange swaps, currency swaps, currency options and other foreign exchange
products, including nondeliverable forwards. Dealers report their transactions in these instruments with
other reporting dealers, other financial institutions and non-financial customers. Each transaction is
recorded once, and offsetting contracts are not netted. There is no distinction between sales and
purchases. Direct cross-currency transactions (e.g. pound sterling for Swiss francs) are counted as
single transactions. Transactions that use a vehicle currency (e.g. the US dollar) are counted as two
separate transactions. See King and Mallo (2010) for further details. The data include transactions in
dark pools such as MidFX and BGC.
22
   For instance, local inter-dealer transactions in Germany are halved to obtain the correct turnover for
Germany. As another example, transactions between a reporting dealer located in the United Kingdom
and a reporting dealer located in France are halved to obtain the correct estimate of global turnover.
23
   The nationality of the reporting dealer is not relevant in this context. For example, when UBS
Frankfurt reports trades to the Bundesbank, these transactions are allocated to Germany.
24
   In reality the dealer will not execute every single trade individually because transaction costs would
be excessive and he/she would take credit risk for each transaction. Dealers will instead add additional
trading orders to their dealing books, net FX positions internally (via Autobahn, BARX or Velocity, for
example) and trade the residual either on exchange platforms (EBS, Reuters, etc.) or via OTC
transactions. From a BIS perspective, what matters is the location where the FX book is aggregated and
netted (i.e. at the back-office).
25
   Given the growing use of electronic execution methods, moreover, it can be expected that in the next
BIS Triennial Survey (which is to be conducted in April 2016) the sales contact of the electronic


                                                                                                      10
foreign exchange dealers suggest that banks net and aggregate their positions in the
same location (in the back-office) where they trade (in the front-office). In other
words, there are no major differences between sales and trading desks in most cases. 26
The distinction might still be more important in the case of smaller financial centers
where the sales desk might remain local but the trading desk might be in a larger
center, such as London, New York or Tokyo. But readers should note that when a
bank decides to relocate its trading desk to a major financial center, it may move its
sales team there, too.

         4. Stylized Facts

        Figure 3 shows that in the course of the last two decades transactions in
foreign exchange have increasingly taken place offshore, in locations other than the
country issuing one of the currencies involved in the trade. The figure shows the
evolution between 1995 and 2013 of the weighted and unweighted global averages of
foreign exchange trading occurring offshore (weighted in the left-hand-side panel,
unweighted at the right). 27 The global weighted average rose over this period by five
percentage points, to about 78% in 2013. Insofar as this estimate is considerably
higher than the theoretical lower bound of 50% (one of the two currencies involved in
a foreign exchange trade undertaken in a particular national market is the currency of
a foreign country, meaning that it is necessarily traded offshore), this confirms that a
substantial fraction of transactions occur in third markets.

        From 1995 to 2013 the global unweighted average of the individual currency
shares of foreign exchange trading occurring offshore essentially tripled, from 20 to
60 per cent. (Note that the unweighted arithmetic average, which weights every unit
equally, is not subject to the 50% lower bound.)                  This suggests that
internationalization (trading in third markets) affected not only major currencies like
the US dollar but also other units.

        Not only does a substantial fraction of offshore transactions occur in markets
such as London, New York or Tokyo, but that share is increasing. This is evident
from Figure 4, which shows the evolution between 1995 and 2013 of scaled and
unscaled Herfindahl indices of concentration of global foreign exchange transactions
occurring offshore in these three financial centers (left-hand-side panel), as well as the
combined share of global transactions they account for (right-hand side panel). Both
charts show a clear upward trend, testifying to the importance of London, New York
and Tokyo in the global market for offshore foreign exchange transactions.


platform who services the client, or the trading desk or the electronic matching engine, will be used to
determine the location of a deal when no sales desk is involved (see BIS 2015).
26
   This is consistent with the observation that there were no major breaks in the data when the BIS
changed its definition of trading location in 2004 from the trading desk to the sales desk.
27
   The weighted average is the sum of foreign exchange trading occurring offshore in all currencies
scaled by the sum of total (onshore and offshore) foreign exchange trading in all currencies. The
unweighted average is the arithmetic average of the individual currency shares traded offshore.


                                                                                                     11
       That internationalization (trading in third markets) involved not just major
currencies but also smaller units is again evident from Figure 5, which shows the
evolution between 1995 and 2013 of the share of foreign exchange trading occurring
offshore for each of the 55 currencies in our sample between 1995 and 2013. 28 The
figure is a heat map, whose shades darken over time in line with the growing
importance of trading occurring offshore for all units.

        In addition to these changes over time, there is heterogeneity among
currencies in the extent of foreign exchange trading offshore. Note in Figure 6, which
focuses on a selection of units, the relatively high shares of the US dollar and also the
euro and Japanese yen, compared to the relatively low shares of several emerging
market currencies, like the Korean won and Indian rupee, while still other emerging
market units have high shares (for example the Polish zloty). In total, only 9 of the 55
units had an offshore share of less than 50%. In other words, most currencies actively
trade offshore.

         5. Identification

        Our identification strategy capitalizes on the special role of the UK, the US
and Japan in electronic foreign exchange trading. It is in these countries that
matching servers of EBS and/or Thomson Reuters – the leading platforms for
electronic broking and trading – are located. EBS servers have been located in the
UK, US and Japan since 1990. Thomson Reuters has servers in both the United
Kingdom and the United States. 29

        Our identification assumption is that a direct or indirect connection to the UK,
US or Japan via a submarine fiber-optic cable reduces latency time and losses in
signal transmission while increasing bandwidth for a large range of internet-based
applications. It therefore enhances the attraction of transacting in the location that
now possesses a high-speed connection to an electronic platform. It reduces the costs
of undertaking transactions electronically through EBS and/or Thomson Reuters,
rather than other means or in other venues. The reduction in latency is especially
attractive to high-frequency traders seeking to exploit tiny, short-lived price
discrepancies at the millisecond level and to an extent also for other traders. 30 And
lower latency together with larger bandwidth reduce the costs of aggregating and

28
   Darker shades of grey indicate higher shares of trading occurring offshore (actual shares are not
reported for confidentiality reasons). The color white indicates that the data are unavailable or simply
not reported.
29
   EBS is predominantly used for transactions involving the US dollar, euro, yen and Swiss franc, while
Thomson Reuters is predominantly used for transactions involving the pound sterling, the Australian,
Canadian and New Zealand dollars, and emerging market units.
30
   It has been estimated that 30 to 35% of foreign exchange trading on EBS is HFT-driven. See Rime
and Schrimpf (2013), p. 40. The reduction in signal loss transmission and the increase in bandwidth
enable traders to aggregate large amounts in real time of buy and sell orders in spot, forward and other
derivative markets. This helps to ease price discovery and matching, which is convenient for all market
participants, not only high-frequency traders. This is also why sales desk, which remain crucial to non-
HFT, non-dealer market participants, are important to determine the location of trading.


                                                                                                     12
matching large numbers of buys and sells orders, which is also attractive to other
market participants. 31

         If these gains are sufficiently large, they will affect the geography of trading
and the relative importance of standard spatial frictions, i.e. distance, domestic market
liquidity and other frictions like capital controls (more on this below). That cable
connections attenuate the effect of the frictions in question, which otherwise prevent
transactions from moving offshore to the major financial centers, is not unlike the
standard “home market effect” (Krugman 1980, 1995). Production of the varieties of
a differentiated good or service (here exchange rate transactions) moves to the larger
market (here major financial centers like London, New York or Tokyo) under
monopolistic competition (here the restricted number of electronic platforms like EBS
or Thomson Reuters that dominate the electronic foreign exchange market or the
restricted number of dealers, like Citi, Barclays, Deutsche or UBS, that dominate the
OTC foreign exchange market) and increasing returns (here e.g. in the self-reinforcing
effect of greater market liquidity; in the concentration of suppliers of intermediate
goods or specialized services, such as legal, IT and accounting services; or in the
availability of skilled and talented staff), when transportation costs are lowered (here
latency is lowered and bandwidth increased through cable connections) and exported
to the rest of the world from the market in question. 32

        But the effect could go in the opposite direction, to the extent that cable
connections between local markets and matching servers in the major financial centers
lower the fixed costs of trading currencies locally by easing access to financial
information and increasing bandwidth, they enhance the competitiveness of local sales
desks and help them keep or repatriate foreign exchange transactions domestically.
(To continue with the analogy with Krugman’s model discussed above, production of
the varieties of the differentiated good or service in question becomes more domestic
when their fixed costs of production are reduced.) In other words, the services
provided by the sales desk in Frankfurt discussed above could become more appealing
to the customer in Berlin, since the sales desk can now have access to a more timely
and broader set of quotes and other financial information. It can now communicate
more quickly with a matching server in London, providing the Berlin-based customer
with a better price while also conveying (in German) useful Frankfurt-based
information about relevant monetary (and other policy) initiatives. And more
generally it can match a larger number of transactions and process a larger amount of
information and data.




31
   That bandwidth is crucial for financial trading is also evident from the fact that Singapore’s
bandwidth consumption was three times larger than Korea’s in 2012, although its population is ten
times smaller, according to data by TeleGeography.
32
   One difference with Krugman (1980)’s model is that he considered two types of goods of different
varieties whereas we focus here on one type of services, i.e. foreign exchange transactions in different
units.


                                                                                                     13
        The direction of the effect and how the impact of other factors like time-zone
differences is altered are what we will seek to uncover.

        Our analysis takes advantage of heterogeneity across countries and over time
in when different countries were connected to the network of submarine fiber-optic
cables, either directly or indirectly. Here “directly” means that there is a point-to-
point submarine fiber-optic cable connecting country x to the UK, US or Japan.
“Indirectly” means that country x is connected to country y and country y is in turn
connected to the UK, US or Japan. In practice we take into account indirect
connections up to the ninth order.

        Figure 7 shows the year of first direct or indirect connection to the UK, US or
Japan. France and the Netherlands were connected to the UK in 1989. 33 South
Africa, to take a contrasting example, was connected much later, in 2002 (as were
other African countries). 34

        Figures 8 and 9 illustrate the growing density of the submarine cable network.
They show the network of countries directly or indirectly connected to the UK in
1998 and 2013, respectively. 35 Countries in time zones corresponding to Asian
trading hours are shown as light grey nodes, against grey nodes for those located in
time zones corresponding to European trading hours and dark grey nodes for US
trading hours. Solid lines indicate countries with highly liquid units – those that are in
the top third by FX turnover – while dashed lines are units in the middle third, and
dotted lines are illiquid units in the bottom third. The contrast between the two
figures is pronounced. That the network of connections to the UK has grown
markedly over time, and improved access to the matching servers of EBS and
Thomson Reuters for electronic trading is readily apparent.

        6. Empirical Framework and Hypotheses

        We estimate the determinants of foreign exchange trading offshore, building
on the literature emphasizing spatial frictions such as distance, domestic market
liquidity, and regulations such as capital controls. We account for the possibility of
unobservable currency and time effects by estimating the following specification:

     𝑦𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐴𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 + 𝛽2 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦                        (1)
                    + 𝛽3 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝛃′𝟒 𝐗 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝜆𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡




33
   France and the UK were connected through a cable called UK-France 3 (owned by B.T., Orange and
Vodafone); the Netherlands and the UK were connected through a cable called Farland North (owned
by B.T.).
34
   Through a cable connecting a large part of Africa’s western shore called SAT-3/WASC owned by
some 30 telecom companies from advanced and emerging market economies.
35
   We report here only the countries in our sample.


                                                                                              14
where i and t denote currency and time; y is the share of trading occurring offshore for
the unit issued by country i in year t; αi are currency-level effects and λt are time fixed
effects. We estimate Eq. (1) using a panel tobit estimator and a panel generalized
linear model with a logit link (both with random effects). Tobit is appropriate insofar
as a number of observations of the dependent variable are censored from below. 36 We
also report results using linear panel and pooled OLS estimators, reporting standard
errors robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by trading zone, although these
estimates do not take into account the boundedness of the dependent variable. 37

         The first friction we consider is information asymmetries across participants in
the foreign exchange market, which are key to exchange rate determination in the
analysis of Bachetta and van Wincoop (2006) and to the vehicle role of a particular
unit in the model of Lyons and Moore (2009). 38 We assume, other things being equal,
that transactions will tend to take place where information about the currency or
currencies being traded is most easily obtained.

        The precise nature of these information asymmetries matters importantly. The
“local information” hypothesis posits that traders outside the country of issuance of a
particular unit face an information disadvantage and trade less profitably because of
culture, language and distance (Hau 2001). Foreign exchange traders further distant,
in the relevant economic sense, from policy-decision-making centers are more
reluctant to trade than market participants located closer to these centers because they
are further from institutions that generate or interpret public information, such as
central banks, ministries or national statistical institutes. They are also further from
customer order flows, including those from the central banks in question when they
intervene in the foreign exchange market (Menkhoff and Schmeling 2008). The local
information hypothesis thus suggests that traders located in the country of issuance
possess more and better information, implying that the share of trades in a currency
that occur offshore should decline with distance to London, New York and Tokyo.

        In contrast, the “financial center” hypothesis suggests that traders in large
financial centers enjoy an information advantage over traders in smaller centers (see
the discussion in Hau 2001 in relation to the equity market). Traders in large financial

36
   In some cases data submitted to the BIS does not distinguish clearly between negligible and zero
trading activity. For discussion of why panel GLM might be especially relevant in our context see
below.
37
   Specifically we distinguish the three time zones corresponding to Asian trading hours, European
trading hours and US trading hours. We effectively assume that observations within time zones are
correlated in some unknown way but that observations across time zones are not correlated. This
allows us to take into account variations in liquidity over the trading day and across time zones, as
discussed e.g. in Bollersev and Domowitz (1993) and Huang and Masulis (1999).
38
   In the model of Lyons and Moore, for instance, information is dispersed across market participants
who differ e.g. in their ability to observe order-flow conveying price-relevant information. In this
model, the vehicle role of a particular unit depends on the ease of execution of informed trade, i.e. on
the ability to hide informed trades. The vehicle role of a currency is determined by its price-impact: the
lower the latter is, the more the currency will be used as a vehicle. Vehicleness is hence greater in
currencies with deeper markets (Lyons and Moore 2009, p. 220).


                                                                                                       15
centers may have access to proprietary data bases or in-house research which can
result in significant economies of scale and scope. They may benefit from a larger
customer base and better access to private information about order flows, which may
also help them forecast and exploit the future trading interests of smaller traders
(Moore and Payne 2011). 39 Since information about currencies is generated mainly in
London, New York and Tokyo according to this hypothesis, distance from there to the
country issuing a currency should have a zero or insignificant effect on share traded
offshore or may even have a positive effect, since traders in a local market further
removed from these global financial centers will be at an even greater informational
disadvantage.

        Our measure of information asymmetries is the shortest distance in time zones
between the country issuing currency i and London, New York or Tokyo. 40 We
prefer hour distance over physical distance since traders in adjoining time zones will
receive news more or less simultaneously (when traders in very different time zones
may be sleeping). Focusing on hour distance also allows us to take into account
differences in liquidity arising from non-overlapping trading hours, which matter for
computer-run algorithmic or automated trading strategies seeking to transact with
sleeping agents, this factor being emphasized in studies of the microstructure of the
foreign exchange market such as in e.g. Bollersev and Domowitz (1993) and Huang
and Masulis (1999). This choice of “information distance” is consequential:
Johannesburg, for example, is more than 13,000 kilometers away from London but
only one time zone ahead. For this reason we also consider physical distance in
robustness checks below. 41 We would expect that β1 ≥ 0 if the “large financial
center/institutions” hypothesis is true; in contrast we would expect that β1 < 0 if the
“local information” hypothesis is correct.

       The second spatial friction we consider is domestic market liquidity. More
liquid markets allow transactions to be undertaken at lower cost. Bid-ask spreads are
narrower, and traders can buy and sell larger blocks without moving prices. Where
local markets are small and illiquid, the appeal of offshore markets like London
known for their depth and liquidity will be particularly strong; conversely, where local
markets are liquid, they are likely to capture a larger share of trades of the local




39
   Moore and Payne (2011) find evidence that foreign exchange traders on large floors tend to have
larger aggressive (initiated trade) impact than those on smaller floors, in line with the hypothesis that
the size of an institution matters for its information advantage. As they put it, larger institutions are
likely to observe a larger share of customer order flows and to have access to better research. We are
aware that we have invoked information based on order flows in connection with both the financial
center hypothesis and the local information hypothesis (both in this paragraph and its predecessor).
40
   We take hour distance between London and Frankfurt for the euro.
41
   Hau (2001) calculated physical distance relative to Frankfurt, which he posited to be the largest
financial center for trading of German equities. Similarly, Menkhoff and Schmeling (2008), in their
study of the Russian foreign exchange market, calculated distances between Moscow or St Petersburg
and centers in other Russian regions.


                                                                                                      16
currency. 42 Our measure of domestic market liquidity is the volume of transactions in
foreign currencies in country i (in USD trillion). 43 In the baseline model we exclude
transactions in the domestic currency in order to avoid endogeneity with the
dependent variable. We anticipate that β2 < 0; transactions in units issued by
countries with relatively deep and liquid domestic financial markets tend to be
undertaken onshore. In robustness checks, we also consider the logarithm of this
variable, as well as the volume of transactions in all currencies (both foreign and
domestic).

        The third set of frictions is restrictions on capital flows. Friedman (1969)
argued in a classic article that taxing financial transactions onshore provides
incentives for business to migrate offshore (where capital controls are equivalent in
this context to a tax on purchases and sales of a foreign currency). 44 That controls are
instrumental to the development of offshore currency markets is widely argued by
market participants (see e.g. HSBC 2011 and Credit Suisse 2013). 45 In some cases
these offshore markets have developed through trading in non-deliverable forward
contracts which enable investors there to actively trade claims indexed to a currency
despite controls maintained by the issuing country that limit their access to the
underlying currency itself (McCauley, Shu and Ma 2014). 46

        As a measure of restrictions on capital flows, we use the time-varying indices
of de jure capital account openness constructed by Fernandez et al. (2015). These
capture the overall importance of capital controls in country i and in year t. 47 We
anticipate that β3 > 0; transactions in units issued by countries with closed capital


42
   This can also be rationalized by referring to models in which concentration of an activity in a
particular location has positive feedbacks on the advantages of further concentrating that activity in that
location. See the models and arguments of Krugman and Venables (1995, 1996).
43
   We take the total volume of transactions in euro area members for the euro.
44
   His example illustrating the power of this hypothesis was the development of the Eurodollar market
in London as a response to the adoption by the US of Regulation Q in the 1960s. “The most important
regulation that has stimulated the development of the Euro-dollar market [i.e. of markets in dollars
outside the US] has been Regulation Q, under which the Federal Reserve has fixed maximum interest
rates that member banks could pay on time deposits. Whenever these ceilings became effective, Euro-
dollar deposits, paying a higher interest rate, became more attractive than U.S. deposits, and the Euro-
dollar market expanded.” (Friedman 1969, p. 4).
45
   For instance, entities that are not registered in China are not allowed to participate in onshore foreign
exchange transactions of renminbi (also known as “CNY”), which must be executed via designated
foreign exchange banks. Offshore entities can receive and pay renminbis to settle trade in goods
transactions under certain conditions, however. This has contributed to the development of an offshore
market of renminbis in Hong Kong (also known as “CNH”) in the 2000s in which the renminbi can be
freely transferred between accounts and across banks (although transfers to/from the mainland remain
tightly regulated).
46
   Non-deliverable forwards are forward exchange agreements settled with a single US dollar payment.
They hence allow market participants to obtain exposure to the underlying local unit without having to
deliver it (unlike deliverable forwards). Transactions in non-deliverable forwards are included in the
BIS data.
47
   The index runs from zero (no controls) to one (full controls). For the euro we take the average of the
index for the euro area members.


                                                                                                         17
accounts have an incentive to migrate offshore. In robustness checks we also separate
controls on inflows and outflows.

         In additional sensitivity tests, we control for other variables (denoted X in eq.
1 above) cited in previous literature as bearing on the geography of the foreign
exchange market, and whose omission from the baseline specification could
conceivably bias the results. Such variables include trade openness (measured as
exports plus imports scaled by GDP, constructed from IMF data); financial openness
(measured by net external financial assets scaled by GDP, using updated data from
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2007); a dummy variable for exchange rate flexibility, which
equals one if a country has a managed exchange rate or a float, and zero otherwise,
using the updated classification of Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004); and a metric
of dollar-funded carry trades, namely the difference between the short-term local-
currency interest rate in country i and in year t and the corresponding US interest
rate. 48

      We estimate the effect of technology on the geography of the foreign
exchange market as follows:

     𝑦𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐴𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 + 𝛽2 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦                               (2)
                    + 𝛽3 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝛽4 𝐶𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑠
                    + 𝛃′𝟓 [(𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐴𝑠𝑦𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠
                    + 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 + 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠)
                    × 𝐶𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑠] + 𝛃′𝟔 𝐗 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝜆𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡



                𝑖𝑛𝑓   𝑙𝑖𝑞   𝑐𝑎𝑝
with 𝛃𝟓 = [𝛽5 , 𝛽5 , 𝛽5 ] and we consider the following null hypothesis:

                                                                    𝑗
                      𝐻0 : 𝛽4 = 0 or ∀ 𝑗 ∈ {𝑖𝑛𝑓, 𝑙𝑖𝑞, 𝑐𝑎𝑝}, 𝛽5 = 0.


       Our baseline measure of technology is a dummy variable that equals one if
country i is connected directly or indirectly by a fiber-optic submarine cable to the
UK, US or Japan (the three countries where matching servers of EBS and Thomson
Reuters are located) and zero otherwise. In robustness checks, we also consider point-
to-point connections only, as well as the number of separate cable connections.



48
   We used money market rates (and Treasury bill rates when they are not available). In robustness
checks we also obtained estimates using proxies of yen-funded carry trades, which gave similar results.
Discussions with market participants suggested that yen-short/long kiwi (or aussie) dollar carry trade
strategies have been popular in Tokyo in recent years, for instance. The long leg of the transaction was
often broken in two segments, i.e. a US dollar-yen onshore transaction and a US dollar-kiwi dollar
offshore transaction. This contributed to increase offshore transactions in Japan, regardless of cable
connections.


                                                                                                     18
        Rejecting the null hypothesis suggests that technology has an impact on the
geography of the foreign exchange market that can be direct, as captured by the
coefficient β4, or indirect, i.e. via the interacted determinants of foreign exchange
trading occurring offshore, as captured by the vector of coefficients β5. The signs of
β4 and of the β5 coefficients indicate whether the cable connection increases or
decreases trading occurring offshore through its effect on the fixed costs of trading
and whether it amplifies or reduces the impact of frictions such as information
asymmetries, domestic market liquidity and capital controls on the location of foreign
exchange trading. The net effect from the different coefficients indicate whether
cable connections lower the costs of trading locally, in line with the “Flat World”
hypothesis, or whether they cause trading to move offshore to major financial centers,
in contrast, in line with the “Flash Boys” hypothesis and the “home market” effect
discussed above.

         7. Empirical Results

        Table 1 reports estimates of equation 1. Panel tobit estimates with random
effects are reported in columns 1 and 2; panel GLM estimates are in columns 3 and 4;
linear panel estimates with random effects are in columns 5 and 6; and pooled OLS
estimates with country fixed effects are in column 7. Standard errors in columns 3 to
7 are robust to heteroskedasticity and those in columns 5 to 7 are clustered by time
zone. Time fixed effects are included in all columns.

        The estimated effect of information asymmetries on the share of trading
offshore is negative and statistically significant, consistent with the “local
information” hypothesis. The coefficient in column 1 suggests that each hour
difference in time zone relative to the US, the UK or Japan lowers the share of
offshore trading of the currency issued by the country located in the time zone in
question by 12 percentage points.

        The estimated effect of domestic market liquidity on offshore trading is also
negative, as anticipated, and significant. The coefficient estimate in column 1 implies
that the share of offshore trading of a currency issued by a country where the volume
of local FX transactions is USD 250 billion larger (a large amount by today’s
standards) is about 10 percentage points lower. 49

      The effects of capital controls are more varied. The panel tobit estimates in
columns 1 and 2 suggest that their effect is insignificant, as do the panel GLM and


49
  Recall that domestic market liquidity is expressed in $trillion. $250 billion is not too far off the
volume of offshore FX trading in Singapore or Zurich as of 2013. Readers will remember that we
exclude here transactions in domestic currencies from the metric of domestic market liquidity to avoid
spurious correlations. This result may possibly reflect agglomeration effects arising in a self-
perpetrating way, as in Krugman and Venables (1995, 1996). It is also consistent with models
emphasizing financial frictions, such as the limited risk-bearing capacity of financiers or international
imbalances in the demand for financial assets, as in Gabaix and Maggiori (forthcoming).


                                                                                                      19
pooled OLS estimates of columns 3, 4 and 7. 50 The linear random-effects estimates in
columns 5 and 6, in contrast, suggest that the impact of controls is negative and
significant – that the tighter are controls the less a currency is traded offshore. This is
at variance with Friedman’s hypothesis that capital controls (since they are equivalent
to a tax) encourage foreign exchange transactions to migrate offshore. However, it
may be that this result reflects omitted variable bias, in particular the effect of
technology, as we show below.

        Estimates controlling for trade integration, financial integration, the exchange
rate regime and carry trades are similar (see column 2 of Table 1). So are the panel
GLM and linear panel random-effects estimates (in columns 3 to 6 of Table 1). The
coefficient on exchange rate flexibility is positive and significant, which is consistent
with our findings on the effect of capital controls insofar as exchange rate flexibility
and capital openness typically go hand-in-hand. The coefficient on carry trades is
negative and also significant, which suggests that high local interest rates relative to
the US encourage market participants to invest in local money markets and exchange
funding in dollars, yen (or another low-interest rate unit) against local currency
onshore to that end.

         Table 2 turns to the impact of technology, reporting estimates of equation 2
where the share of foreign exchange trading taking place offshore is regressed on the
standard determinants of the geography of foreign exchange trading as well as the
direct and interacted effect of a submarine fiber-optic cable connection to the UK, the
US or Japan. Both point-to-point connections and connections via third countries,
recall, are considered here. 51

        Consider again the panel tobit estimates in columns 1 and 2. The main
findings of Table 1 for the determinants of the geography of foreign exchange trading
remain broadly unchanged, with the estimated coefficients now being if anything
larger in economic magnitude. 52 In addition, the effect of connection to a submarine
fiber-optic cable is negative and typically statistically significant. This implies that a
cable connection makes it more likely that a country will be able to retain (or
repatriate) trading in its currency at home, other things being equal, presumably
because the costs of trading locally is lower i.e. local sales desks can now more
quickly and efficiently communicate with the matching servers in offshore financial
centers and are hence more competitive through a reduction in their fixed costs of
trading.



50
   He et al. (2015) analyze a smaller cross-section of currencies and a different specification, but they
too find no significant impact of capital controls.
51
   Again, panel tobit estimates with random effects are reported in columns 1 and 2; panel GLM
estimates are in columns (3) and (4); linear panel estimates with random effects are in columns 5 and 6;
and pooled OLS estimates with currency fixed effects are in column 7.
52
   As a result the negative effect of capital controls is also statistically significant at the 20% level of
confidence.


                                                                                                         20
        But other things are not all equal in practice. The interacted effects of
submarine fiber-optic connections, which operate through information asymmetries,
domestic market liquidity and capital controls, are also statistically significant.53
They go in the opposite direction from the direct effect of fiber optic connections
(they enter with a sign opposite to the sign of the connections variable when it is not
interacted with the other determinants). The results are similar with a panel GLM
estimator (see columns 3 and 4). Overall, they suggest that the negative effect on the
share of a currency traded offshore of information asymmetries is smaller (in absolute
value) in the presence of cable links. The negative effect of a relatively liquid local
market is smaller (in absolute value) in the presence of cables. The negative effect of
capital controls is again smaller (in absolute value). Thus, where the direct effect of a
cable link to one of the three major centers is to enable a country to retain more
transactions in its currency onshore, the indirect effect is to weaken other factors
(distance, local market liquidity, capital controls) that previously segmented markets
and gave it a locational advantage.

         Figure 10 shows the predicted share of offshore FX trading conditional on the
extent of information asymmetries (time-zone differences) when other spatial frictions
are set to zero, both with cable connections (the solid line) and without (the dashed
line). 54 The figure on the left-hand side is based on the tobit estimates reported in
column 1 of Table 2; the figure on the right-hand side is based on the panel GLM
estimates reported in column 3 of Table 2.

         Consider the tobit estimates first. That a cable connection attenuates the effect
of distance and local information is evident from the fact that the solid line (with
cable) is flatter than the dashed line (without cable). For a country close to one of the
financial centers, the main impact of the cable connection is direct; it allows the
country to retain a larger share of trading in its currency (toward the left-hand side of
the figure the solid line is below the dashed line, indicating that a smaller share of
transactions occur offshore in the presence of a cable). An example is the case of
Korea, which is in the same time zone as Japan, where the Korean won is among the
least traded offshore. Conversely, for a country far from one of the financial centers,
the main impact of the cable connection is indirect; it works to erode the advantages
of distance, causing the country to lose a larger share of trading in its currency to
offshore markets (toward the right-hand side of the figure, the solid line is above the
dashed line, indicating that a larger share of transactions occur offshore). This is the
case of New Zealand, for example, which is three hours ahead of Japan and whose
unit is heavily traded offshore.

       At a distance of three hours, our tobit estimates suggest that the share of
foreign exchange occurring offshore should be negative. The reason is that our
dependent variable is bounded between zero and one, which implies that quasi-linear

53
     At the 20% level of confidence for capital controls.
54
     The time effects – which range from zero in 1998 and 70% in 2013 – are also set to zero.


                                                                                                21
estimates such as those obtained with tobit only approximate the true effects of the
predictors around the dependent variable mean. Fitting the response variable with
large predictor values may hence result in predicting expected shares outside the [0,1]
domain, as it is the case here. This problem is familiar from other applications, such
as in medical science and epidemiology, which has encouraged scholars to obtain
panel generalized linear model (GLM) estimates with a logistic link function and a
binomial distribution, as we do here (see Localio, Margolis and Berlin 2007 and Diaz-
Quijano 2012). 55 This approach allows the logistic transformation of the fitted
response to vary linearly with the predictors while keeping the predicted share
between zero and one. Consider now the figure on the right-hand side of Figure 10.
That a cable connection attenuates the effect of distance and local information over
the relevant range is again evident from the fact that the solid curve (with cables) is
flatter than the dashed curve (no cable).

        The crossover point is at roughly one hour. For countries in the same time
zone as one of the three big financial centers, a cable connection is a positive for the
market share of local sales desks. For countries two or more time zones away, the net
effect on the local sales desk is negative.

        How large is the effect on average? Taking the ratio in percentage terms of
the slopes of the two lines obtained from the tobit estimates suggests that the effect of
hour distance on the share of foreign exchange trading occurring offshore is 78%
lower on average in countries connected to a submarine fiber-optic cable relative to
countries that are equally distant from a major financial center but not connected. 56

        Figure 11 illustrates the extent to which the attractions of deep and liquid
domestic markets are lessened by cable connections, constructing predicted shares in
the same manner. Again, the solid line is flatter than the dashed line, below it on the
left and above it on the right. For a country whose domestic market is relatively
illiquid, the direct impact of the cable, in leading to the retention or repatriation of
business onshore, is the main effect. But a cable connection also attenuates the
advantages of a highly liquid domestic market. Countries that previously saw a
relatively high share of transactions in their currency occurring onshore due to
domestic market liquidity may see a decline in that share with a cable connection. An
example is Australia, which was connected in 2001 and saw the share of its currency
trading offshore jump by seven percentage points in the three subsequent years,
despite the fact that domestic market liquidity increased by 28% over the same period.

        Again, how large is the effect on average? Taking the ratio in percentage
terms of the slopes of the two lines obtained from the tobit estimates suggests that the
effect of domestic market liquidity on the share of foreign exchange trading occurring
offshore is 80% lower on average in countries connected to a submarine fiber-optic
55
  We also obtained very similar results with a probit link function in robustness checks.
56
   For the panel GLM estimates cable connection also reduces considerably the economic importance
of distance, although the reduction rate is now nonlinear and varies with distance itself.


                                                                                              22
cable than in countries with equally liquid domestic markets but not possessing a
cable connection.

        Figure 12 depicts the extent to which technology neutralizes the effect of
capital controls. 57 Again the solid line is flatter than the dashed line, indicating that a
cable connection attenuates the effect of controls. 58 A cable connection reduces the
share of trading in a currency that occurs offshore through its direct effect; tighter
controls would be expected to bottle up more of this business, but their impact is
weakened by a cable connection, this being the cable’s indirect effect. This time,
however, the solid line is below the dashed line over the entire range due to the
cable’s direct effect. 59 But the effect of capital controls on the share of foreign
exchange trading occurring offshore is still 83% lower on average in countries
connected to a submarine fiber-optic cable relative to countries equally open
financially but not connected in this manner.

         8. Robustness

        Table 3 reports estimates when the share of foreign exchange trading offshore
is regressed on the standard determinants of the geography of foreign exchange
trading as well as the direct and interacted effect of exclusively point-to-point
submarine fiber-optic cable connections to the UK, US and Japan (as opposed to
including also cable connections to the UK, US and Japan via third countries). 60 Our
main results remain broadly unchanged in terms of sign, statistical significance and
economic magnitude, which suggests that they are not sensitive to a specific definition
of technology. 61

       Table 4 reports the estimates when we use the number of connections to
submarine fiber-optic cables as our measure of technology. Again our main results
are broadly unchanged. 62

        Table 5 reports an array of additional sensitivity checks, namely where we use
a time trend in lieu of time fixed effects (column 1); cable connections interacted with


57
   We do not report the panel GLM estimates here because the interaction between cable connection
and capital controls was not statistically significant.
58
   Intuitively one might interpret this as cable communication opening up additional channels for
evasion.
59
   This is evident from Table 2, where the coefficient on capital controls interacted with cables is
always smaller than the coefficient on controls, and the controls measure varies between zero and one.
60
   Convergence of the panel GLM estimates were here obtained with a probit (rather than logit) link
function.
61
   The exception is the effect on capital controls, which loses statistical significance.
62
   The exception is again the effect on capital controls, which loses statistical significance. Note also
that the estimated coefficients on the interacted effects are smaller in economic magnitude, which is
due the fact that our measure of technology is a continuous variable rather than a binary dummy as in
Tables 2 and 3. Convergence of the panel GLM estimates with the additional controls was not
obtained.


                                                                                                      23
a time trend (column 2) 63; geographical distance instead of the time difference to the
UK, US or Japan (column 3); the log of FX turnover rather than its level (column 4);
total FX turnover rather than FX turnover net of domestic currency turnover (column
5); restrictions on capital inflows rather than restrictions on all flows (column 6); and
restrictions on capital outflows (column 7). Our findings remain robust to these
checks, again indicating that they do not depend on particular definitions of the
determinants of the geography of the foreign exchange market.

        One finding in Table 5 is that there is no effect of technology on physical
distance in column 3, unlike hour distance, which suggests that it is the latter that
matters for the impact of technology on influence of information asymmetries in the
foreign exchange market. Another finding is in column 7, where it appears that the
effect of technology on capital controls mainly goes through restrictions on outflows
rather than inflows. 64

        9. Distributional Effects

       Finally we inquire into the impact of cable connections on the location of
foreign exchange trading among the world’s financial centers. Who are the winners
and losers? How large are the effects?

        We proceed in two steps. First, we estimate the net impact of cable
connections on the share of offshore foreign exchange transactions using the panel
GLM estimated coefficients in column 3 of Table 2. We also predict shares under a
counterfactual where issuing countries are not cable-connected (i.e. by setting the
coefficient β4 and those in vector β5 to zero). The difference between the predicted
and estimated counterfactual shares is the net effect of cable connections in
percentage points by currency. The net effect is converted into transaction volumes
using actual turnover figures for each currency.

        The results are shown in Figure 13 based on 2013 data. The dampening effect
of cable connections on spatial frictions generally dominates the reduction in the costs
of trading currencies locally in net terms; the share of offshore trading is higher for
most units. The cross-currency average suggests that cable connections increase, in
net terms, the share of offshore trading by about 21 percentage points. This is
consistent with the “Flash Boys” hypothesis. The landscape of the foreign exchange
market, in other words, has become “flashier” not “flatter”.

       One exception is the Canadian dollar, whose offshore share declines by 10
percentage points. This is intuitive in that Toronto is in the same time zone as New
63
   We therefore control for the fact that our cable connection variable could just be picking up other
global changes insofar as cable connectivity is positively correlated with time.
64
   We also examined bilateral data published by the BIS where we could look directly at offshore
trading in London, Tokyo and New York for a small number of advanced economy units. However,
their countries of issuance were almost all connected to the internet backbone simultaneously, implying
that was hardly any variation to exploit for identification.



                                                                                                    24
York, the Canadian forex market of Canada is relatively thin, and Canada is
financially open. In this case there are few spatial frictions to attenuate, in other
words, so only the reduction in the costs of trading locally remains. A similar story
emerges for the Korean won.

        The New Zealand dollar and Indian rupee are contrary cases: their offshore
shares both increase by about 50 percentage points. This is also intuitive: these units
are issued by the two countries most remote from the major financial centers. Hence
the dampening effect of cable connections on distance is substantial. 65

        The shares of the US dollar, the euro and sterling also increase substantially,
which similarly reflects the mitigating effects of cable connections on distance and on
the attractions of their large and liquid local foreign exchange markets. The shares of
the Swiss franc and Hungarian forint, in contrast, do not change, which is again
intuitive: Switzerland and Hungary are landlocked and have no submarine fiber-optic
cable connections. 66

        In the second step, we allocate net gains and losses in the volume of offshore
trading by currency between financial centers. We have total net volume estimates by
currency. (Unfortunately, we are not able to split these estimates by both currency
and financial center. In other words, we know by how much trading volumes move
offshore, but we do not know exactly to where.) We therefore allocate the
counterfactual offshore trading volumes across financial centers proportionately to
their actual shares in global foreign exchange turnover in 2013. Thus, if London
(more precisely the UK) accounts for 42% of global foreign exchange turnover, it
receives 42% of the counterfactual net gains in the volume of offshore trading by
currency. 67

        The results are depicted in Figure 14, which shows the net percentage points
change in the share of global foreign exchange turnover by country. The main losers
from cable connectivity are the euro area (i.e. Frankfurt and other euro area financial
centers) as well as, perhaps surprisingly, the US (i.e. New York), with losses of seven
and five percentage points of global foreign exchange turnover, respectively. The
intuition here is that cable connections not only lead large shares of transactions in the
dollar and the euro to move offshore, i.e. away from New York and Frankfurt, but in
addition they lead to the geographical redistribution of a relatively large volume of
foreign exchange transactions, insofar as the dollar and the euro are two of the
principal currencies traded in foreign exchange markets. The volume of transactions

65
   New Zealand is three hours ahead of Tokyo while India is four hours behind.
66
   No connections within our sample period, that is; see also the conclusion below.
67
   Onshore trading volumes in the currency in question are reduced accordingly so that global turnover
remains unchanged. A more extreme assumption would be to allocate net gains only to London, New
York and Tokyo (i.e. to consider only point-to-point connections rather than also indirect connections).
But that would only magnify the sizeable boost to the global market share of London and Tokyo which
we document below.


                                                                                                     25
in other currencies that move to Frankfurt and New York from other financial centers,
in contrast, is much smaller.

        The main winner overall is the UK (London), with a gain of 10 percentage
points of global foreign exchange turnover due to cable connectivity. Other centers
affected positively include Japan (Tokyo) and Singapore, with gains of about one
percentage point each. While London, Tokyo and Singapore are all major financial
centers for foreign exchange trading, their own currencies are not traded as heavily as
the euro and the dollar. Thus, what London, Tokyo and Singapore lose when trading
in their respective units moves offshore is more than compensated for by the trading
in other units that cables allow them to take away from other financial centers. 68 That
the winners are islands (or a peninsula in the case of Singapore) is a reminder that the
advantages afforded by cable connections have deep geographical roots, which
underscores their exogeneity.

       These changes are economically important. For instance, the increase of 10
percentage points of the share of London in global foreign exchange turnover is
equivalent to a one-third increase relative to the counterfactual when it has no cable
connections. In contrast, Switzerland’s share stays constant since it has no submarine
cable connection.

        10. Conclusion

        This paper has assessed the impact of technology on the location of production
and trade in services using the rise of electronic trading in the foreign exchange
market as a case study. Employing data on the location of trading of 55 currencies
between 1995 and 2013 and the inauguration of submarine fiber-optic cables as a
source of exogenous technological change, we estimate the impact of cable
connections on the share of offshore foreign exchange transactions. We find that the
dampening effect of cable connections on spatial frictions dominates the reduction in
the fixed costs of trading currencies locally in net terms, hence making the world
“flashier” not “flatter”. Cable connections tend to lead to an increase in the share of
offshore trading for most units. Our estimates suggest that technology dampens the
impact of spatial frictions by up to 80 percent and increases, in net terms, the share of
offshore trading by an average 21 percentage points. Technology also has
economically important implications for the distribution of foreign exchange
transactions across financial centers, boosting e.g. the share in global turnover of
London, the world’s largest trading venue, by an estimated one-third.

       Submarine fiber-optic cables have formed the backbone of the internet for
almost three decades. They have given a competitive advantage to financial centers
bordered by the sea, like Singapore, over centers located in landlocked countries, like
Zurich. Very recently terrestrial cables have been laid to connect financial centers in

68
   An additional explanation in the case of the yen is that the net effect of cable connection is to
increase the share of onshore trading.


                                                                                                 26
a scramble for low latency. The first such cable was Spread Networks’ cable between
Chicago, home to the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s data center, and New Jersey,
home to the Nasdaq data center, unveiled in 2010. euNetworks’ fiber network route,
which opened in 2015 between Frankfurt and Zurich, is another example. 69 But
digging trenches, tunneling through natural obstacles and obtaining transit rights from
property owners are costly and difficult (as colorfully recounted by Lewis 2014) –
more costly and difficult than laying cables on the seabed.

         Since these terrestrial cables connecting two data centers come later, they are
far fewer. And since they are recent, they fall outside our sample period and do not
affect our results. But they suggest a future in which it is not only whether a financial
center has access to the sea but also other attributes – like having a history as and
commitment to being a financial center (like Zurich), and deep pockets (like Zurich) –
that will influence the geography of the foreign exchange market, global finance, and
trade in services more generally. Landlocked or not, there may be hope for Zurich
after all.




69
   This cable then connects up with Germany’s existing fiber-optic connections to the UK and hence to
the EBS and Thomson Reuters servers there. The euNetworks cable link thus also allows London
financial services firms to directly access Zurich-Equinix ZH4, the platform where SIX Swiss
Exchange (the leading Swiss stock exchange) shares are traded. But that is a different market.


                                                                                                  27
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo García-Jimeno and James A. Robinson (2015), “State
  Capacity and Development: A Network Approach,” American Economic Review
  105, pp. 2364-2409.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James Robinson (2005), “The Rise of Europe:
  Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth,” American Economic
  Review 95, pp. 546-579.
Antràs, Pol, Luis Garicano and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2006), “Offshoring in a
  Knowledge Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, pp. 31-77.
Antràs, Pol and Stephen Yeaple (2014), “Multinational Firms and the Structure of
  International Trade,” Handbook of International Economics, Gopinath, Gita,
  Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds. Vol, 4, Elsevier, pp. 55-130.
Bakos, Yannis, (1997), “Reducing Buyer Search Costs: Implications for Electronic
  Market-Places,” Management Science 43, pp. 1676-1692.
Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric Van Wincoop (2006), “Can Information Heterogeneity
  Explain the Exchange Rate Determination Puzzle?” American Economic Review
  96(3), pp. 552-576.
Bank for International Settlements (2001), The Implications of Electronic Trading in
  Financial Markets, Basel: Bank for International Settlements (January).
Bank for International Settlements (2011), High-Frequency Trading in the Foreign
  Exchange Market, Basel: Bank for International Settlements (September).
Bank for International Settlements (2015), Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign
  Exchange and OTC Derivatives Market Activity – Reporting guidelines for
  turnover in April 2016: Basel: Bank for International Settlements (September).
Bartelme, Dominick (2015), “Trade Costs and Economic Geography: Evidence from
  the U.S.,” unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Biais, Bruno, Thierry Foucault and Sophie Moinas, “Equilibrium Fast Trading,”
   Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Blum, Bernardo and Avi Goldfarb (2006), “Does the Internet Defy the Law of
  Gravity?” Journal of International Economics 70, pp. 384-405.
Bollersev, Tim and Ian Domowitz (1993), “Trading Patterns and Prices in the
  Interbank Foreign Exchange Market,” Journal of Finance 48, pp. 1421-1443.
Brogaard, Johnathan, Björn Hagströmer, Lars, Norden and Ryan Riordan (2014),
  “Trading Fast and Slow: Colocation and Market Quality,” University of
  Stockholm, University of Washington and Queen’s school of Business (August).
Cairncross, Frances (1997), The Death of Distance: How the Communications
  Revolution is Changing Our Lives, London: Orion Business Books.
Cantillon, Estelle and Pai-Ling,Yin (2008), “Competition Between Exchanges:
  Lessons from the Battle of the Bund,” CEPR Discussion Paper 6923.




                                                                                 28
Chaboud, Alain, Benjamin Chiquoine, Erik Hjalmarsson and Clara Vega (2014),
  “Rise of the Machines: Algorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market,”
  Journal of Finance 69, pp. 2045-2084.
Credit Suisse (2013), Emerging Markets Currency Guide – Helping You Find Your
  Way, January.
Disdier, Anne-Célia and Keith Head (2008), “The Puzzling Persistence of the
  Distance Effect on Bilateral Trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90, pp. 37-
  48.
Diaz-Quijano, Fredi. (2012), “A Simple Method for Estimating Relative Risk Using
  Logistic Regression,” BMC Medical Research Methodology, 12:14.
Faulconbridge, Guy (2015), “'Brexit fears haunt London's roaring trade in euros,”
  Reuters,     http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/07/22/us-britain-eu-euro-insight-
  idUSKCN0PW13620150722 (accessed August 12, 2015).
Fernández, Andrés, Michael W. Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler and
   Martín Uribe (2015), “Capital Control Measures: A New Dataset,” NBER Working
   Paper, No. 20970, February.
Friedman, Milton (1969), “The Euro-Dollar Market: Some First Principles,” Selected
   Papers, No. 34, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Friedman, Thomas (2005), The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First
   Century, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Gabaix, Xavier and Maggiori Matteo, “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate
  Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Galati, Gabriele (2001), “Why has Global FX Turnover Declined? Explaining the
  2001 Triennial Survey,” BIS Quarterly Review, December 2001, pp. 39-47.
Hau, Harald (2001), “Location Matters: An Examination of Trading Profits,” Journal
  of Finance 56, pp. 1959-1983.
He, Qing, Iikka Korhonen, Junjie Guo and Fangge Liu (2015), “The Geographic
  Distribution of International Currencies and RMB Internationalization,” BOFIT
  Discussion Paper No. 20/2015.
HM Treasury (2003), The Location of Financial Activity and the Euro, London.
HSBC (2011), HSBC’s Emerging Markets Currency Guide 2012, (December).
Huang, Roger and Ronald Masulis (1999), “FX Spreads and Dealer Competition
  Across the 24-Hour Trading Day,” Review of Financial Studies 12, pp. 61-93.
Kindleberger, Charles (1974), “The Formation of Financial Centers: A Study in
  Comparative Economic History,” Princeton Studies in International Finance no.
  36, International Finance Section, Department of Economics Princeton University.
King, Michael and Carlos Mallo (2010), “A User’s Guide to the Triennial Central
  Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange Market Activity,” BIS Quarterly Review
  (December), pp. 71-83.



                                                                                  29
Krugman, Paul (1980), “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
  Trade,” American Economic Review 70, pp. 950-959.
Krugman, Paul (1995), “Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition and the Positive
  Theory of International Trade,” in Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,
  Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp.
  1243-1277.
Krugman, Paul and Anthony Venables (1995), “The Seamless World: A Spatial
  Model of International Specialization,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 1230.
Krugman, Paul and Anthony Venables (1996), “Integration, Specialization, and
  Adjustment,” European Economic Review 40, pp. 959-967.
Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Ferretti (2007), “The External Wealth Nations Mark II:
  Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,”
  Journal of International Economics 73, pp. 223-250.
Leamer, Edward (2007), “A Flat World, a Level Playing Field, a Small World After
  All, or None of the Above? A Review of Thomas L. Friedman’s The World is
  Flat,” Journal of Economic Literature 65, pp. 83-126.
Localio, Russel A., David Margolis and Jesse Berlin (2007), “Relative Risks and
  Confidence Intervals Were Easily Computed Indirectly from Multivariable
  Logistic Regression,” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 60, pp. 874-882.
Lewis, Michael (2014), Flash Boys – A Wall Street Revolt, New York: W. W. Norton
  & Company.
Lyons, Richard and Michael Moore (2009), “An Information Approach to
  International Currencies,” Journal of International Economics 29, pp. 211-221.
Menkhoff, Lukas and Maik Schmeling, “Location in Foreign Exchange Markets,”
  Journal of International Money and Finance 27, pp.1383-1406.
McCauley, Robert, Chang Shu and Guonan Ma (2014), “Non-Deliverable Forwards:
  2013 and Beyond,” BIS Quarterly Review (March), pp. 75-88.
McCauley, Robert and Michela Scatigna (2011), “Foreign Exchange Trading in
  Emerging Currencies: More Financial, More Offshore,” BIS Quarterly Review
  (March), pp. 67-75.
Moore, Michael and Richard Payne (2011), “On the Sources of Private Information in
  Private FX Markets,” Journal of Banking and Finance 35, pp.1250-1262.
Rime, Dagfinn and Andreas Schrimpf (2013), “The Anatomy of the FX Market
  through the Lens of the 2013 Triennial Survey” BIS Quarterly Review (December),
  pp. 27-43.
OECD, (2009), Countering Offshore Tax Evasion: Some Questions and Answers,
  Paris, 28 September 2009, http://www.oecd.org/ctp/harmful/42469606.pdf.
Shapiro, Carl and Hal Varian (1999), Information Rules: a Strategic Guide to the
  Network Economy, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Wenzlhuemer, Roland (2013), Connecting the Nineteenth-Century World: The
  Telegraph and Globalization, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

                                                                                   30
                           Figure 1: The Internet Backbone – The Global Network of Submarine Fiber-Optic Cables




Notes: This figure reproduces the global network of submarine fiber-optic cables using the same data and codes made available by TeleGeography at the following url:
https://github.com/telegeography/www.submarinecablemap.com.




                                                                                                                                                                 31
 Figure 2: Offshore Foreign Exchange Trading in Two Major Financial Centers
                             – Zurich vs. Singapore



                 .4
                 .3
           USD trillion
             .2  .1
                 0




                                              1995                                                     2013
                                                          Switzerland                              Singapore


Notes: This figure shows the evolution between 1995 and 2013 of the volume of foreign exchange
trading occurring offshore in Switzerland and Singapore, i.e. of trading in currencies other than the
respective domestic units (the Swiss franc and the Singapore dollar).

                               Figure 3: Offshore Foreign Exchange Trading
                                – Weighted vs. Un-weighted Global Averages
                 .8




                                                                             .8
                                                                             .6
                                                                        Unweighted
            Weighted
              .75




                                                                           .4.2
                 .7




                                                                             0




                       1995   1998   2001   2004   2007   2010   2013                1995   1998    2001   2004   2007   2010   2013



Notes: This figure shows the evolution between 1995 and 2013 of the weighted (left-hand side panel)
and un-weighted (right-hand side panel) global averages of foreign exchange trading occurring
offshore. The weighted average, which is subject to a theoretical 50%-lower bound, is the sum of
foreign exchange trading occurring offshore in all currencies scaled by the sum of total (onshore and
offshore) foreign exchange trading in all currencies. The unweighted average is the arithmetic average
of the individual currency shares.

                                                                                                                                       32
Figure 4: Importance of London, New York and Tokyo for Offshore FX trading




                    .35




                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                      Share of global offshore FX trading
                    .3




                                                                                                                 .6
            Herfindahl index, 0-1
                    .25




                                                                                           .4
                    .2




                                                                                                         .2
                    .15




                                                                                                                            1995   1998    2001    2004   2007   2010   2013
                                    1995   1998   2001   2004   2007    2010   2013
                                                                                                                                          Tokyo                  New York
                                              Unscaled index           Scaled index                                                       London



Notes: This figure shows the evolution between 1995 and 2013 of the scaled and unscaled Herfindahl
indices of concentration of global foreign exchange trading occurring offshore for London (U.K.), New
York (U.S) and Tokyo (Japan) in the left-hand-side panel, as well as the cumulated share of global
foreign exchange trading accounted for by these three financial centers in the right-hand side panel.




                                                                                                                                                                               33
                    Figure 5: Offshore Foreign Exchange Trading between 1995 and 2013 – Breakdown by Currency




Notes: This figure shows the evolution between 1995 and 2013 of the share of foreign exchange trading occurring offshore for our sample’s 55 units between 1995
and 2013. Darker shades of grey indicate higher shares of trading occurring offshore (actual shares are not reported for confidentiality reasons). White cells indicate
that the data are unavailable or not reported.




                                                                                                                                                                    34
                   Figure 6: Offshore Foreign Exchange Trading in 2013
                            – Breakdown for Selected Currencies

            KRW

            RUB

            HKD
                                                                                Median
             INR

            SGD

             IDR

            CNY

            USD

             ZAR

             BRL

            MXN

             TRY

             JPY

            EUR

             PLN


                   0           .2             .4             .6            .8              1


Notes: This figure shows the shares of foreign exchange trading occurring offshore for the same units
as in McCauley and Scatigna (2011) and Ehlers and Packer (2013). The thick black line is the
(unweighted) median of all individual currency shares (including those not reported in the figure).



              Figure 7: Year of First Connection to the UK, US or Japan
                         via a Submarine Fiber-Optic Cable




Notes: This figure shows the year when the countries issuing the 55 currencies of our sample were first
connected (point-to-point or via third countries) via a submarine fiber-optic cable to the U.K., the U.S.
or Japan (i.e. the three countries where the matching servers of EBS/Reuters for electronic foreign
exchange trading are located).


                                                                                                      35
      Figure 8: Submarine Fiber-Optic Cable Connections to the UK – 1998




Notes: This figure shows the network of countries connected (point-to-point or via third countries) to
the UK (one of the three countries where the matching servers of EBS/Reuters for electronic foreign
exchange trading are located) via a submarine fiber-optic cable in 1998. Countries located in the time
zone corresponding to Asian trading hours are shown as light grey nodes, against grey nodes for those
located in the time zone corresponding to European trading hours and dark grey nodes for US trading
hours. Solid lines indicate countries whose currencies ranked in the top third by FX turnover; dashed
line those in the middle third, and dotted lines those in the bottom third.



      Figure 9: Submarine Fiber-Optic Cable Connections to the UK – 2013




Notes: This figure shows the network of countries connected (point-to-point or via third countries) to
the UK (one of the three countries where the matching servers of EBS/Reuters for electronic foreign
exchange trading are located) via a submarine fiber-optic cable in 2013.


                                                                                                   36
           Figure 10: Impact of Submarine Fiber-Optic Cable Connection
                            – Information Asymmetries




                                                                                            .5
                      .5
                      .4




                                                                                            .4
                                                                                    Predicted share
              Predicted share
                           .3




                                                                                                 .3
               .2




                                                                                    .2
                      .1




                                                                                            .1
                      0




                                                                                            0
                                0              .5               1             1.5                     0           1           2          3           4
                                    Distance to large financial centre (hours)                            Distance to large financial centre (hours)

                                              Cable                No cable                                         Cable                No cable




Notes: This figure shows the predicted share of offshore FX trading conditional on the extent of
information asymmetries, while other spatial frictions are set to zero with (solid line) and without
(dashed line) cable connection. The left-hand side figure is based on the tobit estimates reported in
column 1 of Table 2; the right-hand side figure is based on the panel GLM estimates reported in
column 3 of Table 2.
           Figure 11: Impact of Submarine Fiber-Optic Cable Connection
                            – Domestic Market Liquidity
                                                                                            .5
                      .5
                      .4




                                                                                            .4
                                                                                    Predicted share
              Predicted share
                           .3




                                                                                                 .3
               .2




                                                                                    .2
                      .1




                                                                                            .1
                      0




                                                                                            0




                                0        .1          .2          .3          .4                       0        .2          .4          .6          .8
                                    Domestic market liquidity (USD trillion)                              Domestic market liquidity (USD trillion)

                                              Cable                No cable                                         Cable                No cable




Notes: This figure shows the predicted share of offshore FX trading conditional on the extent of
domestic market liquidity, while other spatial frictions are set to zero, with (solid line) and without
(dashed line) cable connection. The left-hand side figure is based on the tobit estimates reported in
column 1 of Table 2; the right-hand side figure is based on the panel GLM estimates reported in
column 3 of Table 2.


                                                                                                                                                         37
           Figure 12: Impact of Submarine Fiber-Optic Cable Connection
                                 – Capital Controls



                    .5
                    .4
            Predicted share
              .2    .1
                    0  .3




                              0   .2           .4              .6            .8             1
                                          Capital controls (index, 0-1)

                                               Cable              No cable



Notes: This figure shows the predicted share of offshore FX trading conditional on the extent of capital
controls, while other spatial frictions are set to zero, with (solid line) and without (dashed line) cable
connection. The figure is based on the tobit estimates reported in column 1 of Table 2.


         Figure 13: Net Effect of Cable Connections on Offshore FX trading




Notes: This figure shows the change (in percentage points) in the share of foreign exchange
transactions occurring offshore by currency if countries which issue the currencies in question are
connected to a submarine fiber-optic cable relative to a counterfactual situation when they are not.
These estimates are based on data for 2013 and the GLM results reported in column 3 of Table 2.



                                                                                                       38
                   Figure 14: Distributional Effects of Cable Connections on Financial Centers – Winners and Losers




Notes: This map shows the change in percentage points in the share of global foreign exchange transactions undertaken in the countries of our sample if they are
connected to a submarine fiber-optic cable relative to a counterfactual in which they are not. The estimates are based on data for 2013 and the panel GLM results
reported in column 3 of Table 2. They are based on the assumption that net gains in offshore trading (i.e. the balance between the direct and indirect effects of cable
connections) are allocated across connected countries proportionately to their actual share of global foreign exchange transactions in 2013.


                                                                                                                                                                    39
    Table 1: Estimates with Standard Determinants of the Location of FX trading

                                   (1)         (2)         (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)
                                Panel tobit Panel tobit   Panel   Panel   Random    Random    Pooled
                                                          GLM     GLM     effects   effects    OLS

Time zone distance               -0.120*    -0.085+   -0.257   -0.384+ -0.104*** -0.083*       -0.005
                                 (0.064)    (0.060)   (0.263)  (0.271)    (0.036)  (0.049)     (0.027)
Domestic market liquidity       -0.383*** -0.388*** -1.384*** -1.342*** -0.299*** -0.303***   -0.345**
                                 (0.093)    (0.095)   (0.391)  (0.201)    (0.015)  (0.016)     (0.038)
Capital controls                  -0.109     -0.100   -0.502    -0.525   -0.111** -0.145***    -0.094
                                 (0.107)    (0.106)   (0.466)  (0.476)    (0.045)  (0.054)     (0.123)
Trade integration                            -0.091             -0.249             -0.067+
                                            (0.071)            (0.299)             (0.048)
Financial integration                        0.094+              0.240               0.044
                                            (0.060)            (0.281)             (0.045)
Flexible exchange rate regime               0.145**            0.765**            0.094***
                                            (0.056)            (0.341)             (0.033)
Carry trades                               -0.005**             -0.032              -0.002
                                            (0.002)            (0.045)             (0.002)
Constant                           0.119      0.124  -1.331** -1.150** 0.262*** 0.275***       0.002
                                 (0.100)    (0.110)   (0.547)  (0.568)    (0.047)  (0.005)    (0.005)
Currency effects                   YES         YES        YES     YES      YES       YES       YES
Time effects                       YES         YES        YES     YES      YES       YES       YES
Observations                       252         238        252     238      252       238        252
R   2
                                                                           0.343     0.393     0.841
ρ                                 0.783        0.740                       0.744     0.686

Note: The table reports estimates of model equation (1) where the share of foreign exchange trading
occurring offshore is regressed on the standard determinants of the geography of foreign exchange
trading. Panel tobit estimates with random effects are reported in columns (1) and (2); panel GLM
estimates are reported in columns (3) and (4); linear panel estimates with random effects are reported
in columns (5) and (6); and pooled OLS estimates with country fixed effects are reported in column
(7). The standard errors reported in parentheses in columns (3) to (7) are robust to heteroskedasticity
and those in columns (5) to (7) are clustered by time zone (i.e. Asian, European, and US trading
sessions); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, + p<0.2.




                                                                                                       40
           Table 2: Basic Estimates – Impact of Submarine Cable Connections

                                     (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)
                                    Panel      Panel     Panel      Panel    Random      Random    Pooled
                                    tobit      tobit     GLM        GLM      effects     effects    OLS

Time zone distance                 -0.463***-0.430***   -1.443***-1.586***   -0.221***-0.195***      -0.147
                                     (0.127)  (0.126)     (0.478)  (0.508)     (0.067)  (0.045)     (0.140)
Domestic market liquidity           -1.757** -1.784**   -7.746***-7.047***   -1.270***-1.104***    -1.761**
                                     (0.818)  (0.831)     (2.115)  (1.827)     (0.131)  (0.066)     (0.222)
Capital controls                     -0.289+  -0.288+     -1.358+ -1.650**    -0.119** -0.197**      -0.102
                                     (0.186)  (0.190)     (0.845)  (0.794)     (0.060)  (0.090)     (0.094)
Cables                             -0.305***-0.332***    -1.157**-1.315***      -0.129   -0.141      -0.160
                                     (0.114)  (0.115)     (0.518)  (0.483)     (0.120)  (0.120)     (0.148)
Cables × time zone distance         0.362*** 0.361***    1.320*** 1.294**       0.132    0.123       0.141
                                     (0.112)  (0.113)     (0.486)  (0.510)     (0.114)  (0.108)     (0.126)
Cables × domestic market liquidity    1.398*   1.415*    6.380*** 5.677***    0.986*** 0.814***    1.431**
                                     (0.814)  (0.827)     (2.104)  (1.807)     (0.117)  (0.061)     (0.212)
Cables × capital controls            0.241+   0.243+       0.833   1.152+       0.014    0.060      0.033+
                                     (0.189)  (0.192)     (0.892)  (0.858)     (0.034)  (0.052)     (0.014)
Trade integration                              -0.079               -0.142              -0.064*
                                              (0.073)              (0.317)              (0.037)
Financial integration                         0.095+                0.155               0.043+
                                              (0.062)              (0.303)              (0.029)
Flexible exchange rate regime                0.128**              0.737**              0.092***
                                              (0.054)              (0.346)              (0.035)
Carry trades                                  -0.004*               -0.026               -0.001
                                              (0.002)              (0.034)              (0.001)
Constant                           0.453*** 0.463***      -0.159    0.016    0.405*** 0.412***      0.165
                                    (0.133)   (0.142)    (0.431)   (0.565)    (0.090)   (0.094)    (0.145)
Currency effects                     YES       YES        YES       YES        YES        YES       YES
Time effects                         YES       YES        YES       YES        YES        YES       YES
Observations                         252        238       252        238       252         238       252
R   2
                                                                               0.324      0.380     0.853
ρ                                   0.830      0.799                           0.759      0.684

Note: The table reports estimates of model equation (2) where the share of foreign exchange trading
occurring offshore is regressed on the standard determinants of the geography of foreign exchange
trading as well as the direct and interacted effect of both point-to-point and via third countries
submarine fiber-optic cable connections to the U.K., U.S. or Japan (i.e. the three countries where the
matching servers of EBS/Reuters for electronic trading are located). Panel tobit estimates with random
effects are reported in columns (1) and (2); panel GLM estimates are reported in columns (3) and (4);
linear panel estimates with random effects are reported in columns (5) and (6); and pooled OLS
estimates with currency fixed effects are reported in column (7). The standard errors reported in
parentheses in columns (3) to (7) are robust to heteroskedasticity and those in columns (5) to (7) are
clustered by time zone (i.e. Asian, European, and US trading hours); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, +
p≤0.2.




                                                                                                           41
        Table 3: Robustness – Only Point-to-Point Submarine Cable Connections

                                     (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)
                                    Panel      Panel     Panel      Panel    Random      Random    Pooled
                                    tobit      tobit     GLM        GLM      effects     effects    OLS

Time zone distance                 -0.324***-0.302***   -0.802***-0.842***   -0.228***-0.208***     -0.205+
                                     (0.083)  (0.080)     (0.189)  (0.195)     (0.025)  (0.004)     (0.075)
Domestic market liquidity           -1.741** -1.817**    -4.286**-4.129***   -1.056***-0.913***    -1.670**
                                     (0.824)  (0.838)     (1.699)  (1.516)     (0.109)  (0.136)     (0.182)
Capital controls                      -0.084   -0.074      -0.231   -0.385    -0.062** -0.112**      -0.043
                                     (0.138)  (0.141)     (0.332)  (0.307)     (0.025)  (0.051)     (0.060)
Cables                             -0.259***-0.297***    -0.681** -0.783**    -0.149** -0.159**     -0.207+
                                     (0.100)  (0.103)     (0.343)  (0.323)     (0.073)  (0.079)     (0.086)
Cables × time zone distance         0.276*** 0.289***    0.845*** 0.854***    0.189*** 0.184***      0.198*
                                     (0.070)  (0.071)     (0.210)  (0.197)     (0.040)  (0.028)     (0.053)
Cables × domestic market liquidity   1.377*   1.444*     3.444**  3.289**     0.773*** 0.627***    1.339**
                                     (0.818)  (0.833)     (1.711)  (1.533)     (0.090)  (0.139)     (0.186)
Cables × capital controls             -0.027   -0.040      -0.446   -0.232     -0.105+   -0.084      -0.024
                                     (0.159)  (0.164)     (0.439)  (0.432)     (0.077)  (0.112)     (0.079)
Trade integration                              -0.086               -0.132               -0.050
                                              (0.071)              (0.175)              (0.043)
Financial integration                         0.088+                0.096                0.023
                                              (0.062)              (0.171)              (0.042)
Flexible exchange rate regime                0.137**              0.412**              0.092**
                                              (0.054)              (0.182)              (0.046)
Carry trades                                 -0.005**               -0.015               -0.001
                                              (0.002)              (0.016)              (0.002)
Constant                           0.354*** 0.375***      -0.099    -0.060   0.409*** 0.408***     0.210+
                                    (0.115)   (0.124)    (0.282)   (0.350)    (0.043)   (0.064)    (0.081)
Currency effects                     YES       YES        YES       YES        YES        YES       YES
Time effects                         YES       YES        YES       YES        YES        YES       YES
Observations                         252        238       252        238       252         238       252
R   2
                                                                               0.377      0.429     0.858
ρ                                   0.802      0.762                           0.748      0.671

Note: The table reports estimates of model equation (2) where the share of foreign exchange trading
occurring offshore is regressed on the standard determinants of the geography of foreign exchange
trading as well as the direct and interacted effect of point-to-point submarine fiber-optic cable
connections to the U.K., U.S. or Japan (i.e. the three countries where the matching servers of
EBS/Reuters for electronic trading are located). Panel tobit estimates with random effects are reported
in columns (1) and (2); panel GLM estimates are reported in columns (3) and (4); linear panel
estimates with random effects are reported in columns (5) and (6); and pooled OLS estimates with
currency fixed effects are reported in column (7). The standard errors reported in parentheses in
columns (3) to (7) are robust to heteroskedasticity and those in columns (5) to (7) are clustered by time
zone (i.e. Asian, European, and US trading hours); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, + p<0.2.




                                                                                                           42
           Table 4: Robustness – Number of Submarine Cable Connections

                                        (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)
                                       Panel      Panel       Panel    Random      Random      Pooled
                                       tobit      tobit       GLM      effects     effects      OLS

Time zone distance                 -0.239***  -0.284***     -0.505**   -0.161***-0.193***       -0.064
                                     (0.076)    (0.077)      (0.257)     (0.032)  (0.050)      (0.050)
Domestic market liquidity            -0.866*   -0.982**       -1.065   -0.342***  -0.201+     -1.210**
                                     (0.449)    (0.499)      (1.992)     (0.083)  (0.151)      (0.240)
Capital controls                     -0.171+     -0.137      -0.576+   -0.122***-0.192***       -0.094
                                     (0.120)    (0.121)      (0.358)     (0.022)  (0.010)      (0.075)
Cables                             -0.018***  -0.017***    -0.035***   -0.009***-0.010***     -0.014**
                                     (0.004)    (0.004)      (0.009)     (0.003)  (0.003)      (0.002)
Cables × time zone distance         0.014***   0.024***     0.043***    0.010*** 0.016***      0.011+
                                     (0.004)    (0.005)      (0.012)     (0.003)  (0.002)      (0.005)
Cables × domestic market liquidity    0.014*     0.016*       0.015      0.004+    0.001      0.020**
                                     (0.009)    (0.009)      (0.036)     (0.002)  (0.004)      (0.004)
Cables × capital controls             0.011      0.007        0.016       -0.002   0.004        -0.003
                                     (0.015)    (0.015)      (0.039)     (0.012)  (0.008)      (0.008)
Trade integration                                -0.021                            -0.044
                                                (0.076)                           (0.036)
Financial integration                            0.014                             -0.002
                                                (0.063)                           (0.034)
Flexible exchange rate regime                  0.146***                          0.109**
                                                (0.056)                           (0.047)
Carry trades                                    -0.004*                            -0.001
                                                (0.002)                           (0.002)
Constant                              0.227** 0.227*          -0.456   0.317*** 0.341***       0.005
                                      (0.112)   (0.121)      (0.356)    (0.030)   (0.042)     (0.003)
Currency effects                        YES        YES        YES        YES        YES        YES
Time effects                            YES        YES        YES        YES        YES        YES
Observations                            252         238        252        252        238        252
R   2
                                                                         0.309      0.371      0.862
ρ                                      0.860       0.842                 0.742      0.681
Note: The table reports estimates of model equation (2) where the share of foreign exchange trading
occurring offshore is regressed on the standard determinants of the geography of foreign exchange
trading as well as the direct and interacted effect of the number of submarine fiber-optic cable
connections of the currency issuing country. Panel tobit estimates with random effects are reported in
columns (1) and (2); panel GLM estimates are reported in columns (3); linear panel estimates with
random effects are reported in columns (4) and (5); and pooled OLS estimates with currency fixed
effects are reported in column (6). The standard errors reported in parentheses in columns (3) to (6)
are robust to heteroskedasticity and those in columns (4) to (6) are clustered by time zone (i.e. Asian,
European, and US trading hours); *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, + p<0.2.




                                                                                                       43
                               Table 5: Other Robustness Checks
                                      (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                                    Time        Cables ×      Geo        Log        Total     Capital    Capital
                                    trend      time trend   distance   turnover   turnover   inflows    outflows

Time zone distance                 -0.405***   -0.401*** -0.058** -0.450*** -0.476*** -0.453*** -0.432***
                                     (0.110)     (0.109)  (0.023)   (0.129)  (0.132)   (0.132)   (0.122)
Domestic market liquidity           -1.727**   -2.603*** -1.639* -2.193** -1.273** -1.902** -1.711**
                                     (0.834)     (0.972)  (0.868)   (0.907)  (0.622)   (0.845)   (0.832)
Capital controls                   -0.469***   -0.577*** -0.265+ -0.280+ -0.289+        -0.232   -0.208+
                                     (0.180)     (0.201)  (0.206)   (0.187)  (0.187)   (0.275)   (0.128)
Cables                             -0.332***   -0.282*** -0.064 -0.331*** -0.374*** -0.326*** -0.327***
                                     (0.101)     (0.103)  (0.094)   (0.115)  (0.123)   (0.120)   (0.113)
Cables × time zone distance         0.333***    0.342***   0.020   0.366*** 0.392*** 0.390*** 0.358***
                                     (0.093)     (0.093)  (0.017)   (0.114)  (0.119)   (0.119)   (0.108)
Cables × domestic market liquidity 1.357+       2.257**   1.265+    1.353+    0.911+    1.538*    1.339+
                                     (0.829)     (0.974)  (0.864)   (0.894)  (0.616)   (0.840)   (0.828)
Cables × capital controls           0.454**     0.561***   0.229     0.230    0.247+     0.164    0.195+
                                     (0.179)     (0.198)  (0.210)   (0.190)  (0.190)   (0.277)   (0.133)
Trade integration                     -0.054     -0.103+ -0.116+     -0.071   -0.078    -0.085    -0.074
                                     (0.074)     (0.077)  (0.072)   (0.073)  (0.073)   (0.073)   (0.072)
Financial integration                0.085+       0.125*  0.115*    0.098+    0.081+    0.099+    0.090+
                                     (0.063)     (0.067)  (0.060)   (0.062)  (0.062)   (0.063)   (0.062)
Flexible exchange rate regime       0.112**     0.119** 0.161*** 0.121** 0.125** 0.126** 0.129**
                                     (0.054)     (0.055)  (0.058)   (0.054)  (0.053)   (0.055)   (0.054)
Carry trades                         -0.003+     -0.004+ -0.004*    -0.004*  -0.004*   -0.004*   -0.004*
                                     (0.002)     (0.002)  (0.002)   (0.002)  (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
Constant                            0.283**     0.274**   0.210* 0.479*** 0.506*** 0.477*** 0.447***
                                     (0.137)     (0.135)  (0.111)   (0.145)  (0.150)   (0.145)   (0.141)
Currency effects                     YES         YES         YES         YES        YES       YES         YES
Time effects                         NO          NO          YES         YES        YES       YES         YES
Observations                         238          238         238        238        238       238         238
ρ                                   0.792        0.782       0.739      0.822      0.821     0.799       0.802

Note: The table reports estimates of model equation (2) where the share of foreign exchange trading
occurring offshore is regressed on the standard determinants of the geography of foreign exchange
trading as well as the direct and interacted effect of both point-to-point and via third countries
submarine fiber-optic cable connections to the U.K., U.S. or Japan (i.e. the three countries where the
matching servers of EBS/Reuters for electronic trading are located) and a time trend in lieu of time
fixed effects (in column 1); cable connections interacted with a time trend (in column 2); geographical
distance in lieu of the time difference to the U.K., U.S. or Japan (in column 3); the log of FX turnover
rather than its level (in column 4); total FX turnover rather than FX turnover net of domestic currency
turnover (in column 5); restrictions on capital inflows rather than restrictions on all flows (in column
6); restrictions on capital outflows (in column 7). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, + p<0.2.




                                                                                                                 44
Online Appendix

                                     Table A1: Ownership of the Submarine Fiber-Optic Cables Laid Between 1989 and 2002
                                                       a. Point-to-Point Connections to the U.K. (London)
       Cable name                                  Year   Length (km)   id     Owners
                                                   1989   35            1387   BT
       UK-France 3                                 1989   155           1314   BT, Orange, Vodafone
       Farland North                               1989   150           1819   BT
       BT-MT-1                                     1990   80            1752   BT, Manx Telecom
       Lanis-2                                     1992   67            1751   Vodafone
       Lanis-1                                     1992   113           1616   Vodafone
       Lanis-3                                     1992   122           1834   Vodafone
       Swansea-Brean                               1993   97            1835   Vodafone
       Scotland-Northern Ireland 2                 1993   82            1614   BT
       Swansea-Brean                               1993   97            1835   Vodafone
       Celtic                                      1994   275           1054   BT, eircom, Orange
       UK-Netherlands 14                           1996   208           1365   BT, KPN, Vodafone
       Ulysses                                     1997   250           1343   Verizon
       FLAG Europe-Asia (FEA)                      1997   28000         1027   Global Cloud Xchange
       Ulysses                                     1997   250           1343   Verizon
       Atlantic Crossing-1 (AC-1)                  1998   14301         1143   Level 3
       SeaMeWe-3                                   1999   39000         1031   Orange, BT, KDDI, SingTel, Telecom Italia Sparkle, Telekom Malaysia, OTEGLOBE, AT&T, Belgacom, Communications Authority of
                                                                               Thailand, China Telecom, Deutsche Telekom, Etisalat, Telecom Egypt, CTM, PT Indonesia Satellite Corp., Jabatan Telecom Brunei, KT,
                                                                               Portugal Telecom, Maroc Telecom, PLDT, Saudi Telecom, Sri Lanka Telecom, Turk Telekom, Tata Communications, Chunghwa
                                                                               Telecom, Verizon, KPN, Telekom Austria, SingTel Optus, Telstra, Vietnam Telecom International, Omantel, PCCW, Pakistan
                                                                               Telecommunications Company Ltd., Cyta, eircom, LG Uplus, Softbank Telecom, Telkom South Africa, Rostelecom, Orange Polska,
                                                                               SingTel Optus, Telecom Argentina, Myanmar Post and Telecommunication, Sprint, Vocus Communications, Djibouti Telecom, Embratel,
                                                                               Vodafone
       Sirius North                                1999   147           1754   Virgin Media Business
       Solas                                       1999   232           1205   eircom, Vodafone
       Concerto                                    1999   550           1538   Interoute
       Pan European Crossing (UK-Belgium)          1999   117           1539   Level 3
       Tampnet Offshore FOC Network                1999   1751          1203   Tampnet
       Sirius South                                1999   219           1092   Virgin Media Business
       Circe South                                 1999   115           1323   VTLWavenet, euNetworks
       Sirius North                                1999   147           1754   Virgin Media Business
       Circe North                                 1999   203           1137   VTLWavenet, euNetworks
       ESAT-1                                      1999   261           1223   Esat BT
       Pan European Crossing (UK-Ireland)          2000   495           1547   Level 3
       Tangerine                                   2000   112           1324   Level 3
       ESAT-2                                      2000   245           1224   Esat BT
       Yellow                                      2000   7001          1081   Level 3
       Hibernia Atlantic                           2001   12200         1080   Hibernia Networks
       Tata TGN-Atlantic                           2001   13000         1149   Tata Communications
       FLAG Atlantic-1 (FA-1)                      2001   14500         1028   Global Cloud Xchange
       TAT-14                                      2001   15295         1043   BT, Verizon, Deutsche Telekom, Orange, Sprint, TeliaSonera, Level 3, KPN, Telenor, Etisalat, OTEGLOBE, SingTel, KDDI, Softbank
                                                                               Telecom, Zayo Group, Portugal Telecom, Slovak Telekom, TDC, Telus, Tata Communications, Telefonica, AT&T, Belgacom, Elisa
                                                                               Corporation, Cyta, Rostelecom, Vodafone
       Hibernia Atlantic                           2001   12200         1080   Hibernia Networks
       Tata TGN-Western Europe                     2002   3578          1173   Tata Communications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    45
                                                              b. Point-to-Point Connections to the U.S. (New York)
Cable name                                                    Year   Length (km)   id     Owners
Taino-Carib                                                   1992   186           1229   AT&T, Embratel, Telecom Argentina, Orange, CANTV, Columbus Networks, Telecom Italia Sparkle
HICS (Hawaii Inter-Island Cable System)                       1994   479.081       1455   Hawaiian Telcom
Columbus-II b                                                 1994   2068          1643   n.a.
HIFN (Hawaii Island Fibre Network)                            1997   529           1456   TW Telecom, Hawaiian Telcom
Antillas 1                                                    1997   650           1227   AT&T, Verizon, Sprint, Tata Communications, Orange, Columbus Networks, Telecom Italia Sparkle, Embratel
HIFN (Hawaii Island Fibre Network)                            1997   529           1456   TW Telecom, Hawaiian Telcom
Bahamas 2                                                     1997   470           1069   AT&T, Telefonica, Verizon
Atlantic Crossing-1 (AC-1)                                    1998   14301         1143   Level 3
Pacific Crossing-1 (PC-1)                                     1999   20900         1007   NTT
NorthStar                                                     1999   3229          1166   Alaska Communications Systems Group
Pacific Crossing-1 (PC-1)                                     1999   20900         1007   NTT
Pan American (PAN-AM)                                         1999   7050          1073   AT&T, Telefonica del Peru, Softbank Telecom, Telecom Italia Sparkle, Sprint, CANTV, Tata Communications, TelefÃ³nica de Argentina
                                                                                          (Speedy), Telstra, Verizon, Entel Chile, Telecom Argentina, Telconet, Cable & Wireless Communications, Corporacion Nacional de
                                                                                          Telecommunicaciones, Columbus Networks, Embratel
Alaska United East                                            1999   3751          1168   GCI
Columbus-III                                                  1999   9833          1046   Telecom Italia Sparkle, AT&T, Verizon, Telefonica, Portugal Telecom, CANTV, Tata Communications, Ukrtelecom, Telkom South
                                                                                          Africa, Telecom Argentina, Cable & Wireless Communications, Embratel
GlobeNet                                                      2000   23500         1076   BTG Pactual
South American Crossing (SAC)/Latin American Nautilus (LAN)   2000   20000         1084   Level 3, Telecom Italia Sparkle
Southern Cross Cable Network (SCCN)                           2000   30500         1009   Spark New Zealand, SingTel Optus, Verizon
GlobeNet                                                      2000   23500         1076   BTG Pactual
Maya-1                                                        2000   4400          1071   Cable & Wireless Communications, Verizon, Tata Communications, AT&T, Sprint, Hondutel, CANTV, Telefonica, BT, Orbitel, Telecom
                                                                                          Italia Sparkle, Columbus Networks, Entel Chile, Telmex, Embratel, ETB, Alestra
Mid-Atlantic Crossing (MAC)                                   2000   7500          1070   Level 3
China-U.S. Cable Network (CHUS)                               2000   30476         1146   Verizon, AT&T, KDDI, Tata Communications, China Telecom, Chunghwa Telecom, KT, NTT, Level 3, SingTel, Sprint, Telekom
                                                                                          Malaysia, Spark New Zealand, Telstra, PCCW, LG Uplus, Softbank Telecom, Rostelecom, SingTel Optus, Orange, PLDT
Yellow                                                        2000   7001          1081   Level 3
name                                                          2000   10000         1072   Level 3
Southern Cross Cable Network (SCCN)                           2000   30500         1009   Spark New Zealand, SingTel Optus, Verizon
Americas-II                                                   2000   8373          1148   Embratel, AT&T, Verizon, Sprint, CANTV, Tata Communications, Level 3, Centennial of Puerto Rico, Corporacion Nacional de
                                                                                          Telecommunicaciones, Telecom Argentina, Orange, Portugal Telecom, Columbus Networks, Telecom Italia Sparkle, Entel Chile
Southern Cross Cable Network (SCCN)                           2000   30500         1009   Spark New Zealand, SingTel Optus, Verizon
Mid-Atlantic Crossing (MAC)                                   2000   7500          1070   Level 3
Japan-U.S. Cable Network (JUS)                                2001   22682         1010   Verizon, AT&T, BT, Sprint, CenturyLink, KDDI, NTT, Chunghwa Telecom, Tata Communications, SingTel, Telekom Malaysia, Softbank
                                                                                          Telecom, Orange, Level 3, SK Broadband, KT, China Telecom, China Unicom, LG Uplus, New World Telecom, Starhub, PCCW, Telstra,
                                                                                          Vodafone, PLDT
FLAG Atlantic-1 (FA-1)                                        2001   14500         1028   Global Cloud Xchange
Hibernia Atlantic                                             2001   12200         1080   Hibernia Networks
Bahamas Internet Cable System (BICS)                          2001   1100          1232   Caribbean Crossings
TAT-14                                                        2001   15295         1043   BT, Verizon, Deutsche Telekom, Orange, Sprint, TeliaSonera, Level 3, KPN, Telenor, Etisalat, OTEGLOBE, SingTel, KDDI, Softbank
                                                                                          Telecom, Zayo Group, Portugal Telecom, Slovak Telekom, TDC, Telus, Tata Communications, Telefonica, AT&T, Belgacom, Elisa
                                                                                          Corporation, Cyta, Rostelecom, Vodafone
South America-1 (SAm-1)                                       2001   25000         1083   Telefonica
Japan-U.S. Cable Network (JUS)                                2001   22682         1010   Verizon, AT&T, BT, Sprint, CenturyLink, KDDI, NTT, Chunghwa Telecom, Tata Communications, SingTel, Telekom Malaysia, Softbank
                                                                                          Telecom, Orange, Level 3, SK Broadband, KT, China Telecom, China Unicom, LG Uplus, New World Telecom, Starhub, PCCW, Telstra,
                                                                                          Vodafone, PLDT
ARCOS                                                         2001   8600          1078   Columbus Networks, Axtel, CANTV, Codetel, Hondutel, Belize Telemedia, Enitel, AT&T, Alestra, Verizon, RACSA, United
                                                                                          Telecommunication Services (UTS), Telecarrier, Tricom USA, Telecomunicaciones Ultramarinas de Puerto Rico, Internexa, Orbinet
                                                                                          Overseas, Telepuerto San Isidro, Bahamas Telecommunications Company
Tata TGN-Atlantic                                             2001   13000         1149   Tata Communications
TAT-14                                                        2001   15295         1043   BT, Verizon, Deutsche Telekom, Orange, Sprint, TeliaSonera, Level 3, KPN, Telenor, Etisalat, OTEGLOBE, SingTel, KDDI, Softbank
                                                                                          Telecom, Zayo Group, Portugal Telecom, Slovak Telekom, TDC, Telus, Tata Communications, Telefonica, AT&T, Belgacom, Elisa
                                                                                          Corporation, Cyta, Rostelecom, Vodafone
South America-1 (SAm-1)                                       2001   25000         1083   Telefonica
Tata TGN-Pacific                                              2002   22300         1155   Tata Communications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              46
                                                        a. Point-to-Point Connections to Japan (Tokyo)
Cable name                                   Year    Length (km)   id     Owners
FLAG Europe-Asia (FEA)                       1997    28000         1027   Global Cloud Xchange
Pacific Crossing-1 (PC-1)                    1999    20900         1007   NTT
SeaMeWe-3                                    1999    39000         1031   Orange, BT, KDDI, SingTel, Telecom Italia Sparkle, Telekom Malaysia, OTEGLOBE, AT&T, Belgacom, Communications Authority of
                                                                          Thailand, China Telecom, Deutsche Telekom, Etisalat, Telecom Egypt, CTM, PT Indonesia Satellite Corp., Jabatan Telecom Brunei, KT,
                                                                          Portugal Telecom, Maroc Telecom, PLDT, Saudi Telecom, Sri Lanka Telecom, Turk Telekom, Tata Communications, Chunghwa
                                                                          Telecom, Verizon, KPN, Telekom Austria, SingTel Optus, Telstra, Vietnam Telecom International, Omantel, PCCW, Pakistan
                                                                          Telecommunications Company Ltd., Cyta, eircom, LG Uplus, Softbank Telecom, Telkom South Africa, Rostelecom, Orange Polska,
                                                                          SingTel Optus, Telecom Argentina, Myanmar Post and Telecommunication, Sprint, Vocus Communications, Djibouti Telecom, Embratel,
                                                                          Vodafone
Pacific Crossing-1 (PC-1)                    1999    20900         1007   NTT
China-U.S. Cable Network (CHUS)              2000    30476         1146   Verizon, AT&T, KDDI, Tata Communications, China Telecom, Chunghwa Telecom, KT, NTT, Level 3, SingTel, Sprint, Telekom
                                                                          Malaysia, Spark New Zealand, Telstra, PCCW, LG Uplus, Softbank Telecom, Rostelecom, SingTel Optus, Orange, PLDT
Australia-Japan Cable (AJC)                  2001    12700         1102   Softbank Telecom, NTT, Telstra, Verizon, AT&T
APCN-2                                       2001    19000         1049   SingTel, Verizon, KDDI, Chunghwa Telecom, AT&T, BT, Orange, Softbank Telecom, NTT, Tata Communications, Telekom Malaysia,
                                                                          Starhub, PLDT, China Unicom, KT, SingTel Optus, Telstra, PCCW, China Telecom, LG Uplus, New World Telecom, Vodafone

Japan-U.S. Cable Network (JUS)               2001    22682         1010   Verizon, AT&T, BT, Sprint, CenturyLink, KDDI, NTT, Chunghwa Telecom, Tata Communications, SingTel, Telekom Malaysia, Softbank
                                                                          Telecom, Orange, Level 3, SK Broadband, KT, China Telecom, China Unicom, LG Uplus, New World Telecom, Starhub, PCCW, Telstra,
                                                                          Vodafone, PLDT
FLAG North Asia Loop/REACH North Asia Loop   2001    9504          1150   Global Cloud Xchange, PCCW, Telstra
Japan-U.S. Cable Network (JUS)               2001    22682         1010   Verizon, AT&T, BT, Sprint, CenturyLink, KDDI, NTT, Chunghwa Telecom, Tata Communications, SingTel, Telekom Malaysia, Softbank
                                                                          Telecom, Orange, Level 3, SK Broadband, KT, China Telecom, China Unicom, LG Uplus, New World Telecom, Starhub, PCCW, Telstra,
                                                                          Vodafone, PLDT
APCN-2                                       2001    19000         1049   SingTel, Verizon, KDDI, Chunghwa Telecom, AT&T, BT, Orange, Softbank Telecom, NTT, Tata Communications, Telekom Malaysia,
                                                                          Starhub, PLDT, China Unicom, KT, SingTel Optus, Telstra, PCCW, China Telecom, LG Uplus, New World Telecom, Vodafone

EAC-C2C                                      2002    36500         1592   Pacnet
Korea-Japan Cable Network (KJCN)             2002    500           1231   QTNet, KT, Softbank Telecom, NTT
Tata TGN-Pacific                             2002    22300         1155   Tata Communications



Sources: Authors’ compilation based on the data made available by TeleGeography at the following url: https://github.com/telegeography/www.submarinecablemap.com.




                                                                                                                                                                                                           47
