NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRATION IN AMERICAN ECONOMIC HISTORY
Ran Abramitzky
Leah Platt Boustan
Working Paper 21882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21882

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

We thank Steven Durlauf (editor), Matthias Blum, George Borjas, David Card, Giovanni Peri, Gavin
Wright, and seven referees for helpful comments and encouragement. We are grateful for Santiago
Perez for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ran Abramitzky and Leah Platt Boustan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Immigration in American Economic History
Ran Abramitzky and Leah Platt Boustan
NBER Working Paper No. 21882
January 2016
JEL No. J61,N11,N12
ABSTRACT
The United States has long been perceived as a land of opportunity for immigrants. Yet, both in the
past and today, US natives have expressed concern that immigrants fail to integrate into US society
and lower wages for existing workers. This paper reviews the literatures on historical and contemporary
migrant flows, yielding new insights on migrant selection, assimilation of immigrants into US economy
and society, and the effect of immigration on the labor market.

Ran Abramitzky
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
ranabr@stanford.edu
Leah Platt Boustan
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lboustan@econ.ucla.edu

I. Introduction
The United States has long been perceived as a land of opportunity, a place where
prospective immigrants can achieve prosperity and upward mobility. 1 Yet, both in the past and
today, US natives have expressed concern that immigration lowers wages and that new arrivals
fail to assimilate into US society. These fears have influenced historical immigration policy and
are echoed in contemporary debates.2
In this essay, we address three major questions in the economics of immigration: whether
immigrants were positively or negatively selected from their sending countries; how immigrants
assimilated into the US economy and society; and what effects that immigration may have on the
economy, including the effect of immigration on native employment and wages. In each case, we
present studies covering the two main eras of US immigration history, the Age of Mass
Migration from Europe (1850-1920) and the recent period of renewed mass migration from Asia
and Latin America.
Reviewing the historical and contemporary evidence side by side yields a number of
insights. First, the nature of migration selection appears to have changed over time. Whereas, in
the past, migrant selection patterns were mixed, with some migrants positively and others
negatively selected from their home countries on the basis of skill, migrants today are primarily
positively selected from source country populations, at least on observable characteristics.3 The
rise in income inequality in the US can help explain the increasingly positive selection of

1

Ellis Island in New York Harbor served as the entry point for millions of immigrants arriving from Europe in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor, which has come to be a
symbol of the country’s openness to new arrivals, was extolled in Emma Lazarus’s 1883 poem, A New Colossus, for
beckoning “world-wide welcome.”
2
Jencks (2001) describes the parallels between historical and contemporary immigration debates, writing that
“America’s current immigration debate often sounds a lot like the debate that raged early in the twentieth century.
Once again many American workers see immigrants as an economic threat… Once again the great majority of
Americans would prefer to keep the country homogeneous.”
3
We discuss exceptions to this broad pattern in the corresponding section.

2

immigrants seeking to take advantage of the high returns to skill in the US. But the fact that
recent immigrants are not negatively selected – even from destinations that are more unequal
than the US, as would be predicted by the classic Roy model of self-selection – may be explained
by the growing selectivity of US immigration policy over time, or by rising costs of (often
undocumented) entry due to strict immigration restrictions.
Second, both in the past and today, the evidence is not consistent with the common
perception of the “American dream,” whereby immigrants arrived penniless and eventually
caught up with US natives. Long-term immigrants in both periods have experienced occupational
or earnings growth at around the same pace as natives. As a result, immigrants who held lowerpaid occupations than natives upon arrival to the US did not catch up with natives over a single
generation. The major difference between the past and present is that, circa 1900, typical longterm immigrants held occupations similar to the native born, even upon first arrival, whereas
today the average immigrant earns less than natives upon arrival to the US. Smaller earnings
gaps in the past are consistent with the fact that immigrants primarily hailed from European
countries that, though poorer than the US, were not as dissimilar in development to the US as are
sending countries like Mexico and China today. 4 However, there was a substantial degree of
heterogeneity in immigrants’ skills and earnings across sending countries, including some
immigrant groups that out-earn natives from the outset. We also argue that, when evaluating the
pace of immigrant assimilation, methods matter. Studies based on cross-sectional data, which are
less well-suited to studying assimilation than are panel data, often provide an overly-optimistic
sense of immigrant convergence.

4

US GDP per capita is over 5 times higher than Mexico or China today, whereas the US had GDP per capita that
was only 2-3 times higher than European sending countries circa 1900.

3

Third, both then and now, immigrants appear to reduce the wages of some natives, but the
evidence does not support the view that, on net, immigrants have negative effects on the US
economy. Instead, new arrivals creates winners and losers in the native population and among
existing immigrant workers, reducing the wages of low-skilled natives, encouraging some native
born to move away from immigrant gateway cities, and spurring capital investment; in the past,
these investments took the form of new factories geared toward mass production.
The main goal of this paper is to review the historical evidence on key issues of concern
to the economics of immigration today. We explicitly address the set of topics covered in the
Borjas’ (1994, 2014) reviews of the literature, which include immigrant selection and
assimilation and the effect of immigrants on native workers, and we add in each case the insight
that comes from comparison with the historical evidence. Our focus is on the labor and applied
microeconomics research, rather than on more macroeconomic approaches to this topic. Hatton
and Williamson (2005) and Ferrie and Hatton (2014) provide complementary reviews of the role
of immigration in global economic history. There are a number of important historical topics that
we do not cover here. These include internal migration within the US,5 the involuntary migration
of slaves,6 migrations to destinations outside of the US,7 or the effect that out-migration might

5

Classic references on internal migration in US history are Steckel (1983), Hall and Ruggles (2004) and Ferrie
(2005). Collins and Wanamaker (2014) uses linked Census data to evaluate the selectivity and returns to migration
for black and white migrants leaving the US South before 1930. Boustan (2009) and Boustan, Fishback and Kantor
(2010) study the effect of internal migrants on existing workers in destination areas. Molloy, Smith and Wozniak
(2011) address the more recent decline in the rates of internal migration in the US.
6
Curtain (1972), Menard (1975), Fogel (1989), and Eltis, Lewis and Richard (2005) discuss effects of the slave
trade on US population and markets. Nunn (2008) considers the effect of slave trade on the source countries.
7
Hatton and Williamson (1994) include chapters on migration to Argentina, Australia and Canada, the three largest
receiving countries in the period outside the US. Green, MacKinnon and Minns (2002) compare British migrants
who chose to settle in the US versus Canada, and Balderas and Greenwood (2010) compare the determinants of
migration to Argentina, Brazil and the US. Green and Green (1993), Green and MacKinnon (2001), and Dean and
Dilmaghani (2014) study the assimilation of European immigrants into the Canadian economy. Fares to Australia
and New Zealand were higher than to other destinations in this period, and information about these economies was
scarcer (McDonald and Shlomowitz, 1991). Hudson (2001) discusses these effects of these impediments on
migration to New Zealand. Pérez (2014) constructs panel data to study the selection and assimilation of immigrants
to Argentina during the Age of Mass Migration.

4

have on sending countries.8 Furthermore, our coverage of the literature on the modern period is
only partial.

II. Immigration regimes in US history
The history of immigration to the United States has been shaped both by changes in the
underlying costs and benefits of migration as well as by substantial shifts in immigration policy.
The high cost of crossing the Atlantic in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries gave rise to a
long period of indentured immigration (c. 1600-1800).9 With revolutions in shipping
technology10 and a growing reliance on a network of migrant finance,11 migration costs declined
in the mid-nineteenth century, ushering in a sustained Age of Mass Migration from Europe
(1850-1920). This period ended with the imposition of a literacy test for entry in 1917 and strict
immigration quotas in 1921, which were modified (although not eliminated) in 1965. Most
recently, the relaxation of immigration quotas has allowed for a period of constrained mass
migration, primarily from Asia and Latin America.12

8

There has been surprisingly little work done on the effect of emigration on the sending regions considering the
dramatic rates of out-migration from Europe during the Age of Mass Migration. Boyer, Hatton and O’Rourke (1994)
and Hatton and Williamson (1998, chpt. 9) study the labor market effects of out-migration in Ireland and Sweden.
Karadja and Prawitz (2015) study the effect of emigration on local political development in Sweden.
9
The majority of voluntary migrants who settled in the American colonies before 1775 arrived on indentured
servants’ contracts (Smith, 1947; Tomlins, 2001). Indenturing arose as a solution to the high costs of migration in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (Galenson 1981a, 1981b, 1984). Most indentured servants were young men
from the United Kingdom or Germany (Gemery, 1986). Servants worked for a defined period of time, often seven
years, in exchange for passage from Europe to the New World (Grubb, 1985, 1986, 1988). The market rewarded
servants who arrived with more skills in the form of shorter periods of indenture (Galenson 1981a, 1981b).
Abramitzky and Braggion (2006) suggest that, relative to the West Indies, the mainland American colonies appeared
to have attracted servants with higher levels of human capital.
10
As wooden hulls and paddle wheels were replaced by iron sides and compound steam engines, trans-Atlantic
travel time declined from one month in the mid-eighteenth century to eight days by 1870 (Hugill, 1993; Cohn,
2005). On the industrial organization of the steamship industry at its height, see Keeling (1999).
11
See Grubb (1994) on the relationship between migrant financing and the decline in indentured servitude. The
demise of indenturing in the US may also have been tied to the growth of the slave population (Galenson, 1984).
Indeed, indenturing was widely used to transport Asians, primarily from India and China, after the abolition of
slavery in the Caribbean sugar islands and South America in the 1830s (Engerman, 1986).
12
We borrow this periodization in part from Chiswick and Hatton (2003).

5

The rise of mass migration was associated with the shift from sail to steam technology in
the mid-nineteenth century, and a corresponding decline in the time of trans-Atlantic passage.13
As travel costs fell and migrant networks expanded from 1800 to 1850, the number of
unencumbered immigrants entering the US increased substantially.14 Annual in-migration rose
from less than one per 1,000 residents in 1820 to 15 per 1,000 residents by 1850 (Panel A of
Figure 1).15 Throughout the Age of Mass Migration (1850-1920), about 55 million immigrants
left Europe, with the US absorbing nearly 30 million of these arrivals (Hatton and Williamson,
1998, p. 7).16 As a result, the foreign-born share of the population rose from 10 percent in 1850
to 14 percent in 1870, where it remained until 1920 (Panel B of Figure 1).17 Another notable
feature of this era is the fluctuations of migration flows with the business cycle; annual inmigration rates varied between 0.4 and 1.6 percent of the population. Spitzer (2014) explains this
pattern in the context of a dynamic model in which prospective migrants optimally time their
moves to the New World; in this case, high migration rates during economic booms can generate
follow-on migration via migrant networks, thereby augmenting business cycle swings.

13

In the mid-eighteenth century, it took around one month to sail from a European port to the US. The SS Great
Western, the first steamship to cross the Atlantic in 1838, completed the journey in 16 days. As ship technology
improved, with wooden hulls and paddle wheels replaced by iron sides and compound steam engines, travel time
declined further, reaching eight days by 1870 (Hugill, 1993; Cohn, 2005). On the industrial organization of the
steamship industry at its height, see Keeling (1999).
14
Shorter trans-Atlantic voyages reduced the cost of migration in part by lowering the mortality risk of the journey.
In the 1840s, the mortality rate during the crossing was one in 100 (Cohn, 1984). Mortality risk was especially high
for children (Cohn, 1987). Once migrant communities were established in US cities and rural areas, many
prospective migrants were able to travel on pre-paid tickets financed by friends or family, thereby lowering
borrowing costs (Hatton and Williamson, 1998; Carrington, et al., 1996). See also Kobrin and Day (2002) on the
role of immigrant banks in facilitating migration.
15
To compare immigration flows over time, note that Figure 1a does not include undocumented immigrants, which
represented an additional 650,000 entrants per year during the decade of the 2000s (Hanson, 2006). Adding
undocumented immigrants would double contemporary immigrant in-flows, making immigration rates more
comparable today to the Age of Mass Migration.
16
Other important receiving countries were Argentina, Canada and Brazil.
17
Migrants represented a larger share of the labor force than the population during the Age of Mass Migration (20
percent versus 14 percent), largely because few migrants were young children. Today the gap between the foreign
born share of the population and the labor force is smaller (13 percent versus 16 percent).

6

Alongside this growth in migrant numbers, falling migration costs also facilitated a shift
in the typical mix of sending countries towards poorer countries on the European periphery
(Figure 2). In 1850, over 90 percent of the migrant stock hailed from Northern and Western
Europe, particularly from the Great Britain, Ireland and Germany. The share of migrants from
Southern and Eastern Europe began to rise in 1890; by 1920, 45 percent of the migrant stock was
from the “old” sending countries, while 41 percent was from the “new” regions. Immigrants
from Southern and Eastern Europe were, on average, younger, more likely to be male and
unmarried, and less likely to settle permanently in the US (Hatton and Williamson, 1998, p.11,
101-102). According to official statistics on return migration, first collected in 1908, around 30
percent of European migrants returned to their home country (Gould, 1980; Wyman, 1996);
recent work by Bandiera, Rasul, Viarengo (2013) suggests that the return rates from certain
countries may have been much higher.18
Immigrants clustered by region in the US (Dunlevy and Gemery, 1977). Figure 3 uses the
complete count of the 1920 Census to map the most numerous country-of-origin group among
the foreign born by county. The map illustrates some well-known patterns in US history:
Scandinavians were the largest foreign-born group in the upper Midwest; German-speaking
migrants represented the largest share of the foreign born in the lower Midwest; Italians were
prevalent in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Migration within the Americas was also
sizeable, with Canadians representing the largest country-of-origin group in Maine and along
parts of the northern border, and Mexicans dominating through most of Texas, Arizona, New
Mexico and southern California. Settlement patterns in the South were far less cohesive,

18

BRV compare the counts of migrant inflows from newly-digitized passenger manifests to the stock of foreignborn residents in the Census and attribute the difference to return migration. This method implies that 60-75 percent
of migrants returned to Europe in the 1900s and 1910s.

7

primarily reflecting the fact that the immigrant share of the population in southern counties was
very low.
Immigrant enclaves are easier to observe in Figure 4, which presents the share of the
county’s population in 1920 made up of immigrants from particular sending countries. For
illustration, we consider three groups – Austrians and Germans, Italians, and Norwegians. The
largest clusters of German immigrants (as a share of the total population) were in Wisconsin,
central Minnesota and Iowa; and in Pennsylvania and Texas. Italians represented over ten
percent of the population in certain counties in Connecticut, Rhode Island and upstate New York.
Norwegians were equally numerous in the northern tip of Minnesota and in much of North
Dakota.
Rising migrant numbers and, especially, the shift towards new sending countries
contributed to the growing political pressure to restrict immigrant inflows.19 Congress convened
the Dillingham Commission in 1907 to study the effect of immigration on the US economy and
society. The Commission’s report, published in 1911, advocated for a set of additional
regulations, including limits on the number of immigrant arrivals, quotas by county-of-origin,
and restrictions against immigrants who were illiterate or penurious. All but the wealth
requirement were passed over the next decade and the era of open borders came to an end.
A literacy test for entry into the US was passed over President Wilson’s veto in 1917. In
1921 (amended in 1924), a set of country-specific immigration quotas were imposed. From over
a million annual entrants in the late 1910s, immigrant arrivals were capped at 150,000 by 1924.

19

The anti-immigration movement scored early victories with targeted bans against smaller immigrant groups,
including the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act; restrictions against the criminal and the “insane” in 1891; and the 1908
Gentleman’s Agreement limiting immigration from Japan. In 1880, there were around 100,000 Chinese immigrants
in the US (representing 3 percent of foreign-born males between the ages of 18 and 65). These pre-Exclusion Act
migrants formed ethnic enclaves (Chinatowns) in many American cities (Carter, 2013). After the immigration ban,
many Chinese immigrants instead settled in South America and the Caribbean.

8

Allocation of quota slots was based on the size of migrant stocks from each country of origin in
1890 (King, 2000, p. 199-217).20 This early benchmark favored countries in Northern and
Western Europe, especially the UK, over the “new” sending countries from Southern and Eastern
Europe.21 Support for immigration restriction was based on concerns about labor market
competition, as well as xenophobia and antipathy toward new immigrant arrivals (Goldin,
1994).22 A shift in the southern vote away from open immigration was decisive in allowing
Congress to override the presidential veto.23
Following the imposition of strict immigration quotas, the foreign born share of the US
population declined from 14 percent in 1920 to 5 percent in 1970 (see Panel B of Figure 1). The
flow of low-skilled immigrants dropped substantially after 1921, due both to a change in the
country-of-origin mix and to increased selectivity within sending countries (Massey, 2013).
Specific immigrant groups, including Jewish refugees during World War II and Eastern
Europeans allowed entry by the Refugee Relief Act of 1953 contributed to this shift in migrant
selection (Blum and Rei, 2015). The imposition of quotas also reduced the phenomenon of
temporary migration, especially among unskilled and agricultural workers (Greenwood and

20

Legislation passed in 1921 limited immigrant arrivals to 357,000 and allocated slots on the basis of migrant stocks
in the 1910 Census. These restrictions were tightened in 1924 and further amended in 1929.
21
Swings in US immigration regimes mirror similar policy shifts in immigrant-receiving countries over time.
Timmer and Williamson (1998) document a general shift toward restrictive border policy in many immigrantreceiving countries in the early twentieth century, which Williamson (1998) attributes in part to the political pressure
of low-skilled native voters.
22
Goldin (1994) finds that congressional districts with mid-sized immigrant communities (as opposed to large or
small concentrations of the foreign born) and districts facing stagnant wages were the most likely to support
restriction. Nationally, organized labor and residents of rural areas were the most consistent supporters of
immigration restriction. Rural voters may simply have been xenophobic or may have worried about the competition
that immigrants posed for their children, many of whom were moving to urban areas. On the role of nativism in
depressing immigration flows in the 1850s, see Cohn (2000). Higham (2002, ori. pub. 1955) is the classic reference
on nativism in US history.
23
Few immigrants moved to the South. Indirectly, immigration affected southern interests by providing a steady
supply of workers in northern factories, which may have forestalled the move of southern black workers to northern
cities (Collins, 1997).

9

Ward, 2014). An exception is the temporary migration of over four million Mexican farm
laborers authorized by the Bracero program (1942-1964) (Massey and Liang, 1989).
Immigration quotas remained in place until the 1960s. The Immigration and Nationality
Act of 1965, passed in the midst of the Civil Rights movement, eliminated the country-specific
quota system and increased the immigration cap from 150,000 to 270,000 entrants per year.24
The country-specific allocation was replaced by preferences for close family members of US
citizens or legal permanent residents and for individuals with specific skills with employment
sponsorship. Another route to legal migration, albeit in small number, is through refugee or
asylum seeker status. Currently, the global immigration quota is 620,000, with no more than 7
percent of the flow allocated to any given country.25
The foreign-born share of the population increased from 5 percent in 1970 to 14 percent
in 2010, returning to a level last seen during the previous Age of Mass Migration. In 2010, 51
percent of the migrant stock was from Latin America and 28 percent was from Asia. Given that
demand for immigration to the US now outstrips available slots, the number of “illegal” or
“undocumented” immigrants living in the US increased, reaching 27 percent of the total stock of
immigrants by 2011 (and a larger share of the annual flow). In the decade of the 2000s, estimates
suggest that around 650,000 undocumented immigrants arrived each year, mainly from Mexico
(Hanson, 2006).26
Policymakers have attempted to counteract undocumented migration by expanding the
policing of the southern border; expenditures on border control rose ten-fold from the 1980s to

24

King (2000, p. 247) argues that the 1965 policy change was “not designed to open the US to increasing numbers
of immigrants but simply to end inequities in the selection of immigrants” (on this point, see also Massey and Pren,
2012).
25
The assignment of immigration slots by hemisphere ended in 1978, in favor of a single, worldwide quota.
26
See facts at http://pewhispanic.org/files/reports/126.pdf

10

the 2000s (Gathmann, 2008).27 Since 2001, Congress has repeatedly introduced (but failed to
pass) the DREAM Act to create a path to permanent residency for the children of undocumented
immigrants.28 In 2012, the Obama Administration passed an executive order to offer temporary
work permits to such children and expanded this Deferred Action program to other
undocumented immigrants in 2014. An immigration reform bill passed by the Senate in June
2013 (but not brought to a vote in the House) offered a “tough but fair” pathway to citizenship
for the estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants living in the US. The reform was
intended to provide a wider set of employment and educational opportunities to immigrants and
their children, and at the same time set stronger enforcement tools to prevent more illegal
immigrants from coming to the US. Immigration reform remains a central issue for the 2016
presidential campaign.29

III. Migrant selection
International migration is a selective process, with some residents choosing to leave their
country of birth and others choosing to stay. Who moves depends on the costs and benefits of
migration, which can vary across individuals for both systematic and idiosyncratic reasons. In a
simple Roy model in which migration costs are assumed to be the same for everyone,
prospective migrants possessing skills that are highly valued in the destination economy can

27

Policing the border has an ambiguous effect on the total number of undocumented migrants living in the US; fear
of apprehension reduces the inflow of new undocumented migrants but also discourages existing migrants from
returning home (Angelucci, 2012; Gathmann, 2008; Hanson and Spilimbergo, 1999).
28
Woolston (2015) compares the educational attainment of undocumented immigrants who arrived in the US as
young children with their younger siblings who were born in the US and shows that US citizenship has a positive
effect on educational outcomes.
29
Contemporary survey evidence finds that low-skilled workers are less favorable toward an open immigration
policy than their higher-skilled counterparts, although the underlying cause of this association – whether concerns
about labor market competition or an association between skill level and nativist attitudes – is unclear (Scheve and
Slaughter, 2001; O’Rourke and Sinnott, 2006; Hainmueller and Hiscox, 2007). See Citrin, et al. (1997) for an
alternative reading of the survey evidence.

11

expect the highest return to migration and are thus most likely to move. Specifically, if the
destination country offers higher labor market rewards for skill relative to the sending country,
the migrant flow will be positively selected on the basis of skill. If, instead, the destination
economy offers lower rewards for skill relative to the sending area, the migrant flow will be
negatively selected on the basis of skill.30 By positive (or negative) selection, we mean that
migrants have more (less) productive skills than residents who stay behind in the source country.
In practice, skills can be indexed by observable attributes (like education) or pre-migration
wages, which provide a measure of otherwise unobserved skills rewarded in the labor market.
Selection patterns during the Age of Mass Migration are consistent with a basic Roy
model. Migration to the US was positively selected from some European countries and
negatively selected from others, with differences in selection lining up with differences in the
relative returns to skill across sending countries. In the recent period, migrants to the US from
many sending countries appear to be positively selected on the basis of education and other
observable dimensions of productivity. Such positive selection may be a result of immigration
policy that favors education and skill.

A. Migrant selection in the past
Given available information on the income distribution of European sending countries in
the mid-nineteenth century, an application of the Roy model would predict neutral selection from
Western Europe and negative selection from the European periphery. At this time, the US
exhibited a similar income distribution to many Western European countries, in which case we
would expect neutrally-selected migration from countries like Great Britain (Lindert, 2000;
30

This logic is drawn from Roy’s (1951) model of self-selection into occupations, as applied to the migration
decision by Borjas (1987); see Borjas (2014, p. 8-25) for a useful summary of this application.

12

Lindert and Williamson, 2014).31 Although evidence on the income distribution in other
European counties is limited, scattered data suggest that the US was more equal than countries
on the European periphery in the late nineteenth century.32 In these cases, low skilled workers
would have the most to gain from moving to the US and we would expect negative selection.
Indeed, as a basic Roy model would predict, historical evidence suggests that migration
from Western Europe to the US was neutrally selected. Passenger lists of emigrants leaving the
German region of Hesse-Cassel in the 1850s reveal that mid-skill level artisans were
overrepresented in the migrant flow, as opposed to poor laborers or rich farmers (Wegge, 2002).
British immigrants in the 1860s and 1870s were also more likely to have been raised by a father
in a semi-skilled profession, as opposed to by an unskilled or white collar father; Long and Ferrie
(2013b) observe this pattern in Census data matched between the US and the UK.33
In contrast, migrants to the US from countries in the European periphery (including
Ireland, Norway and Italy) appear to have been negatively selected. Irish migrants from the prefamine and famine periods held lower-paid occupations than men who remained at home and
were more likely to report a round-numbered age; such age heaping is often used as a proxy for a
lack of numeracy (Mokyr and Ó Gráda, 1982; Cohn, 1995). Norwegian migrants in a linked
Census sample were more likely than non-migrants to be raised by fathers who did not own land
and who held lower-paid occupations (Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2012). Abramitzky, et
al. also find a higher return to migration within pairs of brothers than in the population as a
31

Lindert and Williamson’s (2014) new inequality estimates for the US in 1860 are based on “social tables,” or
counts of the population in 1-digit occupations, matched with information on labor and property income by
occupation category.
32
See Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson (2012) for a comparison of the US and Norwegian income distributions in
1900. Atkinson and Piketty (2007) and Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2011) provide a broader set of cross-country
comparisons. We caution that the Atkinson, et al. series begin circa 1920 and focus on the share of income earned by
workers at the top of the income distribution, both of which may reduce the applicability to the Age of Mass
Migration.
33
Cohn (1992) instead finds that, during the antebellum period, British migrants were drawn from both the richest
occupations (farmers) and the poorest (laborers), with the skilled artisans underrepresented in the migrant flow.

13

whole, suggesting that naïve estimates of the return to migration are biased downward by
negative selection for men leaving urban areas. Spitzer and Zimran (2014) compare the stature of
Italian migrants entering the US – logged in Ellis Island arrival records – with the stature of
Italian males conscripted into the armed forces as a proxy for childhood health conditions.
Migrants were negatively selected on the basis of height from the overall Italian population, due
entirely to higher migration rates from the poorer southern provinces.34
The direction of migrant selection is closely related to the motivations of prospective
migrants. The Roy model implicitly assumes that migrants are seeking to optimize lifetime
income but, in some cases, migration may also be prompted by flight from persecution or pursuit
of political and social freedoms. An extensive literature in economic history studies the
determinants of aggregate migration flows, drawing either on national time series (e.g., Hatton,
1995 for the UK; Hatton and Williamson, 1998 for Ireland) or provincial differences in
emigration rates (e.g., Hatton and Williamson, 1998 for Ireland and Italy; Sanchez-Alonso, 2000
for Spain).35 In general, the size of the migration flow increases with the relative wage and
employment rates in the destination country, as well as with the size of the migrant network,
suggesting that prospective migrants are aware of and responsive to economic conditions.36
Improvements in relative economic opportunities in the destination country are also associated
with more positive migrant selection (Covarrubias, Lafortune and Tessada, 2015).
There has been less work done on the role of non-economic factors such as political
upheavals or persecution in driving migration flows during the Age of Mass Migration. Boustan

34

Kosack and Ward (2014) use heights to assess the selection patterns of Mexican migrants into the US at the
beginning of the twentieth century. Their results suggest positive selection: migrants from Mexico were on average
four to five centimeters taller than Mexican conscripts. See also Greenwood (2007, 2008) on migrant selection by
age and gender.
35
Hatton (2010) provides a thorough review of this literature (see p. 942-949).
36
See Moretti (1999) on the role of social networks on migration from Italy during the Age of Mass Migration.

14

(2007) and Spitzer (2014) show that Jewish out-migration from the Russian empire reacted to
anti-Jewish violence (pogroms), but that economic fundamentals continued to drive much of the
migration patterns in this case. Research into other cases, including the German revolutions of
1848, the Irish struggles for independence, and the role of various famines and natural disasters,
could prove rewarding.

B. Migrant selection in the present
Unlike in the past, recent empirical evidence on migrant selection to the US appears to be
at odds with predictions from the basic Roy model. In particular, migrants to the US from many
sending countries appear to be positively selected in their education and other observable skills,
regardless of the differentials in returns to skill between destination and source (Jasso, et al.,
2004; Feliciano, 2005; Kennedy, et al., 2006; Grogger and Hanson, 2011).
The case of Mexican immigrants has been analyzed most closely. A high level of income
inequality in Mexico suggests that the migrant flow out of Mexico should be negatively selected.
Instead, early work found that migrants were drawn from the middle of the educational
distribution (Chiquiar and Hanson, 2005; Orrenius and Zavodny, 2005).37 More recent work
based on Mexican panel data finds some evidence of negative selection from Mexico, in the
sense that migrants earned less than non-migrants in the period before their trip (see FernandezHuertas Moraga, 2011; Ambrosini and Peri, 2012; Kaestner and Malamud, 2013). Differences in
the two sets of studies could be due to under-enumeration of undocumented Mexican immigrants

37

Caponi (2011) uses a structural approach to estimate the skill distribution of Mexican immigrants into the US. He
finds that Mexican immigrants into the US are positively selected in terms of ability.

15

in the US Census (Ibarraran and Lubotsky, 2007) or to differential selection patterns by observed
skill (education) versus labor market productivity (wages).38
The common finding of positive selection in contemporary migration flows has led to
various attempts to adapt the standard Roy model framework, including modifying the utility
function and incorporating individual variation in migration costs. Grogger and Hanson (2011)
argue that positive migrant selection can be rationalized with the use of a linear (rather than
logarithmic) utility function. In this case, the migration decision depends on absolute rather than
percentage wage differences. Hence, given that rich countries tend to exhibit larger absolute
differences between the wages of low and high skilled workers, immigrants that move from
developing to developed countries will tend to be positively selected in terms of skills.
Alternatively, the costs of migration (and not only the benefits) may vary by skill level.
First, skilled workers may find it easier to adapt to the new location, for example by learning a
new language, navigating bureaucratic hurdles at entry, and searching for housing and
employment in the destination. Second, the low skilled may have a harder time accessing credit
to finance their move, “pricing out” the poor from migration opportunities. Finally, under the
existing immigration regime, highly-educated workers may have greater access to legal avenues
of immigration, such as employer sponsorship, leaving lower skilled migrants to face the high
costs of illegal entry.39

38

Gould and Moav (2010) argue that patterns of migrant selection can differ across skill categories. Education, in
particular, may reflect “general” skills, while other labor market skills may be “country-specific.” They show that
Israeli emigrants are positively selected in terms of education but are drawn from the middle of the distribution of
unobserved skills, as proxied by residual wages.
39
Members of different skill groups may also have different values for US-specific amenities, including cultural
diversity and political freedoms like the right to vote (see Vigdor, 2002 for one application of this idea).

16

C. History can inform current debates on migrant selection
Changes in the economic environment would predict the observed shift over time toward
positive migrant selection. The divergence in absolute income between the US and the
developing world and the widening of the US income distribution might increasingly attract
high-skilled migrants seeking to take advantage of the high returns to skill in the US. However, a
puzzle remains: why is there positive selection today even from sending countries that are more
unequal than the US (e.g., Nigeria and Brazil)?
Historical evidence can help adjudicate between proposed explanations for the positive
selection puzzle. Some explanations for this puzzling fact are not consistent with the negative
selection of migrants from some European sending countries in the past. For example, if the
higher-skilled are simply better able to navigate the migration process and adapt to a new culture,
we would expect positive selection in both the past and the present. Similarly, a model of linear,
rather than logarithmic, utility, as in Grogger and Hanson (2011), predicts that migrants from
poorer to richer countries would have been positively selected in the past, which is contrary to
evidence from Ireland, Italy and Norway.
In a basic Roy model, the cost of migration is the same for everyone. If, instead,
restrictive immigration policy renders migration costs particularly high today for the low skilled,
migration costs could help explain the positive selection puzzle. Today, around 20 percent of
entry slots in the US are reserved for immigrants sponsored by an employer; these openings tend
to be filled by high-skilled immigrants. Legal immigrants are then able to sponsor family
members to join them through family reunification. Jasso, et al. (2000) document that the
average skills of new green card holders have been increasing relative to the native born since

17

the 1970s and attribute these changes to an increasing preference for skilled workers over time.40
Furthermore, even as travel costs have declined, the actual cost of entering the US for many lowskilled workers, often illegally with the help of a smuggler, has increased.
Immigrants from Europe in the Age of Mass Migration did not face legal barriers to
entering the US and, perhaps as a result, were negatively selected from their home country
population in some cases. Today, a few immigrant groups are able to migrate to the US without
restriction, including residents of US territories like Puerto Rico.41 Puerto Rico is more unequal
than the US (compare a Gini coefficient of 0.55 in Puerto Rico and 0.48 in the US mainland) and
thus, according to a basic Roy model, we would expect migration from the island to be
negatively selected. Indeed, Puerto Ricans who move to the mainland are negatively selected on
the basis of educational attainment and earnings ability (Ramos, 1992; Borjas, 2008).42
The role of migration costs in generating positive selection need not imply that the poor
are priced out of migration because of a lack of credit or financing for their trip. Both in the past
and the present, there is evidence that immigrant networks can alleviate such financial
constraints. Wegge (1998) compares “networked” migrants in 1850s Germany who shared a
surname with other migrants from their village with their “non-networked” counterparts.
Networked migrants held substantially less wealth at departure, suggesting that migrant networks
served as an effective substitute for self-financing. In Norway in 1900, where mass migration
was already underway, individual wealth was a deterrent to (rather than a facilitator of)
40

Jasso and Rosenzweig (2008) and Antecol, Cobb-Clark and Trejo (2003) compare the immigrant selection system
in the US to those used in Australia and Canada.
41
Selection patterns of internal migrants who can move at will also shed light on migrant selection in the absence of
policy restrictions. Molloy, Smith and Wozniak (2011) and Malamud and Wozniak (2012) find that college
graduates are more likely to move across state lines; this pattern would be consistent with the Roy model if these
highly-skilled migrants tend to settle in states where the return to skill is high (Dahl, 2002). See also Robinson and
Tomes (1982), Borjas, Bronars and Trejo (1992) and Abramitzky (2009).
42
In contrast, migrants from the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), an associated state of the US, are positively
selected on educational attainment and pre-migration earnings, despite moving from a more unequal sending country
(Akee, 2010).

18

migration (Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2013). Men who grew up in households with
assets, particularly those who could expect to inherit their family’s land by virtue of birth order
and sibling composition, were less likely than others to migrate.43 A similar pattern holds today:
Mexican migrants from communities with strong migration networks are less wealthy than are
migrants from communities with weak migration networks (McKenzie and Rapoport, 2007,
2010).44
In addition to underlying changes in the costs of migration, some of the observed
differences in selection patterns across time could be due to measurement issues. First, there is a
wide array of measure of skills used in the literature, including literacy, years of schooling,
proxies for numeracy, earnings, wealth, unobserved ability, health and height. Although these
measures are most likely correlated, this relationship might be weak in some cases. Second,
historical work is more likely to measure the flow of new migrants into the US using passenger
lists, whereas the contemporary literature often analyzes the stock of immigrants observed in the
US Census at a point in time (e.g., Chiquiar and Hanson, 2005). These two methods need not
produce the same answer if return migration is also selective (existing evidence suggests that this
is the case; see, for example, Lubotsky, 2007; Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2014; Ward,
2015).

D. Future research directions
Despite our speculation that shifts in immigration policy may explain changing selection
patterns over time, there is little work directly assessing the relationship between migrant

43

In contrast, Angelucci (2012) finds that an exogenous increase in wealth induced by the Mexican program
Oportunidades increased the probability of migrating to the US.
44
Relatedly, Spitzer (2014) argues that migrant networks helped Jews flee waves of anti-Jewish violence in the
Russian empire.

19

selection and prevailing immigration restrictions. We view the connection between immigration
policy and migrant selection to be a crucial area of future research, especially given the ongoing
political debates about immigration reform. Shifts in the immigration regime also encourage the
involvement of different institutions in the immigration process – including immigrant banks and
immigrant aid societies in the past and universities and firms as the sponsors of student or worker
visas today. Little is known about the role that these institutions have played in shaping both
migrant selection and assimilation.
A recent explosion in historical Census micro data from a number of European sending
countries, including Ireland, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom, opens up the possibility
for new work on the role of local conditions in shaping migrant selection. To date, most work on
migrant selection has analyzed national trends, but there may be substantial variation in who
leaves from different regions of sending countries. Micro data also allow for the analysis of
international migration alongside internal migration within sending countries from rural to urban
areas. We also emphasize the importance of building new panel datasets to study both
contemporary and historical migration flows.
Finally, we emphasize that a proper understanding of migrant selection is necessary for
generating unbiased estimates of the economic gains to migration. Abramitzky, Boustan and
Eriksson (2012) and McKenzie, Gibson and Stillman (2010) have made this point for historical
and contemporary immigration flows, respectively. A comparison of their estimates suggests that
the return to migration has increased substantially over time, perhaps as a result of quotas that
artificially restrict the supply of immigrant workers. However, these studies are based on very
specific cases – migration from Norway to the US and from Tonga to New Zealand, respectively

20

– and so additional estimates of the economic returns to migration for larger migration flows and
at various points in time would be welcome.

IV. Immigrant assimilation in the US
How do immigrants perform in the US labor market? Do newly-arrived immigrants fare
worse than the natives born and, if so, do they catch up with natives over time? We might expect
immigrants to earn less than the native born if they start out with fewer productive skills than
natives or if they are discriminated against at the workplace. Immigrants held back by an initial
lack of US-specific skills may be able to close their earnings gap with natives by investing in the
skills necessary to succeed in the US (see, for example, Borjas 2014 for a clear formalization of
this idea). Immigrants facing discrimination in the labor market may still be able to catch up with
the native born if they can “pass” as natives – for example, by changing their name or losing
their accent.
Both during the Age of Mass Migration and today, immigrants experienced some
earnings convergence with natives as they spent more time in the US labor market, but this
convergence process is slow. As a result, immigrants do not experience complete catch-up in a
single generation, either in the past or the present.

A. Earnings convergence between immigrants and natives
i. Contemporary patterns and methodological developments
Much of the contemporary literature on immigrant assimilation has been focused on
solving methodological issues in order to properly measure changes in immigrant earnings with
time spent in the US. In early work on this topic, Chiswick (1978) found that immigrants in the

21

1970 Census earned less than natives upon first arrival, but rapidly caught up and were able to
overtake natives after spending 15-20 years in the US. A declining earnings gap between
immigrants and natives with time spent in the US may reflect immigrants’ earnings growth, but
may also be driven by declining skill levels of immigrants across arrival cohorts and negativelyselected return migration. By following immigrant arrival cohorts across Census waves, Borjas
(1985) documents that around half of the convergence observed in a single cross section can be
attributed to declining skills across arrival cohorts. The extent of convergence is smaller yet in
panel datasets that follow individual immigrants over time, thereby controlling for selective
return migration (Lubotsky, 2007).45 Figure 5 provides a succinct graphical illustration of the
conceptual issues associated with inferring earnings convergence from cross-sectional data and
the benefits of using panel data in this context.
In recent years, initial earnings gaps and the speed of convergence between immigrants
and natives have varied by arrival cohort. Earnings at entry relative to natives have fallen from a
gap of around 20 log points in the arrival cohort of 1965-69 to a gap of around 35 log points for
the arrival cohort of 1985-89, before stabilizing or improving slightly (Chiswick, 1986; Smith,
2006; Borjas and Friedberg, 2009). Newer cohorts also appear to experience slower earnings
growth across Census waves (Borjas, 2016). The decline in immigrants’ relative earnings can be
attributed, in part, to a general widening of the income distribution, which has adversely affected
earnings of the low skilled (Lubotsky, 2011). Immigrants in recent arrival cohorts may also be
suffering from lower levels or slower acquisition of US-specific human capital, particularly

45

Other panel analyses of immigrant assimilation using data from various countries include Borjas (1989), Hu
(2000), Edin, Lalonde and Aslund (2000), Duleep and Dowhan (2002), Constant and Massey (2003), Eckstein and
Weiss (2004) and Kim (2011).

22

English language, or from a declining transferability of skills across countries (Duleep and
Regets, 2002; Borjas, 2016).46
Earnings patterns also vary by immigrant country of origin. Mexican immigrants earned
less than natives in every year since 1910 and this disparity has increased over time, reaching a
40 percent earnings disadvantage by 1990 (Feliciano, 2001). Some of the decline in relative
earnings for Mexican immigrants can be attributed to a widening gap in educational attainment
with the native born. Furthermore, Hispanic immigrants experience slower-than-average rates of
earnings convergence with natives, suggesting that the earnings gap is likely to persist over at
least one generation (Lubotsky, 2007). In contrast, Chinese and Japanese immigrants enjoyed
similar labor market outcomes to natives in the 1970 Census (Chiswick, 1983). More recent
evidence suggests that first generation Asian immigrants fare worse than comparable whites but
that this difference vanishes in the second generation (Duleep and Sanders, 2012; Arabsheibani
and Wang, 2010).
Less is known about the earnings assimilation of highly educated immigrants who work
in the high-tech industry or pursue graduate degrees and stay in the US upon graduation. Parey,
et al. (2015) show that German college graduates who settle in the US relative to other
destination areas are positively selected, consistent with predictions from the Roy model. Even
among this positively selected pool, the most successful of US-educated foreign PhDs tend to
remain in the US (Grogger and Hanson, 2015). Highly-skilled immigrants are more likely to start
companies than natives with a similar degree of education, and they tend to earn higher wages,

46

The more rapid assimilation of cohorts arriving in the 1960s, when the foreign born share of the labor force was
small, is consistent with the idea that immigrants compete more readily with other immigrants. Assimilation may be
slower in periods of mass migration.

23

and to patent and publish more (Hunt, 2011), although these outcomes depend on country of
origin.47

ii. Immigrant-native convergence during the Age of Mass Migration
Studies of immigrant assimilation during the Age of Mass Migration also find evidence
of substantial earnings convergence between immigrants and natives in cross-sectional data but
produce more tempered conclusions in new panel datasets.48 Using published tabulations from
the Dillingham Commission reports, initial work in this area documented that, circa 1900, the
average immigrant earned substantially less than the average native-born worker (Higgs, 1971;
McGouldrick and Tannen, 1977; Blau, 1980).49 In cross-sectional sources, immigrants appear to
make up all or most of this gap within a generation (studies by Eichengreen and Gemery, 1986
and Hanes, 1996 are exceptions). Hatton (1997) and Hatton and Williamson (1998) analyze
surveys of workers in particular industries in Michigan and California and find that immigrants
enjoyed faster wage growth than natives. Minns (2000) uses the 1900 and 1910 Censuses –
which allow him to control for changes in the average skills of different arrival cohorts – and
finds that, outside the farm sector, immigrants moved up the occupational ladder at a faster pace
than natives.50

47

Mattoo, et al. (2008) argue that, unlike educated immigrants from Asian countries and Western Europe, educated
immigrants from Latin America and Eastern Europe do not hold jobs commensurate with their skill level. They
attribute this pattern to differences in the quality of education across sending countries.
48
Immigrants experienced a notable degree of upward mobility in the antebellum period. Ferrie (1994, 1997, 1999)
links passenger lists from ship registers to the Censuses of 1850 and 1860. More than half of immigrants who
arrived in unskilled occupations moved up the occupational ladder over twenty years. Immigrants’ wealth also
increased by an average of 10 percent with each year spent in the US. Ferrie does not compare immigrants to natives
directly.
49
Hannon (1992) finds a similar pattern in individual-level earnings data from the copper mining industry in
Michigan.
50
Moving into farming was a more frequent avenue of upward mobility for natives than for immigrants
(Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2014). Hence, excluding the farm sector can bias the results towards finding
faster relative income growth for immigrants.

24

Cross-sectional data overstates the convergence of immigrants to natives in the past, both
because of declines in the skill levels of arrival cohorts and because immigrants who returned to
Europe were less skilled than those who stayed in the US. Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson
(2014) build a panel dataset of natives and immigrants from 16 sending European countries from
1900 to 1920. The average long-term immigrant in the panel data held similarly-paying
occupations to the native born upon first arrival and moved up the occupational ladder at the
same rate, neither converging with nor diverging from the native born.51 This pattern is at odds
with a view commonly held today that, in the past, European immigrants who arrived with few
skills were able to invest in themselves and succeed in the US economy within a single
generation.52
The labor market performance of a “typical” immigrant in the US masks substantial
heterogeneity by sending country. Immigrants from sending countries with real wages above the
European median, such as England and France, held significantly higher-paid occupations than
US natives upon first arrival, while immigrants from sending countries with below-median
wages (e.g., Norway, Portugal) started out in equal or lower-paid occupations (Abramitzky,
Boustan and Eriksson, 2014).53 Yet, immigrants from all sending countries converged with
natives slowly or not at all, thereby maintaining existing gaps between immigrants and natives
for at least a generation.
51

However, the average immigrant in the cross-sectional data, which included many temporary migrants, did earn
less than the native born, consistent with the general finding of lower immigrant earnings in this period.
52
Contemporary studies have data on individual earnings, whereas studies using historical Census data rely on
occupation-based earnings measures. We replicated the analysis in Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson (2014) using
the 1970-1990, 1980-2000, and 1990-2010 census repeated cross sections and document two facts: First, the initial
occupational earnings penalty faced by immigrants is not fully closed in the repeated cross section in any of the
periods. Even after more than 20 years in the US, the average immigrant earns about 5-10 percent less than the
average native. Second, this initial difference has been growing, from 10 percent in the 1970s to more than 15
percent in the most recent sample.
53
Chiswick (1991, 1992) argues that Jewish immigrants faced an initial disadvantage in occupational status in this
period but were able to catch up with the native born after around 15 years in the US; this convergence rate is typical
of what is commonly found using cross-sectional data.

25

iii. Convergence across generations
Differences between immigrants and the native born can persist into the second
generation if children inherit ability or skills from their parents, or from their broader ethnic
environment.54 However, we would expect these gaps to diminish across generations both due to
regression to the mean and because, unlike their parents, many children of immigrants were
educated in US schools and exposed to US cultural norms. Studying the children and
grandchildren of migrants who arrived during the Age of Mass Migration is especially useful for
gaining insight into the process of inter-generational convergence, given that enough time has
gone by for multiple generations to be observed into adulthood.
During the Age of Mass Migration, immigrant advantage (or disadvantage) relative to
natives persisted across generations. Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson (2014) find that if firstgeneration immigrants from a sending country out-performed natives (e.g., immigrants from
England or Russia), so too did the second generation, whereas if the first generation held lowerpaid occupations than natives (e.g., immigrants from Norway or Portugal), the second generation
did as well. Yet, the partial convergence in the past was faster than inter-generational
convergence for some country-of-origin groups today. Mexican immigrants are converging more
slowly than did Southern and Eastern Europeans across generations, in large part because their
rates of educational attainment have lagged behind those of the native born (Perlmann, 2005).
Broader analyses of immigrant outcomes across two or three time periods finds stability
in the degree of correlation between immigrant fathers and sons over time. Borjas (1993) and
Card, DiNardo, and Estes (2000) estimate inter-generational correlations between cohorts of
immigrant parents and their native-born children over two periods (1940-70 and 1970-2000).
54

See Borjas (1992) on the concept of ‘ethnic capital.’

26

Borjas (1994) extends this analysis to three generations, using the Censuses of 1910, 1940 and
1980. These papers find that intergenerational correlations in earnings are strong (around 0.4)
and remarkably stable across immigrant cohorts. The relationship between the earnings of fathers
and sons is mediated, in part, by educational attainment; controlling for education reduces the
correlation between the earnings of father and son cohorts to around 0.15.

B. Investments that facilitate labor market assimilation
Immigrants work toward earnings convergence with natives by making investments in
US-specific skills, including English fluency. Bleakley and Chin (2004, 2010) find a large return
to knowing English in the contemporary period, both in the labor market and along other
dimensions of assimilation (e.g., marriage, fertility). They identify the effect of English fluency
by comparing immigrants from English- and non-English-speaking countries who arrived in the
US at different ages. Ward (2015b) estimates a smaller return to knowing English in the early
twentieth century using a similar research design. This pattern is consistent with agricultural and
manufacturing base of the historical economy; Chiswick and Miller (2010) find that English has
lower returns today in occupations that rely more heavily on manual rather than communicationbased skills.
In the past, immigrant parents appear to have learned English from their children, who
are more adept at learning languages, but current immigrants are more likely to rely on their
children to navigate the English-speaking world (Kuziemko and Ferrie, 2014; Kuziemko, 2014).
School curriculum can influence children’s ability to learn English. Some states passed laws in
the 1910s and 1920s requiring that public school classes be taught in English only.55 Lleras55

Bandiera, et al. (2015) show that compulsory schooling laws were first introduced in US states that received more
immigrants from countries that lacked compulsory schooling rules.

27

Muney and Shertzer (2015) find that this language policy had modest effects on the literacy of
children of non-English speaking parents.56
Choosing a labor market or a neighborhood with greater access to employment offers
another opportunity for immigrants to increase their earnings potential. Upon first arrival, many
immigrants settle in ethnic enclaves. Immigrant-native residential segregation remained stable
and modest from 1910 to 1950, with a dissimilarity index of around 40; thereafter, segregation
between immigrants and natives rose (dissimilarity = 55 in 2000) (Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor,
2008).57 In theory, living in an enclave could enhance employment opportunities if immigrants
receive job referrals or other assistance from their compatriots (Munshi, 2003; LaFortune and
Tessada, 2012). However, immigrant neighborhoods could also limit employment opportunities
if residents are isolated from information about the broader labor market. 58 In that case, moving
to a more integrated neighborhood could be a form of labor market investment. To our
knowledge, economic historians have not studied how residential segregation affected the labor
market outcomes of immigrants in the past.59 Contemporary data suggest that immigrants who
choose to live in immigrant neighborhoods have lower earnings capacity but that, correcting for
this selection, living in an enclave can improve labor market performance.60

56

Today, policy makers debate the benefits of teaching immigrant children in English immersion classrooms or in
separate bilingual settings; Chin, Daysal and Imberman (2013) find that English-language learners are equally well
served by both methods but that bilingual education benefits native English speakers by limiting their contact with
non-English speaking peers.
57
The dissimilarity index can be interpreted as the share of immigrant households that would need to move such that
each neighborhood would reflect the overall immigrant share in the population. In the context of racial segregation,
a dissimilarity index of 35 is considered low, while an index value of 55 is considered moderate.
58
Beaman (2012) argues that members of an ethnic network face a tradeoff: network members may provide job
referrals to new arrivals, but they also may compete with each other over employment in an occupational niche.
59
Collins and Margo (2000) study the effect of segregation on a number of socioeconomic outcomes for African
Americans from 1940 to 1990. They find little or no evidence of negative effects of segregation prior to 1980, while
negative effects in more recent times.
60
Edin, Fredriksson and Aslund (2003) and Damm (2009) analyze refugee settlement policies in contemporary
Sweden and Denmark, respectively, in which residential location is quasi-randomly assigned. See also Cutler,
Glaeser and Vigdor (2006) on the effect of living in an immigrant enclave.

28

Investments in US-specific skills may have a limited effect on earnings growth if
immigrants face discrimination in the labor market.61 However, in this case, immigrants may be
able to mitigate discrimination by changing their self-presentation to de-emphasize their foreign
roots. Immigrants change their own names and choose less foreign names for their children as
they spend more time in the US (Carneiro, Lee and Reis, 2015; Abramitzky, Boustan and
Eriksson, 2016). Biavaschi, Giulietti and Siddique (2013) find that immigrants who changed
their names between filing their first and second papers for naturalization in the 1920s
experienced more occupational upgrading, perhaps because Americanized names shielded them
from discrimination. Likewise, children of immigrants who received less foreign-sounding
names enjoyed better labor market outcomes, even after controlling for other aspects of family
background (Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2016; Goldstein and Stecklov, 2015).

C. Beyond labor market assimilation
Both in the past and the present, public support for immigration restriction is often tied to
the perception that immigrants fail to assimilate into US society, instead maintaining their
distinct cultural norms, by continuing to speak foreign languages and live in enclave
communities. Therefore, documenting and understanding the speed and extent of immigrants’
cultural assimilation is a potentially important input into policy debates. Contemporary studies
find that immigrants maintain some of their distinctiveness because their norms and behavior

61

Moser (2012) exploits a change in attitudes towards a particular immigrant group – German-Americans after the
outbreak of World War I – to evaluate the effect of discrimination on immigrants’ economic opportunities. She
shows that, during (but not before) the war, men of German ancestry were more likely to be excluded from seats on
the New York Stock Exchange.

29

were shaped by experiences in their home countries or by ethnic enclaves in the US (see
Fernandez and Fogli, 2009; Alesina and Giuliano, 2010; Luttmer and Singhal, 2011; Blau, et al.,
2012). Yet, as immigrants spend more time in the US, they begin to resemble natives along a
number of dimensions, including health, educational attainment, homeownership, fertility and
political preferences.
Often, full adoption of the behaviors common to US natives takes more than a single
generation (Watkins, 1994). In one example of this phenomenon, Guinnane, Moehling and Ó
Gráda (2006) study the fertility patterns of Irish immigrants in the US. Irish immigrants
converged toward US fertility norms, having fewer children than either rural or urban households
in Ireland. Yet, Irish immigrants had more children than otherwise similar native households and
this fertility gap remained into the second generation, suggesting some cultural persistence.62
Other examples of “incomplete” assimilation include immigrants’ consumption patterns and
name selection for children. Using an early version of the Consumer Expenditure Survey, Logan
and Rhode (2010) document that immigrants continued to purchase foods that were relatively
abundant (and therefore inexpensive) at home even at higher prices in the US.63 Abramitzky,
Boustan and Eriksson (2016) find that immigrants selected more native-sounding names for their
children after spending more time in the US, but that some gap with native households remained
even after a generation. In contrast, immigrants appear to completely assimilate to native

62

More broadly, Guest (1982) and Morgan, Watkins and Ewbank (1994) find that the fertility levels of immigrants
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century were higher than those of natives, but that this difference decreased
in the second generation. Morgan, et al. also document substantial differences in fertility rates across immigrant
groups, with “new” immigrants exhibiting higher fertility levels.
63
Immigrants also converged with natives in marriage behavior. Foley and Guinnane (1999) show that, after
controlling for relevant socio-economic characteristics, the marriage patterns of Irish immigrants were similar to
those of the native born. Sassler and Qian (2003) find a decline in the “ethnic dispersion” in the age at first marriage
throughout the twentieth century.

30

incarceration patterns, with recent arrivals less likely than natives to be arrested but rapidly
converging to natives over time (Moehling and Piehl, 2009, 2014).64

D. Future research directions
The existing literature on immigrant assimilation has established a set of patterns,
estimating the speed of income convergence between immigrants and natives from different
sending countries and at different points in time. A promising next step in this literature could be
identifying the social and economic factors that can explain such variation in convergence and
assimilation. These aids (or impediments) to immigrants’ ability to assimilate and to their
assimilation choice could include the strength of immigrant networks, the extent of
discrimination or anti-immigrant enforcement in the workplace, or investments in public
education and health, among others. Differences in these factors across states or labor markets
may generate disparities in immigrant performance across space.
Furthermore, the speed of immigrant assimilation might be influenced by the prevailing
immigration policy regime. In an era of open borders, the initial selection into immigration was
less favorable on the basis of skill and immigrants needed to contend with more competition
from other recent arrivals in the labor market. Both of these mechanisms suggest that immigrant
assimilation may have been hindered by open immigration policy. On the other hand, less-skilled
people who move for better opportunities might have particularly strong incentives to succeed in
their new destination. Ultimately, the effect of immigration policy on the trajectory of immigrant
assimilation is an empirical question.

64

Bell, Fasani, and Machin (2013) study the criminal behavior of immigrants in a contemporary setting, using
variation in immigrant share and in crime rates across regions in the UK.

31

Finally, immigrants who were propelled from their home country by political unrest or
persecution may experience a different trajectory in the US than immigrants who arrived in order
to pursue economic opportunity. For example, unlike economic migrants who often return to
their home countries, refugees often have nowhere to return to. Refugees may thus have a
stronger incentive to invest in country-specific human capital in order to assimilate in their new
destination (Cortes, 2004). Today, there are millions of refugees around the world. Host
countries are often concerned with the speed of refugee assimilation and possible negative
impacts of refugees on natives. Yet, there has been very little economic research on this
population. We believe that the study of refugee migrants and the comparison of the long-term
outcomes of refugees and economic migrants are promising direction for new research. Because
refugee migration is hardly a recent phenomenon, the study of refugees in historical settings may
prove particularly insightful.

V. The effects of immigration on natives and on the US economy
A series of early empirical papers found negligible effects of immigration on native
wages, in seeming contrast to predictions from a simple model, in which immigration lowers the
capital-to-labor ratio in the short run, reducing wages for native workers (Card, 1990; Altonji and
Card, 1991; Card, 2001). This unexpectedly small effect of immigration on native wages has
generated a long and still unresolved debate in the contemporary literature.
We argue that historical cases can help to adjudicate between potential explanations for
limited effects of immigration on native wages today. Historical immigration patterns differed
from contemporary flows in a number of potentially useful ways. First, in the past, immigrants
were more substitutable with the native born, both in terms of skills and legal status. Previous

32

waves of immigrants worked in a set of occupations similar to those held by native workers
(Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2014), whereas, today, immigrants are more likely than
natives to be drawn from the very bottom or the very top of the educational distribution.65
Furthermore, a sizeable number of immigrants today are undocumented, and therefore often not
subject to the same set of labor market institutions (such as the minimum wage), whereas, in the
past, immigrants and natives received similar (and, overall, much lower) level of labor market
protection. Second, the historical economy was more reliant on agriculture and manufacturing,
whereas the contemporary economy is centered on services. Agriculture and manufacturing are
less dependent on communication and team-based production, which may have limited the
channels through which immigration influenced production in the past.66
Early work on the effect of immigration prompted two responses in the contemporary
literature: proposed modifications to the empirical methodology or adjustments to the underlying
economic model. The first studies on this topic relied on variation in the flow of immigrants into
metropolitan areas. Geographic variation can understate the true effect of immigration if
immigrants choose to settle in areas that experience positive labor demand shocks or if
immigrant arrivals encourage similarly-skilled natives to move elsewhere. Borjas (2003)
analyzed the effect of immigration on national skill groups instead and found a sizeable negative
effect of immigration on native workers.67 Examples of papers that propose modifications to the
standard model include Lewis (2011), which argues that cities with larger inflows of unskilled
immigrants were slower to adopt labor-saving technologies, thereby preserving the demand for
65

In 2010, 17.5 percent of immigrants aged 25-65 report having less than a ninth grade education and 11.3 percent
report having more than a college degree, compared to 1.9 percent and 10.6 of native workers.
66
Despite the heavily agricultural and manufacturing-based economy, Ager and Brückner (2013) find that a higher
level of cultural fractionalization was associated with higher output growth at the county level during the Age of
Mass Migration, although, somewhat puzzlingly, cultural polarization (which is highly correlated with
fractionalization) had the opposite effect.
67
Boustan (2009) adapts the national skill group-based approach to study the effect of internal black migration from
the South on the wages of existing black and white workers in the North in the mid-twentieth century.

33

low-skilled workers; Ottaviano and Peri (NBER version in 2006, published in 2012), which
suggests that immigrants and natives are somewhat imperfectly substitutable in production, even
within skill categories;68 and Peri and Sparber (2009), which contends that immigration increases
total factor productivity by facilitating specialization across tasks (see also Peri (2012) and
Ottaviano, Peri and Wright (2013)). The contemporary literature on the effect of immigration on
the US economy is too large for us to cover in full here; for recent surveys, see Hanson (2009)
and Kerr and Kerr (2011).69
Given the greater substitutability between immigrants and natives in the past, we would
expect to find larger effects of immigrant arrivals on native wages during the Age of Mass
Migration. Indeed, historical immigration flows appear to have a larger effect on the wages and
employment opportunities of native workers than those found in contemporary geographic
studies (subject to the caveat of differences in outcome variables and research design). Using
cross-city variation in migrant flows in the 1910s, Goldin (1994) estimates that a one percentage
point increase in the foreign-born share of the population reduced the wages of unskilled laborers
and artisans by around 1.5 percent, with larger effects in the tradeable sector (clothing
manufacturing and foundries).70 Boustan, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) find that internal inmigration in the 1930s had no effect on the wages of local workers, but did reduce work
opportunities and access to relief jobs, a pattern that is consistent with the presence of sticky
wages during the Great Depression. They create an instrument for migrant arrivals that relies on
68

Ottaviano and Peri (2012) use national, skill-group variation as in Borjas (2003). However, we view this paper's
main contribution to be its modification of the standard assumption of perfect substitutability between immigrants
and natives. Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) question the methods in the working paper version of this study.
Recent work by Doran, et al. (2015) shows that firms are unable to hire a high-skilled immigrant because they lost
the H-1B lottery experience no declines in patenting rates, suggesting that native and foreign workers are good
substitutes, at least at the upper end of the skill distribution.
69
Earlier, now-classic reviews of the literature include Borjas (1994) and Friedberg and Hunt (1995).
70
Biavaschi (2013) finds much smaller effects at the state level over a long period (1900-50). Hatton and
Williamson (1998, chapter 8) and O’Rourke and Williamson (1999, chapter 8) use time series data instead to
estimate the effect of mass migration on wages.

34

“push factors” from sending labor markets, including New Deal generosity and extreme weather
events.71
As in the present, immigration to cities encouraged native out-migration in the past,
meriting some caution in the use of geographic variation to identify the effect of immigration on
native wages. Hatton and Williamson (1998) estimate that over the 1880-1910 period, 40 natives
left their state per each additional 100 immigrants, suggesting that immigrants partially crowded
out the native labor force.72 Collins (1997) shows that cities that absorbed large numbers of
European migrants had correspondingly low rates of black in-migration from the rural South,
which also implies that native location decisions were responsive to the presence of immigrant
workers.
In the long-run, the effect of immigration on native wages is moderated by the pace of
new capital investments. Historical immigration flows contributed to the transformation of
American manufacturing from small-scale artisanal shops to large factories engaged in mass
production (Hirschman and Mogford, 2009). Unskilled immigrants appear to have been
complementary with investments in assembly-line machinery (LaFortune, Tessada and Lewis,
2014). Kim (2007) shows that firms in counties with a higher share foreign born in 1920 were
larger, more productive, and more likely to be organized as factories; he uses the settlement
pattern of immigrants in 1850, as well as distance from the port of New York, as instruments for
the later immigrant share of the population. Yet, Hatton and Williamson (2006) argue that land

71

See also Hornbeck (2012) and Long and Siu (2013) on migration responses to the Dust Bowl.
In contrast, Carter and Sutch (2008) argue that immigrants did not crowd out natives during this period because
native- and foreign-born workers migrated to the same set of counties.
72

35

was a more important input in production in the past and hence capital mobility was less
effective in dampening the wage effects of migration.73
Historical immigration was also associated with higher rates of both trade and innovation,
which may have contributed to economic growth.74 Dunlevy and Hutchinson (1999) find that
immigrants increased trade flows between the US and Europe in the early twentieth century,
perhaps by providing information about and network connections to their home markets (see also
O’Rourke and Williamson, 1999, chapter 13). Moser, Voena and Waldinger (2014) analyze one
immigrant flow that would be particularly expected to increase innovation in the US economy:
the arrival of Jewish scientists forced to flee from Nazi Germany in the 1930s.75 US patenting in
categories associated with the dismissed scientists increased by 30 percent after 1933.76
We believe that there is a large scope for future work on the historical effects of
immigrant arrivals on the US economy and society. Recent work on contemporary immigration
flows has introduced improved identification strategies to study the effect of immigrants on
native workers; these empirical innovations have yet to be fully incorporated into work on the
Age of Mass Migration. The dramatic shift in immigration regime in the 1920s presents a
potentially useful opportunity to design well-identified studies of the effect of immigration on
the economy in this era. Furthermore, we suspect that, beyond their effects on the economy,
immigrant voters influenced important policy choices, including, perhaps, the design of social
73

This observation is in line with the Malthusian idea that – in an economy without capital – a higher population
depresses income.
74
Munshi and Wilson (2010) and Rodriguez-Pose and von Berlepsch (2014) argue that European migration had
long-lasting effects on economic activity at the local level through its effects on institutions and culture.
75
Hornung (2014) studies another forced high-skilled immigration – that of the Huguenots from France to Prussia in
the seventeenth century. The arrival of Huguenots, who carried with them specialized knowledge of textile
manufacturing, was associated with higher productivity in the local manufacturing sector.
76
A number of papers study the relationship between immigration and innovation in the contemporary period. Hunt
and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) find that college-educated immigrants increase patent rates at the state level. The
influx of foreign doctoral students has also positively influenced scientific output in US academic departments
(Stuen, Mobarak and Maskus, 2012). Yet, Borjas and Doran (2012) show that the sudden arrival of Russian
mathematicians into the US academy after the fall of the Soviet Union reduced the output of competing American
mathematicians, leading to no net increase in overall output.

36

welfare programs in the 1930s. Making connection to the literature on diversity and public goods
provision would be useful here as well (a classic reference is Alesina, Baqir and Easterly, 1999).

VI. Conclusion
US history is characterized by two episodes of mass in-migration, an era of unrestricted
migrant arrivals from Europe (1850-1913) and a more recent period of constrained mass
migration, primarily from Asia and Latin America (1965-present). Many of the same topics that
concern the economics of immigration today – including migrant selection and assimilation and
the effect of immigrant arrivals on native workers – were also relevant in the past. We argue that
comparing the research findings across these two periods can illuminate contemporary debates.
In particular, our reading of the literature suggests that migrant selection, which is
primarily positive today, was decidedly mixed in the past, with cases of negative migrant
selection from some European sending countries. Changes in migrant selection over time are
consistent with rising bureaucratic costs of migration, which may price out the poor, and with
growing income inequality in the US, which would attract a higher-skilled set of immigrants.
Upon arrival, the average long-term immigrant in the past held a similar set of occupations to the
average native worker, and moved up the occupational ladder at the same pace. The pace of
economic convergence between immigrants and natives was relatively slow in both the past and
the present, with the notable difference that, today, the average immigrant starts out with a larger
earnings gap to overcome (although there is substantial variation in initial earnings by sending
country). It appears that historical estimates of the effect of immigrant arrivals on native wages
are larger than comparable estimates for today, which may be due to the fact that, in the past,
immigrants and natives held a similar set of skills. However, comparisons of these magnitudes

37

over time are complicated by methodological differences, and could be improved with a new
round of well-identified historical studies on the effect of immigration on labor markets.

38

References
Abramitzky, Ran. 2009. “The Effect of Redistribution on Migration: Evidence from the Israeli
Kibbutz.” Journal of Public Economics 93 (3): 498-511.
Abramitzky, Ran, and Fabio Braggion. 2006. “Migration and Human Capital: Self-Selection of
Indentured Servants to the Americas.” Journal of Economic History 66 (4):
882-905.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012: “Europe’s Tired, Poor,
Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass
Migration.” American Economic Review 102 (5): 1832-56.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2013. “Have the Poor Always
Been Less Likely to Migrate? Evidence from Inheritance Practices During the Age of
Mass Migration.” Journal of Development Economics 102: 2-14.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2014. “A Nation of Immigrants:
Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.” Journal of
Political Economy 122 (3): 467-506.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2016. “Cultural Assimilation
During the Age of Mass Migration.” Manuscript.
Ager, Philipp, and Markus Brückner. 2013. “Cultural Diversity and Economic Growth: Evidence
from the US During the Age of Mass Migration.” European Economic Review 64: 76-97.
Akee, Randall. 2010. “Who Leaves? Deciphering Immigrant Self-Selection from a Developing
Country.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 58 (2): 323-44.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 1999. “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (4): 1243-84.
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano. 2011. “Preferences for Redistribution.” In Handbook of
Social Economics: Volume 1A, edited by Alberto Bisin and Jess Benhabib: 93-132.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Altonji, Joseph G., and David Card. 1991. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives.” In Immigration, Trade and the Labor Market, edited
by John M Abowd and Richard B. Freeman. 201-34. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Ambrosini, J. William, and Giovanni Peri. 2012. “The Determinants and the Selection of
Mexico–US Migrants.” The World Economy 35 (2): 111-51.

39

Angelucci, Manuela. 2012. “Conditional Cash Transfer Programs, Credit Constraints, and
Migration.” Labour 26 (1): 124-36.
Angelucci, Manuela. 2012. “US Border Enforcement and the Net Flow of Mexican Illegal
Migration.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 60 (2): 311-57.
Angrist, Josh. 2002. “How do Sex Ratios Affect Marriage and Labor Markets? Evidence from
America's Second Generation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3): 997-1038.
Antecol, Heather, Deborah A. Cobb-Clark, and Stephen J. Trejo. 2003. “Immigration Policy and
the Skills of Immigrants to Australia, Canada, and the United States.” Journal of Human
Resources 38 (1): 192-218.
Arabsheibani, G. Reza, and Jie Wang. 2010. “Asian-White Male Wage Differentials in the
United States.” Applied Economics Letters 17 (1): 37-43.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “Top Incomes in the Long
Run of History.” Journal of Economic Literature 49 (1): 3-71.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Thomas Piketty, eds. 2007. Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century:
A Contrast between Continental European and English-speaking Countries. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Balderas, J. Ulyses, and Michael J. Greenwood. 2010. “From Europe to the Americas: a
Comparative Panel-Data Analysis of Migration to Argentina, Brazil, and the United
States, 1870-1910.” Journal of Population Economics 23 (4): 1301-18.
Bandiera, Oriana, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo. 2013. “The Making of Modern America:
Migratory Flows in the Age of Mass Migration.” Journal of Development Economics
102: 23-47.
Bandiera, Oriana, Myra Mohnen, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo. 2015. “Nation-Building
Through Compulsory Schooling During the Age of Mass Migration.” Manuscript.
Barrett, James R. 1992. “Americanization from the Bottom up: Immigration and the Remaking
of the Working Class in the United States, 1880-1930.” Journal of American History 79
(3): 996-1020.
Beaman, Lori A. 2012. “Social Networks and the Dynamics of Labour Market Outcomes:
Evidence from Refugees Resettled in the US.” Review of Economic Studies 79 (1): 12861.
Bell, Brian, Francesco Fasani, and Stephen Machin. 2013. “Crime and Immigration: Evidence
from Large Immigrant Waves.” Review of Economics and Statistics 21 (3): 1278- 90.

40

Biavaschi, Costanza. 2013. “The Labor Demand Was Downward Sloping: Disentangling
Migrants’ Inflows and Outflows, 1929–1957.” Economics Letters 118 (3): 531-34.
Biavaschi, Costanza, Corrado Giulietti, and Zahra Siddique. 2013. “The Economic Payoff of
Name Americanization.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Working Paper 7725.
Blau, Francine D. 1980. “Immigration and Labor Earnings in Early Twentieth Century
America.” In Research in Population Economics: A Research Annual, Volume 2, edited
by Simon JL and Da Vanzo J, 21-41. Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2012. “Immigration and the Distribution of
Incomes.” NBER Working Paper 18515.
Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, and Kerry L. Papps. 2013. “The
Transmission of Women’s Fertility, Human Capital, and Work Orientation Across
Immigrant Generations.” Journal of Population Economics 26 (2): 405-35.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Aimee Chin. 2010. “Age at Arrival, English Proficiency, and Social
Assimilation among US Immigrants.” American Economic Journal. Applied Economics 2
(1): 165-92.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Aimee Chin. 2004. “Language Skills and Earnings: Evidence from
Childhood Immigrants.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2): 481-96.
Blum, Matthias and Claudia Rei. 2015. “Escaping the Holocaust: Human and Health Capital of
Refugees to the United States, 1940-42.” Manuscript.
Borjas, George J. 1985. “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of
Immigrants.” Journal of Labor Economics 3 (4) : 463-89.
Borjas, George J. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” American Economic
Review 77 (4): 531-53.
Borjas, George J. 1989. “Immigrant and Emigrant Earnings: a Longitudinal Study.” Economic
Inquiry 27 (1): 21-37.
Borjas, George J. 1992. “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107 (1): 123-50.
Borjas, George J. 1994. “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials: The Children and
Grandchildren of the Great Migration.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47 (4):
553-73.
Borjas, George J. 1994. “The Economics of Immigration.” Journal of Economic Literature 32
(4): 1667-1717.

41

Borjas, George J. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4):
1335-74
Borjas, George J. 2016. “The Slowdown in the Economic Assimilation of Immigrants: Aging
and Cohort Effects Revisited Again.” Journal of Human Capital.
Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars, and Stephen J. Trejo. 1992. “Self-Selection and Internal
Migration in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics 32 (2): 159-85.
Borjas, George J., and Rachel M. Friedberg. 2009. “Recent Trends in the Earnings of New
Immigrants to the United States.” NBER Working Paper 15406.
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Friedman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. “How Much Do
Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 28 (1): 1-90.
Borjas, George J., and Kirk B. Doran. 2012. “The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the
Productivity of American Mathematicians.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3):
1143-1203.
Borjas, George J., Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2008. “Imperfect Substitution
Between Immigrants and Natives: a Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper 13887.
Boustan, Leah Platt. 2007. “Were Jews Political Refugees or Economic Migrants? Assessing the
Persecution Theory of Jewish Emigration, 1881-1914.” The New Comparative Economic
History: Essays in Honor of Jeffrey G. Williamson. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Boustan, Leah Platt. 2009. “Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migration and Racial
Wage Convergence in the North, 1940–1970.” Journal of Economic History 69 (3):
755-82.
Boustan, Leah Platt, Price V. Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. 2010. “The Effect of Internal
Migration on Local Labor Markets: American Cities during the Great Depression.”
Journal of Labor Economics 28 (4): 719-46.
Boyer, George R., Timothy J. Hatton, and Kevin H. O'Rourke. 1994. “Emigration and Economic
Growth in Ireland, 1850-1914.” In Migration and the International Labor Market 18501939, edited by Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 221-39. New York:
Routledge.
Caponi, Vincenzo. 2011. “Intergenerational Transmission of Abilities and Self-Selection of
Mexican Immigrants.” International Economic Review 52 (2): 523-47.
Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 43 (2): 245-57.
42

Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
of Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19 (1): 22-64.
Card, David. 2005. “Is the New Immigration Really so Bad?.” Economic Journal 115 (507):
F300-F323.
Card, David. 2009. “Immigration and Inequality.” American Economic Review 99 (2):
1-21
Card, David, John DiNardo, and Eugena Estes. 2000. “The More Things Change: Immigrants
and the Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s.” In Issues in the
Economics of Immigration, edited by George J. Borjas. 227-70. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Carneiro, Pedro, Sokbae Lee, and Hugo Reis. 2015. “Please Call Me John: Name Choice and the
Assimilation of Immigrants in the United States, 1900-1930.” Institute for Fiscal Studies
Working Paper.
Carrington, William J., Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath. 1996. “Migration with
Endogenous Moving Costs.” American Economic Review 86 (4): 909-30.
Carter, April. 2013. The Political Theory of Global Citizenship. London: Routledge.
Carter, Susan B., and Richard Sutch. 2008. “Labor Market Flooding? Migrant Destination and
Wage Change during America’s Age of Mass Migration.” In Migration and
Development Within and Across Borders: Research and Policy Perspectives on Internal
and International Migration, edited by Josh DeWind and Jennifer Holdaway.133-61
Hammersmith Press.
Chin, Aimee, N. Meltem Daysal, and Scott A. Imberman. 2013. “Impact of Bilingual Education
Programs on Limited English Proficient Students and Their Peers: Regression
Discontinuity Evidence from Texas.” Journal of Public Economics 107: 63-78.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1978. “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-Born
Men.” Journal of Political Economy 86 (5): 897-921.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1983. “An Analysis of the Earnings and Employment of Asian-American
Men.” Journal of Labor Economics 1 (2) : 197-214.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1986. “Is the New Immigration Less Skilled than the Old?” Journal of Labor
Economics 4 (2): 168-92.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1991. “Jewish Immigrant Skill and Occupational Attainment at the Turn of
the Century.” Explorations in Economic History 28 (1): 64-86.

43

Chiswick, Barry R. 1992. “Jewish Immigrant Wages in America in 1909: An Analysis of the
Dillingham Commission Data.” Explorations in Economic History 29 (3): 274-89.
Chiswick, Barry, and Timothy J. Hatton. 2003. “International Migration and the Integration of
Labor Markets.” In Globalization in Historical Perspective, edited by Michael D. Bordo,
Alan M. Taylor and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 65-120. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Chiswick, Barry R., and Paul W. Miller. 2010. “Occupational Language Requirements and the
Value of English in the US Labor Market.” Journal of Population Economics 23 (1):
353-372.
Chiquiar, Daniel, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2005. “International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States.” Journal of
Political Economy 113 (2): 239-81
Citrin, Jack, Donald P. Green, Christopher Muste, and Cara Wong. 1997. “Public Opinion
Toward Immigration Reform: The Role of Economic Motivations.” The Journal of
Politics 59 (3): 858-81.
Cohn, Raymond L. 1984. “Mortality on Immigrant Voyages to New York, 1836–1853.” Journal
of Economic History 44 (2): 289-300.
Cohn, Raymond L. 1987. “The Determinants of Individual Immigrant Mortality on Sailing
Ships, 1836–1853.” Explorations in Economic History 24 (4): 371-91.
Cohn, Raymond L. 1992. “The Occupations of English Immigrants to the United States, 1836–
1853.” The Journal of Economic History 52 (2): 377-87.
Cohn, Raymond L. 1995. “Occupational Evidence on the Causes of Immigration to the United
States, 1836-1853.” Explorations in Economic History 32 (3): 383-408.
Cohn, Raymond L. 2000. “Nativism and the End of the Mass Migration of the 1840s and 1850s.”
Journal of Economic History 60 (2): 361-83.
Cohn, Raymond L. 2005. “The Transition from Sail to Steam in Immigration to the United
States.”Journal of Economic History 65 (2): 469-95.
Collins, William J. 1997. “When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black
Migration.” Journal of Economic History 57 (3): 607-32.
Collins, William J., and Robert A. Margo. 2000. “Residential Segregation and Socioeconomic
Outcomes: When Did Ghettos Go Bad?” Economics Letters 69 (2): 239-43.
Collins, William J., and Marianne H. Wanamaker. 2014. “Selection and Economic Gains in the
Great Migration of African Americans: New Evidence from Linked Census Data.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (1): 220-52.
44

Constant, Amelie, and Douglas S. Massey. 2003.”Self-Selection, Earnings, and Out-Migration:
A Longitudinal Study of Immigrants to Germany.” Journal of Population Economics 16
(4): 631-53.
Cortes, Kalena. 2004. “Are Refugees Different from Economic Immigrants? Some Empirical
Evidence on the Heterogeneity of Immigrant Groups in the United States.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 86 (2): 465-80.
Covarrubias, Matias, Jeanne Lafortune and Jose Tessada. 2015. “Who Comes and Why?
Determinants of Immigrants Skill Level in the Early XXth Century US.” Journal of
Demographic Economics 81(1): 115-155.
Curtin, Philip D. 1972. The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census. Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2008. “Is the Melting Pot Still Hot?
Explaining the Resurgence of Immigrant Segregation.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 90 (3): 478-97.
Cvrcek, Tomas. 2012. “America's Settling Down: How Better Jobs and Falling Immigration Led
to a Rise in Marriage, 1880–1930.” Explorations in Economic History 49 (3): 335-51.
Dahl, Gordon. 2002. “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple
Markets.” Econometrica 70(6):2367-420.
Damm, Anna Piil. 2009. “Ethnic Enclaves and Immigrant Labor Market Outcomes: Quasi‐
Experimental Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics 27 (2): 281-314.
Day, Jared N. 2002. “Credit, Capital and Community: Informal Banking in Immigrant
Communities in the United States, 1880–1924.” Financial History Review 9 (1): 65-78.
Dean, Jason, and Maryam Dilmaghani. 2014. “Economic Integration of Pre-WWI Immigrants
from the British Isles in the Canadian Labour Market.” Journal of International
Migration and Integration: 1-22.
Doran, Kirk, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen. 2014. “The Effect of High-Skilled Immigration
on Patenting and Employment: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries.” NBER Working
Paper 20668.
Duleep, Harriet Orcutt, and Daniel J. Dowhan. 2002. “Insights from Longitudinal Data on the
Earnings Growth of US Foreign-Born Men.” Demography 39 (3): 485-506.
Duleep, Harriet, and Mark Regets. 2002. “The Elusive Concept of Immigrant Quality: Evidence
from 1970-1990.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Working Paper 631.

45

Duleep, Harriet Orcutt, and Mark C. Regets. 1996. “Admission Criteria and Immigrant Earnings
Profiles.” International Migration Review 30 (2): 571-90.
Duleep, Harriet Orcutt, and Seth Sanders. 2012. “The Economic Status of Asian Americans
Before and After the Civil Rights Act.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Working
Paper 6639.
Dunlevy, James A., and Henry A. Gemery. 1977. “The Role of Migrant Stock and Lagged
Migration in the Settlement Patterns of Nineteenth Century Immigrants.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 59 (2): 137-44.
Dunlevy, James A., and William K. Hutchinson. 1999. “The Impact of Immigration on American
Import Trade in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries.” Journal of
Economic History 59 (4): 1043-62.
Dustmann, Christian, Tommaso Frattini, and Ian P. Preston. 2013. “The Effect of Immigration
along the Distribution of Wages.” Review of Economic Studies 80 (1): 145-73.
Eckstein, Zvi, and Yoram Weiss. 2004. “On the Wage Growth of Immigrants: Israel, 1990–
2000.” Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (4): 665-95.
Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof Åslund. 2003. “Ethnic Enclaves and the
Economic Success of Immigrants: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118 (1): 329-57.
Edin, Per-Anders, Robert J. LaLonde, and Olof Åslund. 2000. “Emigration of Immigrants and
Measures of Immigrant Assimilation: Evidence from Sweden.” Swedish Economic Policy
Review 7:163-204.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Henry A. Gemery. 1986. “The Earnings of Skilled and Unskilled
Immigrants at the End of the Nineteenth Century.” Journal of Economic History 46 (2):
441-54.
Eltis, David, Frank D. Lewis, and David Richardson. 2005. “Slave Prices, the African Slave
Trade, and Productivity in the Caribbean, 1674–18071.” Economic History Review 58
(4): 673-700.
Engerman, Stanley L. 1986. “Servants to Slaves to Servants: Contract Labour and European
Expansion.” In Colonialism and Migration; Indentured Labour Before and After Slavery,
edited by P.C. Emmer. 263-94. Netherlands: Springer
Feliciano, Cynthia. 2005. “Educational Selectivity in US Immigration: How Do Immigrants
Compare to Those Left Behind?.” Demography 42 (1): 131-52.
Feliciano, Zadia M. 2001. “The Skill and Economic Performance of Mexican Immigrants from
1910 to 1990.” Explorations in Economic History 38 (3): 386-409.
46

Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
Work, and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1) : 146-77.
Ferrie, Joseph P. 1994. “The Wealth Accumulation of Antebellum European Immigrants to the
US, 1840–60.” Journal of Economic History 54 (1): 1-33.
Ferrie, Joseph P. 1997. “The Entry into the US Labor Market of Antebellum European
Immigrants, 1840–1860.” Explorations in Economic History 34 (3): 295-330.
Ferrie, Joseph P. 1999. ‘Yankees Now’: The Economic Mobility of Antebellum Immigrants to the
US. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ferrie, Joseph P. 2005. “The End of American Exceptionalism? Mobility in the United States
Since 1850.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (3): 199-215.
Ferrie, Joseph P., and Timothy J. Hatton. 2014. “Two Centuries of International Migration.” In
Handbook of the Economics of International Migration, Volume 1A: The Immigrants,
edited by Barry Chiswick and Paul Miller, 1-53. North Holland.
Fogel, Robert William, and Stanley L. Engerman. Time on the Cross: The Economics of
American Negro Slavery. New York: WW Norton & Company, 1995.
Fogel, Robert William, ed. 1994. Without Consent or Contract: The Rise and Fall of American
Slavery. New York: WW Norton & Company.
Foley, Mark C., and Timothy W. Guinnane. 1999. “Did Irish Marriage Patterns Survive the
Emigrant Voyage? Irish-American Nuptiality, 1880-1920.” Irish Economic and Social
History 26: 15-34.
Friedberg, Rachel M., and Jennifer Hunt. 1995. “The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country
Wages, Employment and Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (2) : 23-44.
Galenson, David W. 1981a. “The Market Evaluation of Human Capital: The Case of Indentured
Servitude.” Journal of Political Economy 89 (3) : 446-67.
Galenson, David W. 1981b. White Servitude in Colonial America: An Economic Analysis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Galenson, David W. 1984. “The Rise and Fall of Indentured Servitude in the Americas: An
Economic Analysis.” Journal of Economic History 44 (1): 1-26.
Gartner, Scott Sigmund, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin
Wright. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States. Edited by Susan B. Carter. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

47

Gathmann, Christina. 2008. “Effects of Enforcement on Illegal Markets: Evidence from Migrant
Smuggling Along the Southwestern Border.” Journal of Public Economics 92 (10): 192641.
Gemery, Henry A. 1986. “Markets for Migrants: English Indentured Servitude and Emigration in
the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries.” In Colonialism and Migration; Indentured
Labour Before and After Slavery, edited by P.C. Emmer. 33-54. New York: Springer.
Goldin, Claudia. 1994. “The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United States,
1890 to 1921.” In The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political Economy,
edited by Claudia Goldin and Gary D. Libecap. 223-58. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Gould, Eric D., and Omer Moav. “When is “Too Much” Inequality Not Enough? The Selection
of Israeli Emigrants.” (2010).
Gould, John D. 1980. “European Inter-Continental Emigration. The Road Home: Return
Migration from the USA.” Journal of European Economic History 9 (1): 41-112.
Green, Alan G., and David A. Green. 1993. “Balanced Growth and the Geographical
Distribution of European Immigrant Arrivals to Canada, 1900-1912.” Explorations in
Economic History 30 (1): 31-59.
Green, Alan G. and David Green. 2013. “Immigration and the Canadian Earnings Distribution in
the First Half of the Twentieth Century.” Manuscript.
Green, Alan, and Mary MacKinnon. 2001. “The Slow Assimilation of British Immigrants in
Canada: Evidence from Montreal and Toronto, 1901.” Explorations in Economic History
38 (3): 315-38.
Green, Alan G., Mary MacKinnon, and Chris Minns. 2002. “Dominion or Republic? Migrants to
North America from the United Kingdom, 1870-1910.” Economic History Review 55 (4):
666-96.
Greenwood, Michael J. 2007. “Modeling the Age and Age Composition of Late 19th Century US
Immigrants from Europe.” Explorations in Economic History 44 (2): 255-69.
Greenwood, Michael J. 2008. “Family and Sex-Specific US Immigration from Europe, 1870–
1910: A Panel Data Study of Rates and Composition.” Explorations in Economic History
45 (4): 356-82.
Greenwood, Michael J., and Zachary Ward. 2014. “Immigration Quotas, World War I, and
Emigrant Flows from the United States in the Early 20th Century.” Explorations in
Economic History 55: 76-96.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2011. “Income Maximization and the Selection and
48

Sorting of International Migrants.” Journal of Development Economics 95 (1): 42-57.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2015. “Attracting Talent: Location Choices of
Foreign-Born PhDs in the US.” Journal of Labor Economics 33 (S1): S5-38.
Grubb, Farley. 1985. “The Market for Indentured Immigrants: Evidence on the Efficiency of
Forward-Labor Contracting in Philadelphia, 1745–1773.” The Journal of Economic
History 45 (4): 855-68.
Grubb, Farley. 1986. “Redemptioner Immigration to Pennsylvania: Evidence on Contract Choice
and Profitability.” The Journal of Economic History 46 (2): 407-18.
Grubb, Farley. 1988. “The Auction of Redemptioner Servants, Philadelphia, 1771–1804: An
Economic Analysis.” The Journal of Economic History 48 (3): 583-603.
Grubb, Farley. 1994. “The End of European Immigrant Servitude in the United States: An
Economic Analysis of Market Collapse, 1772–1835.” The Journal of Economic History
54 (4): 794-824.
Guest, Avery M. 1982. “Fertility Variation Among the US Foreign Stock Population in 1900.”
International Migration Review 16 (3) : 577-94.
Guinnane, Timothy W., Carolyn M. Moehling, and Cormac Ó Gráda. 2006. “The Fertility of the
Irish in the United States in 1910.” Explorations in Economic History 43 (3): 465-85.
Hall, Patricia Kelly, and Steven Ruggles. 2004. ““Restless in the Midst of Their Prosperity”:
New Evidence on the Internal Migration of Americans, 1850–2000.” Journal of
American History 91 (3): 829-46.
Haines, Michael R. 2006. “Components of Population Growth, by Decade: 1790-2000 Table
Aa15-21” In Historical Statistics of the United States, Earliest Times to the Present:
Millennial Edition, edited by Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R.
Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hainmueller, Jens, and Michael J. Hiscox. 2007. “Educated Preferences: Explaining Attitudes
Toward Immigration in Europe.” International Organization 61 (2): 399-442.
Hanes, Christopher. 1996. “Immigrants’ Relative Rate of Wage Growth in the Late 19th
Century.” Explorations in Economic History 33 (1): 35-64.
Hannon, Joan Underhill. 1982. “Ethnic Discrimination in a 19th-Century Mining District:
Michigan Copper Mines, 1888.” Explorations in Economic History 19 (1): 28-50.
Hanson, Gordon H. 2006. “Illegal Migration from Mexico to the United States.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 12141.

49

Hanson, Gordon H. 2009. “The Economic Consequences of the International Migration of
Labor.” Annual Review of Economics 1 (1): 179-208.
Hanson, Gordon H., and Antonio Spilimbergo. 1999. “Illegal Immigration, Border Enforcement,
and Relative Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the US-Mexico border.” American
Economic Review 89 (5): 1337-1357.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1994. Migration and the International Labor
Market, 1850-1939. Taylor & Francis.
Hatton, Timothy J. 1995. “A Model of UK Emigration, 1870-1913.” The Review of Economics
and Statistics 77 (3): 407-15.
Hatton, Timothy J. 1997. “The Immigrant Assimilation Puzzle in Late Nineteenth-Centuty
America.” The Journal of Economic History 57 (1):, 34-62.
Hatton, Timothy J. 2010. “The Cliometrics of International Migration: A Survey.” Journal of
Economic Surveys 24 (5): 941-69.
Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and
Economic Impact. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2004. “International Migration in the Long-Run:
Positive Selection, Negative Selection and Policy.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 10529.
Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2005. Global Migration and the World Economy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2006. “What Determines Immigration’s Impact?
Comparing Two Global Centuries.” NBER Working Paper 12414.
Higgs, Robert. 1971. “Race, Skills, and Earnings: American Immigrants in 1909.” The Journal
of Economic History 31 (2): 420-28.
Higham, John. 2002. Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism, 1860-1925. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Hirschman, Charles, and Elizabeth Mogford. 2009. “Immigration and the American Industrial
Revolution from 1880 to 1920.” Social Science Research 38 (4): 897-920.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-and LongRun Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” The American Economic Review 102
(4): 1477-1507.

50

Hornung, Erik. 2014. “Immigration and the Diffusion of Technology: The Huguenot Diaspora in
Prussia.” The American Economic Review 104 (1): 84-122.
Hu, Wei-Yin. 2000. “Immigrant Earnings Assimilation: Estimates from Longitudinal Data.”
American Economic Review 90 (2): 368-72.
Hudson, Paul. 2001. “English Emigration to New Zealand, 1839-1850: Information Diffusion
and Marketing a New World” Economic History Review 54 (4): 680-98
Hugill, Peter J. 1995. World Trade Since 1431: Geography, Technology, and Capitalism.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hunt, Jennifer. 2011. “Which Immigrants Are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial?
Distinctions by Entry Visa.” Journal of Labor Economics 29 (3): 417-457.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. “How Much Does Immigration Boost
Innovation?.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2): 31-56.
Ibarraran, Pablo, and Darren Lubotsky. 2007. “Mexican Immigration and Self-Selection: New
Evidence from the 2000 Mexican Census.” In Mexican Immigration to the United States,
edited by George J. Borjas. 159-92. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jasso, Guillermina, Douglas S. Massey, Mark R. Rosenzweig, and James P. Smith. 2004.
“Immigrant Health: Selectivity and Acculturation.” Critical Perspectives on Racial and
Ethnic Differences in Health in Late Life: 227-66.
Jasso, Guillermina, and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2008. “Selection Criteria and the Skill
Composition of Immigrants: A Comparative Analysis of Australian and US Employment
Immigration.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Working Paper 3564.
Jasso, Guillermina, Mark R. Rosenzweig, and James P. Smith. 2000. “The Changing Skill of
New Immigrants to the United States: Recent Trends and Their Determinants.” In Issues
in the Economics of Immigration, edited by George J. Borjas. 185-226. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Jencks, Christopher. 2001. “Who Should Get In?” The New York Review of Books, November
29.
Kaestner, Robert, and Ofer Malamud. 2014. “Self-Selection and International Migration: New
Evidence from Mexico.” Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (1): 78-91.
Karadja, Mounir and Erik Prawitz. 2015. “Mass Migration, Political Power and Development.”
Manuscript.

51

Kennedy, Steven, James Ted McDonald, and Nicholas Biddle. 2006. “The Healthy Immigrant
Effect and Immigrant Selection: Evidence from Four Countries.” Social and Economic
Dimensions of an Aging Population Research Paper No. 164.
Keeling, Drew. 1999. “The Transport Revolution and Transatlantic Migration.” Economic
History 19: 39-74.
King, Desmond. 2009. Making Americans: Immigration, Race, and the Origins of the Diverse
Democracy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kim, Jongsung. 2011. “Education, English Language Proficiency, and Earnings of Male
Immigrants in the US Labor Market.” Journal of Business & Economics Research 1
(3):17-26.
Kim, Sukkoo. 2007. “Immigration, Industrial Revolution and Urban Growth in the United States,
1820-1920: Factor Endowments, Technology and Geography.” NBER Working Paper
12900.
Kobrin, Rebecca. 2012. “Ticket to Riches.” Segula Magazine, June/July.
Kosack, Edward, and Zachary Ward. 2014. “Who Crossed the Border? Self-Selection of
Mexican Migrants in the Early 20th Century.” Journal of Economic History 74
(4): 1015-1044
Kuziemko, Ilyana. 2014. “Human Capital Spillovers in Families: Do Parents Learn from or Lean
on their Children?” Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4):755-786.
Lafortune, Jeanne. 2013. “Making Yourself Attractive: Pre-Marital Investments and the Returns
to Education in the Marriage Market.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
5 (2): 151-78.
Lafortune, Jeanne, and José Tessada. 2013. “Smooth (er) Landing? The Role of Networks in the
Location and Occupational Choice of Immigrants.” Manuscript.
Lafortune, Jeanne, José Tessada, and Ethan Lewis. 2014. “People and Machines A Look at The
Evolving Relationship Between Capital and Skill In Manufacturing 1850-1940 Using
Immigration Shocks.” Manuscript.
Lewis, Ethan. “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity.” 2011. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2): 1029-69.
Lindert, Peter H. 2000. “When Did Inequality Rise in Britain and America?” Journal of Income
Distribution 9 (1): 11-25.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2014. “American Incomes 1650-1870: New
52

Evidence, Controlled Conjectures.” Manuscript.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, and Allison Shertzer. 2015. “Did the Americanization Movement
Succeed? An Evaluation of the Effect of English-Only and Compulsory Schools Laws on
Immigrants' Education.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(3): 258-290.
Logan, Trevon D., and Paul W. Rhode. 2010. “Moveable Feasts: A New Approach to
Endogenizing Tastes.” Manuscript.
Long, Jason, and Henry E. Siu. 2013. “Refugees from Dust and Shrinking Land: Tracking the
Dust Bowl Migrants.” Manuscript.
Long, Jason, and Joseph Ferrie. 2013a. “Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great Britain
and the United States since 1850.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1109-37.
Long, Jason, and Joseph Ferrie. 2013b.”British, American, and British-American Social
Mobility: Intergenerational Occupational Change Among Migrants and Non-Migrants in
the Late 19th Century.” Manuscript.
Lubotsky, Darren. 2007. “Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings.”
Journal of Political Economy 115 (5): 820-67.
Lubotsky Darren. 2011. “The Effect of Changes in the US Wage Structure on Recent
Immigrants' Earnings.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93(1):59-71.
Luttmer, Erzo F. P., and Monica Singhal. 2011. “Culture, Context, and the Taste for
Redistribution.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3 (1): 157-79.
Malamud, Ofer and Abigail Wozniak. 2012. “The Impact of College on Migration Evidence
from the Vietnam Generation.” Journal of Human Resources 47(4):913-50.
Massey, Douglas S. 2013. “America’s Immigration Policy Fiasco: Learning from Past
Mistakes.” Journal of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences 142 (3): 5-15.
Massey, Douglas S., and Zai Liang. 1989. “The Long-Term Consequences of a Temporary
Worker Program: The US Bracero Experience.” Population Research and Policy Review
8 (3): 199-226.
Massey, Douglas S., and Karen A. Pren. 2012. “Unintended Consequences of US Immigration
Policy: Explaining the Post-1965 Surge from Latin America.” Population and
Development Review 38 (1): 1-29.
Mattoo, Aaditya, Ileana Cristina Neagu and Çağlar Özden. 2008 “Brain Waste? Educated
Immigrants in the US Labor Market.” Journal of Development Economics 87 (2): 255269.
McDonald, John, and Ralph Shlomowitz. 1991. “Passenger Fares on Sailing Vessels to Australia
53

in the Nineteenth Century.” Explorations in Economic History 28 (2): 192-208.
McGouldrick, Paul F., and Michael B. Tannen. 1977. “Did American Manufacturers
Discriminate Against Immigrants before 1914?.” The Journal of Economic History 37
(3): 723-46.
McKenzie, David, and Hillel Rapoport. 2007. “Network Effects and the Dynamics of Migration
and Inequality: Theory and Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics
84 (1): 1-24.
McKenzie, David, and Hillel Rapoport. 2010. “Self-Selection Patterns in Mexico-US Migration:
the Role of Migration Networks.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (4): 811-21.
McKenzie, David, Steven Stillman, and John Gibson. 2010. “How Important is Selection?
Experimental vs. Non‐Experimental Measures of the Income Gains from
Migration.” Journal of the European Economic Association 8 (4): 913-45.
Menard, Russell R. 1973. “From Servant to Freeholder: Status Mobility and Property
Accumulation in Seventeenth-Century Maryland.” The William and Mary Quarterly: A
Magazine of Early American History: 37-64.
Menard, Russell R. 1975. “The Maryland Slave Population, 1658 to 1730: A Demographic
Profile of Blacks in Four Counties.” The William and Mary Quarterly: A Magazine of
Early American History: 29-54.
Meng, Xin, and Robert G. Gregory. 2005. “Intermarriage and the Economic Assimilation of
Immigrants.” Journal of Labor economics 23 (1): 135-74.
Minns, Chris. 2000. “Income, Cohort Effects, and Occupational Mobility: A New Look at
Immigration to the United States at the Turn of the 20th Century.” Explorations in
Economic History 37 (4): 326-50.
Moehling, Carolyn M., and Anne Morrison Piehl. 2014. “Immigrant Assimilation into US
Prisons, 1900–1930.” Journal of Population Economics 27 (1): 173-200.
Moehling, Carolyn, and Anne Morrison Piehl. 2009. “Immigration, Crime, and Incarceration in
Early Twentieth-Century America.” Demography 46 (4): 739-63.
Mokyr, Joel, and Cormac Ó. Gráda. 1982. “Emigration and Poverty in Prefamine Ireland.”
Explorations in Economic History 19 (4): 360-84.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak. 2011. “Internal Migration in the
United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (3): 173-96.
Moraga, Jesus Fernandez-Huertas. 2011. “New Evidence on Emigrant Selection.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 93 (1): 72-96.

54

Moser, Petra. 2012. “Taste-Based Discrimination Evidence from a Shift in Ethnic Preferences
after WWI.” Explorations in Economic History 49 (2): 167-88.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger. 2014. “German Jewish Émigrés and US
Invention.” American Economic Review 104(10): 3222-55.
Munshi, Kaivan. 2003. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the US Labor
Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2): 549-99.
Munshi, Kaivan, and Nicholas Wilson. 2010. “Identity and Mobility: Historical
Fractionalization, Parochial Institutions, and Occupational Choice in the American
Midwest.” Manuscript.
Nunn, Nathan. 2008. “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123 (1): 139-76.
O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Richard Sinnott. 2006. “The Determinants of Individual Attitudes
Towards Immigration.” European Journal of Political Economy 22 (4): 838-61.
O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History: The Evolution
of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Orrenius, Pia M., and Madeline Zavodny. 2005. “Self-Selection among Undocumented
Immigrants from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 78 (1): 215-40.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco IP, and Giovanni Peri. 2012. “Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on
Wages.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (1): 152-97.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco IP, Giovanni Peri, and Greg Wright. 2013. “Immigration, Offshoring
and American Jobs.” American Economic Review. 103 (5): 1925-59.
Parey, Matthias, Jens Ruhose, Fabian Waldinger and Nicolai Netz. 2015. “The Selection of
High-Skilled Migrants.” Manuscript.
Pekkala Kerr, Sari, and William Kerr. 2011. “Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey.”
Finnish Economic Papers 24 (1): 1-32.
Pérez, Santiago. 2014. “The (South) American Dream: Economic Mobility of Immigrants in 19th
Century Argentina.” Manuscript.
Peri, Giovanni. 2012. “The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from US States.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (1): 348-58.
Perlmann, J. 2005. “Italians Then, Mexicans Now: Immigrant Origins and the SecondGeneration Progress, 1890-2000.” Russell Sage Foundation.
Ramos, Fernando. 1992. “Out-Migration and Return Migration of Puerto Ricans.” In
55

Immigration and the Workforce: Economic Consequences for the United States an
Source Areas, edited by George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman. 49-66. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Robinson, Chris, and Nigel Tomes. 1982. “Self-Selection and Interprovincial Migration in
Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics 15 (3) : 474-502.
Rodríguez-Pose, Andrés, and Viola von Berlepsch. 2014. “When Migrants Rule: The Legacy of
Mass Migration on Economic Development in the United States.” Annals of the
Association of American Geographers 104 (3): 628-51.
Roy, Andrew Donald. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford
Economic Papers 3 (2): 135-46.
Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machinereadable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Sanchez-Alonso, Blanca. 2000. “Those Who left and Those Who Stayed Behind: Explaining
Emigration from the Regions of Spain, 1880-1914.” The Journal of Economic History 60
(3): 730-55.
Sassler, Sharon, and Zhenchao Qian. 2003. “Marital Timing and Marital Assimilation Variation
and Change among European Americans between 1910 and 1980.” Historical Methods:
A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 36 (3): 131-48.
Scheve, Kenneth F., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001.“Labor Market Competition and Individual
Preferences over Immigration Policy” Review of Economics and Statistics 83 (1):133145.
Shertzer, Allison. 2013. “Immigrant Group Size and Political Mobilization: Evidence from
European Migration to the United States.” NBER Working Paper 18827.
Smith, Abbot Emerson. 1947. Colonists in Bondage: White Servitude and Convict Labor in
America, 1607-1776. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Smith, James P. “Immigrants and the Labor Market.” 2006. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (2):
203-33.
Spitzer, Yannay. 2013. “The Dynamics of Mass Migration: Estimating the Effect of Income
Differences on Migration in a Dynamic Model of Discrete Choice with Diffusion.”
Manuscript.
Spitzer, Yannay. 2013. “Pogroms, Networks, and Migration.” Manuscript.

56

Spitzer, Yannay, and Ariell Zimran. 2013. “Self-Selection of Immigrants on the Basis of Living
Standards: Evidence from the Stature of Italian Immigrants at Ellis Island 1907–1925.”
Manuscript.
Steckel, Richard H. 1983. “The Economic Foundations of East-West Migration during the 19th
Century.” Explorations in Economic History 20 (1): 14-36.
Stuen, Eric T., Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Keith E. Maskus. 2012. “Skilled Immigration and
Innovation: Evidence from Enrollment Fluctuations in US Doctoral Programmes.” The
Economic Journal 122 (565): 1143-76.
Timmer, Ashley S., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. “Immigration Policy Prior to the 1930s:
Labor Markets, Policy Interactions, and Globalization Backlash.” Population and
Development Review 24 (4): 739-71.
Tomlins, Christopher. 2001. “Reconsidering Indentured Servitude: European Migration and the
Early American Labor Force, 1600–1775.” Labor History 42 (1): 5-43.
Vigdor, Jacob L. 2002. “The Pursuit of Opportunity: Explaining Selective Black Migration.”
Journal of Urban Economics 51 (3): 391-417.
Ward, Zachary. 2015a. “Birds of Passage: Return Migrants, Self-Selection and Immigration
Quotas.” Manuscript.
Ward, Zachary. 2015b. “The Role of English Fluency in Migrant Assimilation: Evidence from
United States History.” Manuscript.
Watkins, Susan Cotts, ed. 1994. After Ellis Island: Newcomers and Natives in the 1910 Census.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Wegge, Simone A. 1998. “Chain Migration and Information Networks: Evidence from
Nineteenth-Century Hesse-Cassel.” Journal of Economic History 58 (4): 957-86.
Wegge, Simone A. 2002. “Occupational Self-Selection of European Emigrants: Evidence from
Nineteenth-Century Hesse-Cassel.” European Review of Economic History 6 (3): 365-94.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1998. “Globalization, Labor Markets and Policy Backlash in the Past.”
The Journal of Economic Perspectives: 51-72.
Woolston, William Gui . 2015. “Do Students Respond to Incentives? The Education Choices of
Teenage Illegal Immigrants.” Manuscript.
Wyman, Mark. 1993. Round-Trip to America: The Immigrants Return to Europe, 1880-1930.
Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press.

57

Figure 1
Panel A: Foreign born flow as percentage of the US population (1820-2010)
1.8
1.6
1.4

%

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0

1820
1830
1840
1850
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010

0.2

Panel B: Foreign born stock as percentage of the US population (1850-2010)

16
14
12

%

10
8

6
4
2
0

Source: Authors’ calculations based on US Historical Statistics (Panel A) and IPUMS samples of
US Census (Ruggles, et al., 2010) (Panel B). Immigrant flows in Panel A include only legal
entrants, leading to an undercount particularly after 1965.
58

Figure 2: Sending regions within the foreign-born population, 1850-2010
N/W Europe

S/E Europe

North America + Oceania

Asia

Latin America

Africa

100%

90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Source: Authors’ calculations based on IPUMS samples of US Census (Ruggles, et al., 2010).

59

Figure 3: Largest country-of-origin group among foreign born by county, 1920

Source: Authors’ calculations from complete-count data of 1920 Census.

60

Figure 4: Share of county population from particular countries-of-origin, 1940
A. Austria and Germany

B. Italy

61

C. Norway

Source: Authors’ calculations from complete-count data of 1920 Census.

62

Figure 5: Inferring assimilation from cross sectional and panel data

Notes: The top graph depicts the earnings of four hypothetical migrants. For illustrative
purposes, we assume that natives earn 100 in every year. Migrants A and B arrived in 1895 and
earn 100 and 80 respectively. Migrant B returns to his home country in 1909. Migrants C and D
arrived in 1915 and earn 60 and 40 respectively.
The bottom row of graphs depicts inferred assimilation profiles from a series of hypothetical
datasets containing subsets of these migrants. With a single cross section of data (say, the 1920
census), a researcher would compare the earnings of immigrants C and D (who arrived in 1915)
to the earnings of immigrant A (who arrived in 1895) and infer that immigrants fully close the
earnings gaps with natives after 25 years in the US. With repeated cross sections, a researcher
would follow the cohort that arrived in 1895 (immigrants A and B), say between the 1900 and
1920 Census. As immigrant B leaves the US, the average earnings of the cohort increase despite
the fact that, by construction, they are constant over time for each individual immigrant. A panel
dataset allows researchers to measure the true pace of earnings growth over time.

63

