                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE EVOLUTION OF GENDER GAPS IN INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES

                                            Claudia Olivetti
                                           Barbara Petrongolo

                                         Working Paper 21887
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21887


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2016




Draft prepared for the Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 8 (expected publication date September
2016). We thank Deborah Goldschmidt for excellent research assistance. We would like to thank Boston
University for financial support during early stages of this project, and the ESRC for funding this research
through the Centre for Economic Performance at the LSE. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Claudia Olivetti and Barbara Petrongolo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Gender Gaps in Industrialized Countries
Claudia Olivetti and Barbara Petrongolo
NBER Working Paper No. 21887
January 2016
JEL No. E24,J16,J31

                                            ABSTRACT

Women in developed economies have made major inroads in labor markets throughout the past century,
but remaining gender differences in pay and employment seem remarkably persistent. This paper documents
long-run trends in female employment, working hours and relative wages for a wide cross-section
of developed economies. It reviews existing work on the factors driving gender convergence, and novel
perspectives on remaining gender gaps. The paper finally emphasizes the interplay between gender
trends and the evolution of the industry structure. Based on a shift-share decomposition, it shows that
the growth in the service share can explain at least half of the overall variation in female hours, both
over time and across countries.


Claudia Olivetti
Boston College
Department of Economics
Maloney Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
claudia.olivetti@bc.edu

Barbara Petrongolo
Queen Mary University and
Centre for Economic Performance, LSE
Mile End Road
London E1 4NS
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
B.Petrongolo@lse.ac.uk
1    Introduction
Women have made major inroads in labor markets throughout the past century, result-
ing in clear convergence in human capital investment and employment prospects and
outcomes relative to men. However, there are remaining gender differences in pay and
employment levels, as well as in the types of activities that men and women perform in
the labor market. Women’s progress in the labor market has been the focus of a vast
and still growing literature on its causes, characteristics and consequences, as well as
on the incomplete convergence with respect to men. The existing literature has indi-
cated a number of supply-side explanations for gender trends, including human capital
investment, medical advances, technological progress in the household, and the avail-
ability of child care. Recent lines of research also emphasize the role of social norms
regarding women’s work in shaping observed gender outcomes, and gender differences
in preferences and psychological traits potentially related to labor market success.
    This paper presents long-run trends in gender outcomes in employment, hours and
wages for a large sample of high-income countries, reviews the literature on the rise
in female labor force participation during the postwar period, and discusses existing
views on the remaining disparities with respect to men. In our discussion we devote
special emphasis to the role played by long-run changes in the industry structure and
its cross-country variation.
    The evolution of female employment is traced using an unbalanced panel of nineteen
high-income countries between 1850 and 2008, including the United States, Canada,
Australia, Japan, and a large cross-section of European economies. The historical
perspective reveals that, while being a major 20th century development, the increase
in female labor market participation is more markedly a postwar phenomenon. The
post-war period increase in female participation is even more striking if contrasted
with the secular decline in men’s labor force participation rates, which, in most of the
countries in our sample, accelerated after 1950. We further our analysis of the postwar
period by illustrating how the rise in female participation translated into a substantial
increase in the female share of total hours worked in the economy, and was associated
to the narrowing of gender gaps in earnings. Despite convergence in gender trends in
most countries, women’s economic progress seems to have stalled in Japan and Korea.
    We then provide a closer perspective on gender trends by looking at the role of
structural transformation, and in particular at the interplay between the rise of the
service economy and the growth in female hours of work. The expansion of the ser-

                                           2
vice sector may create jobs whose characteristics better match female preferences and
household roles, and at the same time may increase the relative demand for female
work as long as women have a comparative advantage in the production of services.
The labor demand element of the rise in the service economy is well positioned to gen-
erate gender convergence in labor market outcomes both in terms of employment and
wages, a feature that could not be rationalized on the basis of labor supply mechanisms
alone. Based on a shift-share decomposition analysis, we show that the growth in the
service share can explain at least half of the overall variation in female hours, both
across countries and over decades.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes long run trends
in female employment, hours worked and the gender pay gap on our country sample.
Section 3 reviews the existing literature on the rise in female participation and the
lack of full convergence in labor market outcomes with respect to men. Section 4
takes a closer look at the interplay between changes in the industry structure and
gender trends, based on a shift-share analysis for the growth in female hours. Section
5 concludes.


2       Long-run trends in female outcomes
Women’s labor force participation increased substantially over the course of the past
century in all developed economies, but the increase has been uneven both over time
and across countries. We document these trends using an unbalanced panel of nineteen
high-income countries for the period 1850-2008.
   The pre-WWII data on the economically active population and population counts
by gender are from the International Historical Statistics (Mitchell, 1998a, 1998b and
1998c), with the exception of the US. For this country data are from Goldin (1990,
Table 2.1). The pre-war data are combined with similar post-war data from the In-
ternational Labour Organization (ILO).1 The labor force construct is defined as the
number of women aged 15 and above who are employed, divided by the corresponding
population. This is the only labor force definition that is available consistently across
countries and over such long horizons. The final sample includes: Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
    1
    See Olivetti (2014, section 5.3.1 and Data Appendix), for details. Far from being perfect, these
data are as close as possible to being harmonized in terms of the definition of the employment construct.



                                                   3
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and United States.
The start date for each country is the first year for which information is available. This
goes as far back as the 1850s for Belgium, France, Netherlands and the UK. Starting
in 1900, data cover all countries except Greece and Japan, for which 1920 is the first
available data point. The data are available at 10- or 5-year intervals for most of the
countries in the sample. From 1990 to 2005, data at 5-year intervals are available for
all countries.
    Figure 1 displays female employment rates by country. The female employment
to population ratio for women aged 15+ in the US was 20% in the late nineteenth
century, and surpassed 60% at the beginning of the current century. In other OECD
countries the rise in female employment only started in the postwar period, reaching
similar or higher levels than in the US, Canada, Australia, the UK, the Netherlands
and Scandinavian countries. Despite growing during at least five decades, by the end
of the 20th century the female employment rate in other European countries remained
below the 60% mark, and especially so in Mediterranean countries, where the current
level of female employment is similar to that observed in the US or the UK during
the 1970s. Japan seems to be the one country in which female employment stagnated
around 50% throughout the postwar period.
    On average, female employment increases between the mid-19th century and the
first decade of the 21st century by about a tenth of a percentage point per year. How-
ever, and this is perhaps less well known, this increase did not happen monotonically.
There are large cross-country differences in the evolution of female employment be-
tween 1850 and 1950. While female employment grows monotonically in the US and
Canada, in most of the remaining countries one can detect important declines in female
employment during these hundred years, either throughout the period (for instance in
Belgium, Netherlands and Portugal), or after an initial rising phase (for example in
the UK, Italy, Spain, Austria and most notably France).2 In fact, Goldin (1986, 1990)
argues that even for the US, more inclusive measures of labor supply that cover both
paid and unpaid work of married women, deliver a U-shaped pattern, whereby female
labor force participation declines during the 19th century, reaching the bottom some-
times in the 1920s, before starting its steady rise during the rest of the 20th century.3
On average, female employment declined very slightly by 0.05 of a percentage point per
   2
   Costa (2000, figure 2) document the same pattern for France using a different data source.
   3
   Possibly the same issue may be affecting estimates of female employment for other countries, e.g.
Canada.


                                                 4
year during 1850-1950. Large gains in female employment were thus not a historical
necessity, but mostly a feature of the postwar period. Except for Japan, where female
participation is essentially flat, women’s employment rates increase post-1950 in all
countries, accelerating around 1980. On average, female employment grows by half a
percentage point per year between 1950 and 2005.
    In what follows we zoom on more recent decades, and provide evidence on labor
market indicators that are unavailable for a large set of countries for longer time spans.
We first study the post-war evolution of employment rates of working age women in
Figure 2. These are defined as the ratio of the number of economically active women
aged 15 to 64 to the total population in this age group.4 Comparing the series in Figure
1 and 2, we note that the working age employment figures in the most recent years
are about 10 to 15 percentage point higher than the corresponding figures for women
aged 15+. This is due to high rates of retirement among women 65 and above at the
same time as the size of this population share grew thanks to improvements in health
conditions and life expectancy. By year 2008 the employment rate for working age
women reaches the 70% mark in the US, the UK, Australia, Germany and Portugal,
and surpasses it in the Netherlands, Finland and Canada, reaching 77% in Denmark,
Norway and Sweden. The employment rate is lowest in Italy (52%) and Greece (55%).
On average, female employment among working age women grows by 0.6 percentage
points per year between 1947 and 2008.
    We next move on to the evolution of working hours, encompassing both intensive
and extensive margins of participation. We use information on labor inputs by gender
and country from the EU KLEMS database,5 which covers a relatively large cross-
section of countries from 1970 onwards. Data are at the annual frequency, and the
last year for which the labor construct is available consistently for all countries in
our sample is 2005. Labor input data by gender are unfortunately not available for
all the countries included in Figure 1, and namely Norway, Sweden, France, Greece,
   4
     According to the ILO definition, the economically active population comprises all persons of
either sex who furnish the supply of labour (paid or unpaid) for the production of goods and services
during a specified time-reference period. In general, the data on economically active population do
not include students, persons occupied solely in domestic duties in their own households, members
of collective households, inmates of institutions, retired persons, persons living entirely on their own
means, and persons wholly dependent upon others. National practices vary between countries as
regards the treatment of groups such as armed forces, the definitions used and groups covered, but
also by differences in the methods of collection, classification and tabulation of the data by age and
other dimension. See http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/c1e.html for details.
   5
     The database is publicly available at http://www.euklems.net. See O’Mahony and Timmer (2009)
for a description of the methodology employed in constructing the database.


                                                   5
Ireland, and Portugal. Thus we augment the EU KLEMS sample whenever possible
using a variety of data sources. For Greece and Portugal we use the Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series, International (IPUMS-I), available for 1971-2001 and 1991-2001,
respectively. For France we use data from the French Labour Force Survey for 1981-
2005.6 We also add Korea to the sample, which was not covered in our historical data
but is covered by EU KLEMS. Using the various data sources we build an unbalanced
panel of 17 countries.
    Figure 3 displays the evolution of the female share of total hours for our sample. In
most countries this increases substantially between 1970 (or the first year available) and
2005. In the early 1970s, female hours represented less than one third of total labor
inputs, with important differences between the UK and Scandinavia (around 40%),
the US, Canada, Japan and Italy (around 30%), and Korea and Greece at the other
extreme (22% and 15% respectively). By 2005, female hours represent more than 45%
of the total in the UK, Scandinavia and Germany, and around 40% in all other countries
except Japan, Korea, the Netherlands and southern Europe, where they remain below
the 40% mark. On average, the female share in total hours was growing at a quarter of
a percentage point per year. Growth rates are lowest in the UK and Scandinavia, and
highest in southern Europe, as well as Australia, implying some mild convergence in the
female hours share across countries. The two Asian countries represent an exception
to the broad convergence pattern, as both their female hours share and its growth are
relatively low.
    Trends in the share of female hours (0.25 percentage points per year on average)
are on average weaker than trends in female employment over the same period (0.5
percentage points per year during the same period). This difference clearly reflects the
diffusion of part-time work among women during the past few decades. On the other
hand, trends in the share of female hours are also affected by the slight fall, in several
countries, of male employment (Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999).
    We finally look at closing gender gaps in wages in Figure 4, plotting median fe-
male/male earnings ratios for our sample of developed economies.7 For some countries
the data go as far back as the 1970s, while in most cases gender earnings differentials
   6
     Unfortunately, we could not obtain comparable data for Ireland, Norway and Sweden who are
thus not included in our analysis.
   7
     These are time series collected by the OECD, calculated as the ratio between median earnings
of men and women. Data are on gross earnings of full-time employees. The series is available at
http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/onlineoecdemploymentdatabase.htm#earndisp. The version we use is
updated 11 February, 2015. See link for definitions and sources by country.


                                               6
are only available starting in the 1990s. The figure shows clear evidence of gender wage
convergence in most countries. On average, the female/male earnings ratio increased
by approximately 0.4 percentage points per year between 1970 and 2010. Around 2010,
median female earnings are at or above 80% of median male earnings in most countries,
reaching 90% in Belgium, Denmark, Ireland and Mediterranean countries. In Japan
and Korea, by contrast, female earnings are only 73% and 63%, respectively, of male
earnings.
    Overall, the series presented in this Section clearly illustrate gender convergence in
employment, hours and earnings in a large sample of high-income countries, at least
since the mid-20th century. Progress in wages and hours was also accompanied in
most countries by women’s entry into professional and managerial occupations, and
consequently reduced occupational segregation by gender (see Goldin, 2006, 2014b, for
historical evidence for the US, and OECD, 2002, Section 3, for cross-country evidence).
Positive co-movements between quantities (whether employment rates or hours) and
wages is indicative of the presence of net demand forces underlying gender convergence.
In other words, the evidence presented would not be consistent with pure supply forces,
and one should bear this in mind when considering existing theories, discussed in the
next Section.


3     A review of the literature
3.1    Gender convergence
Women’s entry in the labor market during the post-war period has been accompa-
nied by remarkable progress in the economic literature on gender, studying women’s
changing role in the economy and its driving forces, and identifying the factors behind
the remaining disparities with respect to men. Most historical studies on gender de-
velopments are for the US, but in recent decades the availability of comparable labor
market data for most high-income countries has quickly prompted interest in similar
questions for other contexts and international comparisons. Latest empirical develop-
ments, based on the availability of rich administrative and experimental data, have
further expanded economists’ perspective on gender issues.
    The economic literature on gender has developed across a wide range of approaches.
Most studies on the long-run evolution of female employment are based on calibrations
of macroeconomic models, typically encompassing a combination of factors such as

                                            7
education, labor supply, marriage and fertility choices, and technological advances.
Work on gender inequalities has increasingly aimed at causal identification of the factors
driving gender gaps in various contexts, relying on variation from institutional design
or field and lab experiments.
    Goldin (1990, 2006, 2014a), Blau, Winkler and Ferner (2014, Ch. 2) and Green-
wood, Guner and Vandenbroucke (2015) - among others - provide comprehensive
overviews of historical trends in gender outcomes and their driving factors in the US,
and Blau, Winkler and Ferner (2014, Ch. 17 and 18) offer a wider perspective on
both high-income and developing countries. Several explanations have been proposed
for the rising female involvement in the labor market. Medical advances have reduced
fertility via the introduction of the contraceptive pill (Goldin and Katz, 2002; Bailey,
2006), as well as improved maternal health, thus reducing the incidence of post-birth
disablement, and provided substitutes to maternal lactation (Albanesi and Olivetti,
2015). Technological progress in the household and greater availability of childcare
have reduced the need of (mostly female) labor input in home production (Greenwood,
Seshadri and Yorukoglu, 2005; Attanasio, Low and Sanchez-Marcos, 2008).
    While these changes freed-up some of women’s time from household tasks, the rise
in female relative wages acted as a pull factor from the labor market. Wage convergence
was in turn induced by a variety of causes, including, among other factors, equal pay
legislation, technological changes, and evolving social norms. Technological progress
in the workplace and faster capital accumulation have raised the value of non-manual
or non-routine skills relative to manual/routine skills, thereby raising female relative
wages and participation. In Galor and Weil (1996) the rise in women’s relative wages
raises the opportunity cost of childrearing, thereby reducing fertility and increasing
female labor supply. Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2010) interpret the concur-
rent growth in relative female wages and hours as the consequence of a gender-biased
labor demand shift, and in their model calibration such shift can explain the bulk of
the rise in female hours in the US. Black and Spitz-Oener (2010) point at changes
in occupational skill requirements, and in particular the increase in the non-routine
component of work, as an important factor of rising female wages, and estimate that
about half of gender wage convergence in Germany is accounted for by the changing
structure of tasks. Similar driving forces are considered by Rendall (2010) in a cali-
brated model for the US economy, and Beaudry and Lewis (2014) estimate the impact
of computerization and changing task structure on the gender wage gap by exploiting


                                            8
variation in IT penetration across US metropolitan areas. A related strand of litera-
ture builds on the interplay between changes in the industry structure and the rise in
female participation. The transition from the industrial to the post-industrial phase of
economic development is everywhere associated with an expansion of the service sector.
This leads to the creation of jobs particularly suited to women’s skills and preferences,
resulting in rising female employment and facilitating changes in social norms (see,
for example, Goldin, 1990, 2006; Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2014; Ngai and Petrongolo,
2015).
    Further factors considered include the rise in the returns to experience, and the
fall in “unexplained” gender differences in pay. Olivetti (2006) estimates that the
pronounced rise in the returns to actual labor market experience can account for about
half of wage convergence in the US, and the bulk of the increase in working hours for
married women. Accumulation of actual experience would lead to wage convergence
both directly, via human capital accumulation, and indirectly, via changes in employers’
beliefs and the decrease in statistical discrimination (Gayle and Golan, 2012). Goldin
(2014b) argues that another dimension of declining discrimination against women was
women’s entry into traditionally male occupations, which was aided, among other
factors, by occupational licensing.
    A recent and growing strand of work on the rise in female participation has em-
phasized the role of changing social norms, and in particular the revolution in social
attitudes towards female work, in female labor market outcomes. This phenomenon has
involved both changes in men’s attitudes towards married women working (Fernández,
Fogli and Olivetti, 2004), changes in women’s beliefs about the effect of maternal em-
ployment on children (Fogli and Veldkamp, 2011), as well as changes in women’s own
sense of self (Fernández, 2013). Gender stereotypes have been plausibly weakened by
a stronger female presence in the labor market (see, for example, Fernández, Fogli and
Olivetti, 2004, for evidence on postwar US), and increasingly so in leadership roles in
business or politics (see Beaman et al., 2009, for evidence on India). However, Alesina,
Giuliano and Nunn (2011) find evidence of very persistent components of gender norms,
dating as far back as pre-industrial agricultural societies.


3.2    Remaining gaps
Despite the convergence in gender trends documented in the literature, the remaining
gender gaps in wages, employment levels, as well as in the types of activities that men

                                           9
and women perform in the labor market, seem remarkably persistent, even more so
against the backdrop of reversing education gaps in most countries and stricter equal
treatment legislation.
    Gender inequalities may have roots in gender differences in productivity and/or
preferences, or labor market discrimination. By the end of the 1990s, the state-of-the-
art work on gender inequalities in the labor market, reviewed in Altonji and Blank’s
(1999) chapter in the Handbook of Labor Economics, had mainly investigated differ-
ences in human-capital accumulation and discrimination as the main sources of gender
gaps in wages, hours and job allocation. At the same time, Altonji and Blank (1999)
indicated that lack of direct evidence on gender preferences would frustrate attempts
to separately identify the effects of these three forces.
    More recently, the availability of richer evidence from both administrative data and
experiments has enabled researchers to make substantial progress in all three areas
(see Bertrand, 2011, for a comprehensive survey). It is often suggested that one of
the main drivers of women’s preferences as well as productivity - whether actual or
perceived - is their dominant role in the provision of child care and home production
in general and the consequent work-life balance considerations. Indeed, symmetric
gender gaps in working hours in the household and the market point to a clear link be-
tween women’s role as main providers of home production and their labor choices and
constraints. Women’s role in childbearing may disadvantage women in high-rewarding
careers, often characterized by long, inflexible work schedules, and strongly nonlinear
pay schedules with respect to time worked (Goldin, 2014a), and a few studies have
found clear evidence of a negative impact of having children on women’s relative earn-
ings, especially among the highly-educated (Bertrand, Goldin and Katz, 2010; Kleven,
Landais and Sogaard, 2015).
    Theories of statistical discrimination also suggest that women’s comparative advan-
tage in home production may in turn feed into employers’ beliefs, promotion standards
and the gender structure of pay (Lazear and Rosen, 1990; François, 1998; François and
van Ours, 2000; Albanesi and Olivetti, 2009), as well as shape general attitudes to-
wards gender roles in society and gender identity. Gender identity considerations may
affect women’s decision to participate to the labor force, or to enter occupations that
are male-dominated, over and above financial incentives to do so (Akerlof and Kran-
ton, 2000; Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan, 2015). Cross-country evidence shows that
progressive attitudes towards gender roles are clearly positively associated with more


                                          10
equal gender outcomes in the labor market (Fortin, 2005). However, causal testing of
the impact of gender norms is harder to achieve (see Bertrand, 2011, for a discussion
of related work). A growing approach to identifying the economic impact of culture
compares labor market outcomes across women from different immigrant groups resid-
ing in the same country. Immigrants presumably differ in their cultures but share a
common institutional and economic environment. This approach allows one to isolate
the impact of culture and social norms from institutional influences (Fernández and
Fogli, 2009, Fernández, 2011).
    The growing influence of the psychology literature on economic questions, as well
as the development of the experimental approach in labor economics, have opened
up novel perspectives on gender preferences (see Azmat and Petrongolo, 2014).8 In
particular, work based on lab experiments has found evidence of gender differences
in psychological factors such as attitudes towards risk, competition, negotiation and
altruism, which may be related to labor market success. A recurrent finding from lab
evidence is that women are more risk-averse than men (see, among others, Croson and
Gneezy, 2009), and, conditional on ability, they are less likely to both opt for perfor-
mance pay (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007) and to thrive in competitive environments
(Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini, 2003). Women also tend to be weaker negotiators
(see Rigdon, 2013, and references therein), although their behavior is sensitive to both
the gender of their opponent and to information concerning the bargaining behavior
of other players. However, evidence on gender differences in pro-social behavior is far
from clear-cut, whether one looks at sharing behavior (Croson and Gneezy, 2009) or
at the willingness to contribute to public goods (Eckel and Grossman, 2008).
    The economic consequences of differences in psychological traits beyond the lab are
to date not entirely understood (Bertrand, 2011), and progress on the mapping between
gender preferences and labor market outcomes is still at relatively early stages. Flory,
Leibbrandt and List (2010) investigate workplace consequences of attitudes towards
competition, and find that women are less likely than men to apply to jobs in which a
large share of compensation is attached to relative performance. However, Lavy (2013)
finds no evidence of gender differences in teachers’ performance under competition.
Leibbrandt and List (2014) find that women are not systematically less likely to initiate
salary negotiations than men, but Card, Cardoso and Klein (2015) find evidence of
   8
    The experimental approach has also provided cleaner evidence on the extent of gender discrimi-
nation (or lack thereof, according to context) than previous studies based on survey data (Azmat and
Petrongolo, 2014).


                                                11
bargaining effects in matched employer-employee data for Portugal, whereby women
appropriate only 90% of the firm-specific rents appropriated by men.
    Despite a growing literature on the labor market consequences of gender differ-
ences in behavior and comparative advantages, evidence on their origin is thinner.
Understanding nature and nurture components of gender differences in behavior is an
issue with strong policy implications. On the nature side, differences between men
and women related to childbirth and physical strength, as well as the brain structure
and sex hormones, may have an impact on their labor market outcomes. Women’s
physical traits are likely to have a declining impact on their labor market involve-
ment, due to medical progress in contraception, child rearing, and maternal health,
and technological advances biased towards brain relative to brawn skills. Nevertheless,
a few (non-experimental) studies have detected a significant correlation between ex-
posure to sex hormones and gender behavior (see Bertrand, 2011, Section 2.7.2). On
the nurture side, preferences may have roots in the education system, the household,
or society at large, and there is now evidence of environmental influences in various
contexts. Gneezy, Leonard and List (2008) compare attitudes toward competition in
patriarchal and matrilineal societies in a lab experiment setting, and find that while
men are more likely to compete in a patriarchal environment, the gender differential
in competition is reversed in a matrilineal society. Carrell, Page and West (2010)
provide evidence on educational influences, showing that instructor gender has a pow-
erful effect on female students’ performance in STEM subjects, especially at the top of
the ability distribution, but little impact on male students. Booth and Nolen (2012a,
2012b) find that girls’ attitudes towards competition and risk-taking differ between
single-sex or mixed-gender school environments. Household influences may start at a
young age through interaction with parents, or later in life through interaction with
spouses. Using school-level surveys, Fryer and Levitt (2010) find no evidence of dif-
ferential parental investment in girls’ and boys’ math skills, but there is little direct
evidence in the economic literature on later influences, and in particular on the inter-
play between the spousal division of labor in the household and women’s performance
in the labor market.
    While gender convergence has been a common feature of most OECD labor markets
during the post-war period, some aspects of convergence and the remaining gaps differ
widely across countries. Our previous work (Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2008) notes that
countries in which the employment gap has closed faster display relatively larger gaps


                                           12
in wages. The gender pay gap is typically higher in the US and the UK (around 30
log points) than in continental Europe, and especially in Scandinavia (around 15 log
points) and Southern Europe (around 10 log points). These wage gap figures are nega-
tively correlated with the corresponding employment gaps, ranging from 10 percentage
points in the US, the UK, and Scandinavia, to 15–25 points in northern and central
Europe, up to 30–40 points in southern Europe and Ireland.9 This correlation is sug-
gestive of selection effects in international variation in observed wage gaps. If working
women tend to have relatively high-wage characteristics, low female employment rates
become consistent with low wage gaps in so far as low-wage women are less likely to
feature in the observed wage distribution. Thus countries with high employment gaps
(typically southern Europe) tend to have lower wage gaps than countries with low
employment gaps (e.g. the US and the UK), as the average working woman is more
positively selected into employment than the average working man. Using alternative
wage imputation techniques, Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) conclude that selection
correction explains nearly one half of the negative cross-country correlation between
wage and employment gaps.
    Blau and Kahn (1996, 2003) emphasize instead the role played by international
differences in overall wage dispersion in shaping the gender pay gap. The idea is that
a given disparity between the characteristics of working men and women translates
into a wider gender wage gap the higher the overall level of wage inequality. Thus
in countries with a more compressed wage distribution (for example Scandinavian
countries) gender differences in pay are also more compressed than in countries with a
wider wage distribution (for example the US and the UK).
    More recently, Blau and Kahn (2013) and Cipollone, Patacchini and Vallanti (2013)
discuss the role of international differences in family-friendly policies such as family
subsidies, parental leave provisions and stress their impact in raising female labor
force participation in a number of OECD countries. Although generous policies are
in most cases associated with higher female participation, they may have unintended
negative effects on women’s earnings or job segregation by raising the relative cost of
hiring women (Blau and Kahn, 2013). By accommodating shorter working hours or
periods of leave from the labor market, some family-friendly policies may backfire by
reinforcing employers’ beliefs and social norms regarding women’s comparative advan-
tage in childcare and home production, with potential consequences on job segregation
  9
    Data on gaps reported are from Olivetti and Petrongolo (2008) and refer to the sample period
1994-2001.


                                              13
(François, 1998), differences in the incidence of high-powered labor contracts (Albanesi
and Olivetti, 2009) and on-the-job training (Dolado, Garcı́a-Peñalosa and de la Rica,
2013).
   Finally, international differences in taxation have received growing attention in
the literature on gender outcomes, in light of the impact of the tax system on the
labor supply of secondary earners (Guner, Kaygusuz and Ventura, 2012; Guner and
Kaygusuz, 2012; Alesina, Ichino and Karabarbounis, 2011.) Bick and Fuchs-Schundeln
(2012) - among others - show that cross-country differences in labor income taxes
and in the tax treatment of married couples can explain a considerable fraction of
the variation in the labor supply of married couples across developed economies. In
a policy experiment they show that moving to a system of strictly separate taxation
would increase labor supply of married women considerably in a number of countries
considered, though not in southern Europe, and conclude that taxes are among factors
that explain the absence of gender convergence in some countries.


3.3    Gender and the rise in services
The rest of this discussion will expand on the relationship between the industry struc-
ture and gender outcomes. Together with the rise in female participation, the 20th
century has witnessed substantial reallocation of labor across the broad sectors of agri-
culture, manufacturing and services, also known as structural transformation. Between
1900 and 2000, the share of services in the US economy rose from less than one third
to more than three quarters and similar trends are detected in the majority of OECD
countries, although typically with some time lag with respect to the US.
     We believe the perspective on the industry structure would bring important insight
to the study of gender inequalities for two reasons. First, the interplay between the rise
in services and gender outcomes may have both supply and demand components. That
is, the expansion of the service sector may create jobs that are safer and cleaner and thus
more “respectable” for women wishing to enter the labor market (Goldin, 1990, 2006),
and at the same time may stimulate the relative demand for female work if women have
a comparative advantage in the production of services (Ngai and Petrongolo, 2015).
The labor demand element is appealing in so far as it has the potential to address gender
trends in both quantities and prices. Indeed, Aguiar and Hurst (2007, p. 982) note that
the rise in female hours at a time of rising female wages “places a strong restriction on
theories explaining the increase in female labor force participation”. Second, while the

                                            14
share of services increased in all OECD countries, the uneven expansion of the service
sector across countries may contribute to explain the international variation in gender
outcomes.10
    The production of services is relatively less intensive in the use of “brawn” skills
than the production of goods, and relatively more intensive in the use of “brain” and
interpersonal skills. As women are less endowed of brawn skills than men, the his-
torical growth in the service sector has created jobs for which women have a natural
comparative advantage (Goldin, 1990, 2006; Galor and Weil, 1996; Rendall, 2010;
Weinberg, 2000; Ngai and Petrongolo, 2015). While the brawn versus brain distinction
has become less relevant in recent decades with the introduction of brawn-saving tech-
nologies, women may still retain a comparative advantage in services, related to the
more intensive use of communication and interpersonal skills, which cannot be easily
automated. The simultaneous presence of producer and consumer in the provision of
services makes these skills relatively more valuable in services, and a few studies have
documented the rising incidence of interactive tasks in general (Michaels, Rauch and
Redding, 2013), and relatively more so for women Borghans et al. (2005), and high-
lighted gender differences in the endowment and use of such traits (Roter et al, 2002,
Dickerson and Green, 2004, Borghans et al., 2005, 2008). Women’s comparative ad-
vantage in services is clearly reflected in the allocation of women’s work hours. Around
1970, the service sector absorbed about three quarters of women’s market work in the
US, Canada, Germany, France and the UK, but only about one half of men’s market
work. By creating jobs in which women are over-represented, the rise in services has
consequences for the evolution of female work.
    Another important element to the relationship between the rise in services and
female work is the gender distribution of home production. Women have historically
been the primary provider of home production. In 1965, women in US spent on average
38 hours per week in home production, while men only spent 11 hours. Available data
for European countries are more recent, but show similar patterns. Around 1990,
  10
     While most of our discussion on gender and structural transformation hinges on the role of the rise
in services, the relationship between economic development and female participation is typically not
monotonic in a very long-run perspective. Goldin (1995) establishes a U-shaped relationship between
female labor supply and GDP per head on a large cross-section of countries observed in the first half
of the 1980s, whereby the declining branch of the U-shape is associated with a smaller agricultural
sector. Subsequent work by Mammen and Paxson (2000), Lundberg (2010) and Luci (2009) provides
additional evidence of a U-shaped labor supply based on larger panels of economies observed in the
1970s and 1980s, 2005, and for the years 1965 to 2005, respectively, and Olivetti (2014) detects a
similar pattern for developed economies at the start of the twentieth century.


                                                  15
corresponding figures were 36 and 18 for Germany, 35 and 17 for the Netherlands,
and 44 and 10 for Italy (Freeman and Schettkat, 2005; Burda, Hamermesh and Weil,
2008). Household work includes activities that have close substitutes in the market
service sector. If the expansion of the service sector makes it cheaper to outsource
these activities, female work is pushed out of the household and pulled into the market
sector in which women have a comparative advantage.
    While women’s market hours would be boosted by both the rise in services and
marketization of home production, men have been historically over-represented in
the manufacturing sector, and their working hours mostly bore the burden of de-
industrialization. Evidence for the US presented by Ngai and Petrongolo (2015) shows
that the whole rise in female hours since the late 1960s accrued to the service sector,
while female hours in manufacturing remained roughly unchanged; and the whole re-
duction in male hours depleted the manufacturing sector, while male hours in services
stayed roughly constant.
    There is a growing literature on the link between the industry structure and female
participation, as well as on its interplay with marketization of home production. Early
work by Reid (1934), Fuchs (1968) and Lebergott (1993) has suggested links between
these forces, without proposing a unified theoretical framework. Goldin (1984, 1990)
emphasizes the increased demand for clerical work since the late 19th century as one
key factor leading to female employment gains throughout the first half of the 20th
century, resulting in a shift of female work from manufacturing and the home to clerical
employment.
    A few recent papers have proposed multi-sector frameworks to model the interplay
between the rise in services and female labor market outcomes, in which the impact of
sector-specific shocks on gender outcomes are typically driven by gender comparative
advantages (or simply baseline allocations) across production of goods and services,
whether in the market or the home. Akbulut (2011), Buera, Kaboski and Zhao (2013)
and Rendall (2014) emphasize marketization of home services as the driving force con-
tributing to both the rise of female market work and the service share. Lee and Wolpin
(2006, 2010), illustrate that the rise in services and female labor market outcomes are
jointly driven by sector-specific technical change and exogenous shocks to the value of
home time. Ngai and Petrongolo (2015) propose a model with uneven productivity
growth, in which goods and services are poor substitutes, while market and home ser-
vices are good substitutes. In their model, faster labor productivity growth in the goods


                                           16
sector reallocates labor from goods to services, resulting in structural transformation,
while slower labor productivity growth in the home sector reallocates hours of work
from the home to market services, resulting in marketization. Due to women’s compar-
ative advantage in services, structural transformation and marketization jointly raise
women’s relative market hours and wages. Gender comparative advantages thus turn a
seemingly gender-neutral shock such as the rise in services into a de facto gender-biased
shock.
    The relationship between the service share and female outcomes has been studied
in an international perspective in a few papers that relate lower female employment
in Europe to an undersized service sector relative to the US. Olivetti (2014) docu-
ments the relationship between structural transformation and gender outcomes since
the late 19th century in a large sample of countries, and finds evidence of clear gender
differentials in the historical process of sectoral reallocation. In particular, the share
of agricultural work drops faster for women than for men, the share of manufacturing
work exhibits a much flatter hump-shaped profile, while the share of service steadily
rises. Olivetti and Petrongolo (2014) link the observed variation in gender gaps in
both wages and hours across countries to differences in the industry structure. Their
analysis decomposes the gender bias in labor demand into measurable within- and
between-industry components, and find that the between-industry component explains
more than eighty percent of the overall variation in labor demand between the U.S. and
Western Europe, and roughly one third of the overall cross-country variation in wage
and hours gaps. Finally, Rendall (2014) quantitatively assesses the impact of exoge-
nously closing gender gaps on female employment and the consequent rise in services.
She calibrates her model using US and German tax rates in turn and concludes that
tax rates differentials account for the majority of differences in hours worked between
the US and Germany.


4    Evidence on female hours and the industry struc-
     ture
This aim of this Section is to provide unified evidence on the contribution of the indus-
try structure to the variation in female hours, along both historical and international
dimensions. We use data on the industry composition of employment from EU KLEMS,
which allows for a 12-fold industry classification consistently defined across countries.

                                           17
The industries are: (1) Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing; (2) Mining, quarry-
ing and utilities; (3) Manufacturing; (4) Construction; (5) Wholesale and retail trade,
hotels and restaurants; (6) Transport and storage; (7) Financial intermediation; (8)
Business activities and real estate; (9) Public administration and defence; (10) Educa-
tion; (11) Health and social work; (12) Other community, social or personal services,
and private household services. We classify industries (1)-(4) as goods-producing, and
the rest are classified as services.
    Table 1 highlights both between- and within-industry components in the rise of
female hours by showing evidence on sector shares and the share of female hours within
each sector over time in 17 countries. Columns 1 and 2 report the share of goods and
service hours at the start and at the end of the sample period, respectively, for each
country, and column 3 reports their change over time. In all countries considered the
share of services expands substantially. On average, the service sector grew at a rate of
0.64 percentage points a year across the country sample. The data also display some
clear convergence pattern, whereby countries with a relatively lower service share at
baseline experience the strongest rise in services, with continental Europe featuring
predominantly in this group.
    Table A1 in the Appendix gives further details on the average shares of 12 finer in-
dustries over the sample period, as well as their growth rate. Among goods-producing
industries, agriculture and manufacturing are declining on average by a third of a per-
centage point per year across countries, while the share of the construction sector stays
roughly constant in most countries. Most service industries are experiencing positive
growth, except transportation and public administration, whose size remains overall
constant. Service industries with highest growth are: trade, hotels and restaurant;
business activities and real estate; health and social work; and other services. Despite
common trends, the average size of industries varies importantly across countries. For
example, Anglo-Saxon countries tend to have a relatively larger finance sector and a
smaller manufacturing sector. Southern European and Asian countries have on average
a larger primary sector, and smaller health and business activities sectors.
    Column 4 in Table 1 reports the female intensity in goods and service industries at
the start of the sample period, measured as the share of female hours in each broad
sector. On average, the female presence in service industries (41%) is nearly twice as
large than in good-producing industries (23%). The generalized rise in services is thus
expected to boost female employment by expanding the sector in which women are


                                           18
over-represented. Over time, the female presence in goods-producting industries stays
roughly constant at 22% of total hours, while it rises in services from 41% to 48%.
As noted above based on US evidence (Ngai and Petrongolo, 2015), the rise in female
hours over the past few decades accrued entirely to service industries.
    Figure 5 shows more detailed dynamics on the rise in services and female hours in
the aggregate economy. Each line represents the joint evolution of the service share and
female hours in each country over decades, with each marker representing a decade.
Positively sloped trajectories imply that both indicators are rising over time. The
cross-country dynamics also shows clear evidence of convergence in both the industry
structure and female hours over time, with some countries still lagging behind. For
example, Greece and Korea in 2005 have similar female and service shares as those
observed in the United States in the 1970s.


4.1     Shift-share analysis: Time series
We next quantify between- and within-industry components of trends in female hours
by decomposing, for each country, the growth in the female hours share into a term
reflecting the change in the share of each sector, and a term reflecting changes in gender
intensities within a sector. Let’s denote by lf t the share of hours worked by women in
the economy at time t. Using a standard shift-share decomposition, the change in lf t
can be expressed as
                                    X               X
                            ∆lf t =     αf j ∆ljt +    αj ∆lf jt ,                     (1)
                                       j              j

where ljt denotes the share of hours in sector j, lf jt denotes the share of female hours in
sector j, and αf j = (lf jt + lf jt−1 ) /2 and αj = (ljt + ljt−1 ) /2 are decomposition weights.
The first term in equation (??) represents the change in the female hours share that
is attributable to changes in the industry structure of the economy (between-industry
component), while the second term reflects changes in the female intensity within
sectors (within-industry component).
    The results of this decomposition are reported in Table 2. Column 1 and 2 report
the female hours share in the first and last year for which information is available,
respectively, for each country. Column 3 reports its change over time. In most countries
the female hours share increases substantially, as also shown in Figure 2. The next four
columns present the results of the shift-share decomposition, based on twelve industries
(columns 4 and 5) or two industries - simply goods and services - (columns 6 and 7).


                                              19
Columns 4 and 6 report between-industry components, i.e. the first term in equation
(??), and columns 5 and 7 report the within-industry component, i.e. the second term
in the equation.
    Based on the 12-fold industry decomposition (column 4), the between-industry
component explains 52% of the overall rise in female hours in the whole sample (this is
the ratio of the country-averages in the last row of columns 4 and 3, 3.9/7.5). In the UK,
Germany, France, and Scandinavian countries it actually represents the whole observed
variation or even more than that, revealing a negative within-industry component.
The industries that - in virtually all countries - carry a relatively higher weight in the
between-industry component are health and business services, followed by trade, hotels
and restaurants; education; and other services. Bar a small number of exceptions, these
patterns are extremely consistent across countries. Not surprisingly, women represent a
relatively large share of labor inputs in these industries (and especially so in health and
other services), and these industries all grew substantially during the sample period.
Table A2 in the Appendix gives details of each industry’s contribution to the between-
industry component of the rise in female hours reported in Table 2.
    When we aggregate industries into two broad sectors in column 6, the between-
industry component still explains 48% of the overall variation (3.6/7.5). This is indeed
because the pattern labor reallocation from goods-producing industries to the broad
service sector is quantitatively much more important than labor reallocation across
goods-producing industries or across service industries.


4.2    Industries and occupations
The literature on structural transformation and gender outcomes typically emphasizes
gender comparative advantages, via the more intensive use of non-physical and inter-
personal skills in the production of services rather than goods. However, tasks are
more directly associated to labor inputs (e.g. occupations) rather than output (indus-
tries), and some sectors may tend to use female labor more intensively because they
use more intensively occupations in which women have a comparative advantage. One
should thus expect that the rise in female hours has an important between-occupation
component.
    Between-industry and between-occupation dimensions are clearly not orthogonal.
As the distribution of occupations varies systematically across industries, a portion
of the between-occupation component may be explained by the expansion of indus-

                                            20
tries in which female-friendly occupations are over-represented. Between-occupation
changes that are not captured by changes in the industry structure would by defini-
tion be included in the within-industry component of our canonical decompositions
(??). We therefore assess whether our shift-share analysis is missing an important
between-occupation component of the rise in female hours, by splitting the within-
industry component of (??) into within- and between-occupation components.11 The
full decomposition is
                                                                                    !
                       X                 X        X                    X
             ∆lf t =       αf j ∆ljt +       αj        αf jk ∆ljkt +       αjk ∆lf jkt ,     (2)
                       j                 j         k                   k

where k indexes occupations, ljkt is the share of occupation k in industry j, lf jkt is the
share of female hours in occupation k and industry j, and αf jk = (lf jkt + lf jkt−1 ) /2
and αjk = (ljkt + ljkt−1 ) /2. The first term in (??) represents the between-industry
component, the second term represents the between-occupation component that takes
place within industries, and the last term represents the component that takes place
within industry×occupation cells, and as such it would remained unexplained by either
categorization.
    We perform this decomposition for a subset of countries for which we can readily
access household surveys or Census data ensuring a consistent classification of occupa-
tions over time. This subset includes the US, the UK, Canada, France and Greece. For
the US, UK and France we use household surveys and, respectively, the Current Pop-
ulation Survey (1967-2008), the UK Labour Force Survey (1975-2008) and the French
Labour Force Survey (1975-2006). For Canada and Greece we use census of population
(1981-2001 and 1971-2001, respectively).12 The choices of sample period are motivated
by both data availability and broad consistency with the rest of our analysis. For
simplicity we consider as simple dichotomous classification of industries (service versus
good production), and a five-fold classification of occupations: (1) professionals and
managers; (2) clerical occupations; (3) sales occupations; (4) service occupations; (5)
manual occupations.13
    The results of this further decomposition are reported in Table 3. Column 1 reports
  11
     This type of shift-share analysis has been performed by Olivetti and Petrongolo (2014) for a
cross-section of countries and by Ngai and Petrongolo (2015) for the US time series.
  12
     Unfortunately, information on hours is not available in the 1971 Canadian Census.
  13
     For France we use the major occupation group directly provided by the survey: agricultural
managers; other managers; professionals; intermediate professions; white and blue collars.



                                                  21
the total change in the female hours share between the start and the end of the sample
period, based on country-specific data sources. Columns 2 and 3 report a simple
between/within industry decomposition of this change with two broad sectors, and
this mimics quite well the results obtained on EU KLEMS data, reported in Table 2.
Columns 4 and 5 further decompose the within-industry component (column 3) into
between and within-occupation components. Comparison of columns 4 and 5 shows
that in none of the countries considered did the growth in the female hours share take
place via the expansion of female-friendly occupations within sectors. In particular, in
the US, Canada, France and Greece the between-occupation component is very close
to zero. In the UK, it is actually negative, meaning that - within the service or goods
sector - the change in the occupation structure has indeed moved in a way that was
less favorable to female employment. The results of this Table show that the bulk of
the growth in female-friendly occupations took instead place via the expansion of the
service share.


4.3    Shift-share analysis: A cross-section of countries
We next turn to the contribution of the industry structure to the international variation
of the female hours share, asking how much of international gender disparities can be
explained by the size of female-friendly industries. We take the US as the reference
country, and perform a shift-share decomposition similar to (??), where the ∆ terms
represent differences between each country in the sample and the US, and the α terms
are averages (with equal weights) of each country’s and US’s indicators. The results
obtained were not sensitive in any discernible way to alternative weighing.
    Table 4 reports the results of the decomposition at two points in time, the 1980s
and the 2000s. Columns 1 reports the average female hours share over the 1980s,
column 2 reports its difference with respect to the US, and columns 3 and 4 report the
between-industry component of this difference, based on a 12-fold and 2-fold industry
classification, respectively. Columns 5-8 report the corresponding values for the 2000s.
Information for Germany and Portugal is not available before 1990. With the exception
of Greece (1981, 2001) and Portugal (2001), the statistics are averages over the 1980s
and the 2000s.
    In the 1980s, females represented about one third of total hours on average (column
1). In southern Europe and the two Asian countries, the female share is far below
that of the US, while in Scandinavian countries this is markedly above. On average,

                                           22
the female share in the US is about 3.3 percentage points higher than in the rest of
the sample (column 2). Column 3 confirms the importance of the between-industry
component in the cross-section (12 industries). The between-industry component is
everywhere negative, as a consequence of a larger service sector in the US, with the
exception of Denmark, where the total differential to be explained is also positive.
When averaging across countries, nearly 80% (2.6/3.3) of the cross-sectional variation
in the female share is explained by international variation in the industry structure.
Column 4 delivers a very similar picture, qualitatively, based on a binary goods/service
classification, although the between-industry components falls in magnitude in most
countries, averaging to about 60% (2/3.3) of the overall variation. Thus aggregation of
hours into two broad sectors matters more in the cross-section than in the time-series
variation. This is because, as discussed previously, the industries making up the two
broad sectors vary considerably in size across countries, while they follow similar trends
over decades.
    By the 2000s, the female share has increased in all countries, with some cross-
country convergence, whereby the average difference between the female share through-
out the sample and the US has dropped to 2 percentage points (column 6). However,
on average, the between industry component has fallen only very modestly (columns
7 and 8), implying that most of the cross-country convergence in the female share has
taken place via a higher female intensity within industries. This evidence implies that
while the service share was growing in all countries in the sample, it did not grow
systematically faster in countries with relatively lower female hours, and it may thus
be a factor hindering further convergence in gender outcomes.


4.4    What drives variation in the service share?
As the evidence presented above suggests that variation in the service share can absorb
a large portion of the cross-country variation in the female share, factors that tend to
shape the industry structure in a country may have consequences for gender inequalities
in the labor market.
    Several factors have been discussed in recent work. Work on structural transforma-
tion classifies the mechanisms that drive the rise in services into income and relative
price effects (See Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi, 2013, for a recent survey, and
references therein). With the first mechanism, income growth shifts the allocation of
resources towards services as long as the demand for services is more elastic to income

                                           23
than the demand for goods (Kongsamut, Rebelo and Xie, 2001). With the second
mechanism, changes in relative prices alter the resource allocation when the elastic-
ity of substitution between goods and services is not unity (Baumol, 1967; Ngai and
Pissarides, 2007). Changes in relative prices may in turn be driven by inter-industry
differentials in productivity growth, and specifically faster growth in manufacturing
than service industries. As manufacturing output and services are poor substitutes in
consumption, faster productivity growth in manufacturing reallocates labor from man-
ufacturing into services. These hypotheses have been typically framed in a historical
perspective to explain the secular rise in services, and similar intuition implies that
international differences in productivity growth would map out into differential growth
in the service share in a cross-section of countries.
    While services produced in the market and manufacturing goods are poor substi-
tutes in consumption, some market services tend to have close substitutes in home
production activities like childcare, elderly care, cooking, house repairs, gardening etc.
When such activities are outsourced to the market, home production hours are released
to the market, and market services grow. Marketization of home production may re-
spond to various driving forces. First, higher productivity growth in market services
than in the home reallocates labor from the home to the market, as home and market
services are relatively good substitutes. Second, institutional factors such as taxation
or family policies may affect the speed of marketization. Finally, as women are the
primary provider of home services, social norms about women’s work in and out of the
household may also have an impact on marketization of home production.
    Freeman and Schettkat (2005) provide evidence on the marketization hypothesis,
based on both time-use data and expenditure data across countries, and conclude that
marketization contributes substantially to the hours gap across the Atlantic. In a
similar vein, Rogerson (2008) relates the relatively poor performance of continental
European labor markets to an under-marketized service industry. Marketization of
services may in turn be hindered in continental Europe by a higher tax wedge, which
distorts home-market substitution. Ngai and Pissarides (2011) and Ragan (2013) pro-
vide evidence on this mechanism for a number of OECD countries by showing that
taxation and subsidies decrease and raise hours, respectively, in industries that have
close home substitutes. Cortes and Tessada (2011) and Cortes and Pan (2013) study
the impact of low-skill immigration on marketization of home production. This hap-
pens via the entry of low-skill immigrants in activities with close household substitutes,


                                           24
and the consequent fall in their market price.
    Olivetti and Petrongolo (2014) explore cross-country characteristics that, according
to the above hypothesis, are potentially related to the share of services. They find that
countries with a higher tax rate for secondary earners have a smaller service sector
(though the correlation does not hold for the overall tax wedge), while public provision
of child care is associated with a larger service share. Among cultural indicators, the
one that is significantly correlated to the share of services is the proportion of women
believing that men are more deserving of work when jobs are scarce, while indicators
of attitudes towards women’s role in the household are not significantly related to the
service share. Elements of cross-country evidence detected by Olivetti and Petrongolo
(2014) are broadly consistent with the marketization hypothesis, and indeed the ob-
served growth in the share of industries such as hotels and restaurants, health and
social care, early education, and other services, has expectedly absorbed home pro-
duction in the same activities. On the other hand, marketization is unlikely to play
a role in the growth in the whole business service sector, which grew noticeably in all
countries considered and contributed significantly to the between-industry component
of the rise in female hours.


5    Conclusions
This paper documents gender convergence in main labor market indicators for a large
sample of high-income countries during the past few decades, using comparable data on
employment, working hours and earnings. While levels of female participation differ
widely across our country sample, most countries considered share similar trends in
female outcomes, with clear signs of international convergence.
    Despite women’s secular advancement in most dimensions of market work, there
is no evidence of fully closing gaps with respect to men. The recent literature on
gender disparities, while still acknowledging the importance of classical explanations
of gender gaps based on differences in productivity or discrimination, has explored
novel angles on gender disparities, based on gendered social norms and differences in
preferences and attitudes in domains closely linked to labor market success. The role
of these factors has received some support from latest empirical advances on richer
data sources. As these factors evolve very slowly, one may expect remaining gaps to
display a high degree of persistence, and one of the most active strands of research in


                                           25
this literature investigates policies that would accelerate change in social norms.
    The paper then proposes a perspective on gender gaps that stresses the role of
the industry structure. As women are over-represented in services, in most countries
considered a substantial portion of the rise in female hours is associated with the
reallocation of labor from manufacturing into services. By the same token, international
variation in the service share is also associated with important variation in female
hours across countries. While marketization of home services is a key force behind
both higher female participation and the rise in market services, not all features of
the rise in services are fully consistent with the marketization hypothesis, and a more
detailed analysis of the dynamics of detailed industries would help shed light in this
direction.
    Causal links between the service share and female outcomes are of course harder
to establish. Women may have a comparative advantage in producing services, and
thus structural transformation stimulates demand for female labor inputs; and at the
same time they may have a stronger preference for service jobs than men, thus the rise
in female participation would stimulate the expansion of the sector that best accom-
modates women leaving the home. Research in this direction would surely enrich our
understanding of the causes and consequences of gender disparities.


References
  [1] Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Alloca-
      tion of Time Over Five Decades.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 969-1006.

  [2] Akbulut, Rahşan. 2011. “Sectoral Changes and the Increase in Women’s Labor
      Force Participation.” Macroeconomic Dynamics 15: 240-264.

  [3] Akerlof, George A. and Rachel. E. Kranton. 2000. “Economics and Identity,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 115: 715-753.

  [4] Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti. 2009. “Home Production, Market Pro-
      duction, and the Gender Wage Gap: Incentives and Expectations,” Review of
      Economic Dynamics, 12 (1): 80-107.

  [5] Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti. 2015. “Gender Roles and Medical
      Progress.” Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

  [6] Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano and Nathan Nunn. 2013. “On the Origins of
      Gender Roles: Women and the Plough.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128:
      469-530.

                                          26
 [7] Alesina, Alberto, Andrea Ichino and Loukas Karabarbounis. 2011. “Gender Based
     Taxation and the Allocation of Family Chores.” American Economic Journals:
     Economic Policy, 3: 1-40.
 [8] Altonji Joe G. and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. “Race and Gender in the Labor Mar-
     ket” in Orley Ashtenfelter and David Card, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics,
     Vol. 3A, (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
 [9] Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low and Virginia Sanchez-Marcos. 2008. “Explaining
     Changes in Female Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Model”, American Economic
     Review 98: 1517–1542.
[10] Azmat, Ghazala and Barbara Petrongolo. 2014. “Gender and the Labor Market:
     What Have We Learned from Field and Lab Experiments?”. Labour Economics
     30: 32-40.
[11] Bailey, Martha J. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive
     Freedom on Women’s Lifecycle Labor Supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     121: 289-320.
[12] Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande and
     Petia Topalova. 2009. “Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Prejudice?”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 124: 1497-1540.
[13] Beaudry, Paul, and Ethan Lewis. 2014. “Do Male-Female Wage Differentials
     Reflect Differences in the Return to Skill? Cross-City Evidence from 1980-2000.”
     American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6: 178-194.
[14] Bertrand, Marianne. 2011. “New Perspectivs on Gender.” In O. Ashenfelter and
     D. Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B: 1545–1592. Amsterdam:
     Elsevier.
[15] Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. “Dynamics of
     the Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors.”
     American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2: 228–255.
[16] Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica and Jessica Pan. 2015. “Gender Identity
     and Relative Income Within Household.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forth-
     coming.
[17] Bick, Alexander and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln. 2012. “Taxation and Labor Sup-
     ply of Married Women across Countries: A Macroeconomic Analysis”. CEPR
     Discussion Papers 9115.
[18] Black, Sandra E. and Alexandra Spitz-Oener. 2010. “Explaining Women’s Suc-
     cess: Technological Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work.” Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 92: 187–194.

                                        27
[19] Blau, Francine D. 1998. “The Well-being of American Women, 1970-1995.” Jour-
     nal of Economic Literature : 112–165.

[20] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2003. “Understanding International
     Differences in the Gender Pay Gap.” Journal of Labor Economics 21: 106–144.

[21] Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2007. “Changes in the Labor Supply
     Behavior of Married Women: 1980-2000.” Journal of Labor Economics : 393–438.

[22] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2013. “Female Labor Supply: Why
     Is the United States Falling Behind?” American Economic Review P&P, 103(3):
     251–256.

[23] Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber and Anne E. Winkler. 2014. The Eco-
     nomics of Women, Men, and Work, 7th edition. Prentice-Hall.

[24] Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of
     Alternative Approaches,” in Ashenfelter and Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 3A: 1586–1607.

[25] Booth, Alison L. and Patrick Nolen. 2012a. “Gender Differences in Risk Be-
     haviour: Does Nurture Matter?” Economic Journal 122: F56–F78.

[26] Booth, Alison L. and Patrick Nolen. 2012b. “Choosing to Compete: How Differ-
     ent Are Girls and Boys?” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 81:
     542–555.

[27] Borghans, Lex, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce Weinberg. 2005. “People People: So-
     cial Capital and the Labor-market Outcomes of Underrepresented Groups.” IZA
     Discussion Paper No. 1494.

[28] Borghans, Lex, Bas ter Weel, and Bruce Weinberg. 2008. “Interpersonal Styles
     and Labor Market Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 43 (4): 815–858.

[29] Buera, Francisco J. and Joseph P. Kaboski. 2012. “The Rise of the Service Econ-
     omy.” American Economic Review 102: 2540–2569.

[30] Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Min Qiang Zhao. 2013. “The Rise
     of Services: the Role of Skills, Scale, and Female Labor Supply.” NBER working
     paper No. 19372.

[31] Burda, Michael. C., Daniel. S. Hamermesh and Philippe Weil. 2008. “The Distri-
     bution of Total Work in the EU and the USA”. In: Boeri, Tito, Burda, Michael
     and Kramarz , Francis, (eds.) Working Hours and Job Sharing in the Eu and Usa:
     Are Europeans Lazy? or Americans Crazy? Oxford University Press, Oxford.



                                        28
[32] Card, David, Ana Raute Cardoso, and Patrick Klein. 2015. “Bargaining, Sorting,
     and the Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay
     of Women.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[33] Carrell Scott E., Marianne E. Page and James E. West. 2010. “Sex and Sci-
     ence: How Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap.” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 125: 1101–1144.

[34] Cipollone, Angela, Eleonora Patacchini and Giovanna Vallanti. 2014. “Female
     Labor Market Participation in Europe: Novel Evidence on Trends and Shaping
     Factors”. IZA Journal of European Labor Studies 3: 1–40.

[35] Cortes, Patricia and Jose Tessada. 2011. “Low-skilled Immigration and the La-
     bor Supply of Highly Skilled Women”. American Economic Journal: Applied
     Economics 3: 88–123.

[36] Cortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan. 2013. “Outsourcing Household Production: The
     Demand for Foreign Domestic Helpers and Native Labor Supply in Hong Kong”.
     Journal of Labor Economics 31: 327–371.

[37] Costa, Dora. 2000. “From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women’s Paid
     Labor.” Journal of Economic Perspective 14: 101–122.

[38] Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy (2009). “Gender Differences in Preferences”.
     Journal of Economic Literature 47, 1–27.

[39] Dickerson, Andy and Francis Green. 2004. “The Growth and Valuation of Com-
     puting and Other Generic Skills”. Oxford Economic Papers 56: 371–406.

[40] Fernández, Raquel. 2011. “Does Culture Matter?” In J. Benhabib, A. Bisin,
     and M.O. Jackson (Eds.), Handbook of Social Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier
     Science, pp. 481–510.

[41] Fernández, Raquel. 2013. “Culture Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female
     Labor Force Participation over a Century,” American Economic Review 103:
     472–500.

[42] Fernández, Raquel, Fogli, Alessandra and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and
     Sons: Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics 119: 1249–1299.

[43] Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. “Culture: An Empirical Investi-
     gation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
     nomics 1: 146–177.




                                       29
[44] Flory Jeffrey, Andreas Leibbrandt and John List. 2015. “Do Competitive Work
     Places Deter Female Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Gen-
     der Differences in Job-Entry Decisions.” The Review of Economic Studies 82:
     122–155.

[45] Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldkamp. 2011. “Nature or Nurture? Learning and
     the Geography of Female Labor Force Participation,” Econometrica 79: 1103–
     1138.

[46] François, Patrick. 1998. “Gender Discrimination without Gender Difference: The-
     ory and Policy Responses.” Journal of Public Economics 68: 1–32.

[47] Francois, Patrick and Jan van Ours. 2000. “Gender Wage Differentials in a Com-
     petitive Labor Market: The Household Interaction Effect.” CentER Discussion
     Paper No. 2000–85.

[48] Freeman, Richard and Ronald Schettkat. 2005. “Marketization of Household Pro-
     duction and the EU-US Gap in Work”, Economic Policy 41: 5–39.

[49] Fortin, Nicole. 2005. “Gender Role Attitudes and the Labour Market Outcomes
     of Women across OECD Countries,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 21: 416–
     438.

[50] Fuchs, Victor. 1968. The Service Economy, New York: Columbia University
     Press.

[51] Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 1996. “The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth.”
     American Economic Review 86: 374–387.

[52] Gayle, George-Levi and Limor Golan. 2012. “Estimating a Dynamic Adverse
     Selection Model: Labor Force Experience and the Changing Gender Earnings
     Gap.” Review of Economic Studies 79: 227–67.

[53] Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini, Aldo. 2003. “Performance
     in Competitive Environments: Gender Differences”. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 118: 1049–1074.

[54] Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L. Leonard and John A. List. 2008. “Gender Differences
     in Competition: Evidence from a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society.” Econo-
     metrica 77: 909–931.

[55] Goldin, Claudia. 1984. “The Historical Evolution of Female Earnings Functions
     and Occupations.” Explorations in Economic History 21: 1-27.

[56] Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Wage Gap: An Economic His-
     tory of American Women. Oxford University Press.


                                        30
[57] Goldin, Claudia. 1995. “The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Eco-
     nomic Development and Economic History”, in T. P. Schultz, ed., Investment
     in Women’s Human Capital and Economic Development, pp. 61-90. need to add
     publisher
[58] Goldin, Claudia. 2006. “The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women’s Em-
     ployment, Education, and Family.” Ely Lecture, American Economic Review,
     Papers and Proceedings 96: 1–21.
[59] Goldin, Claudia. 2014a. “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter”.
     American Economic Review 104: 1–30.
[60] Goldin, Claudia. 2014b. “A Pollution Theory of Discrimination.” Chapter 9 in L.
     Platt Boustan, C. Frydman and R.A. Margo (eds.), Human Capital in History:
     The American Record. University of Chicago Press.
[61] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Con-
     traceptives and Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political
     Economy 100: 730–770.
[62] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorugoklu. 2005. “Engines
     of Liberation.”Review of Economic Studies 72: 109-133.
[63] Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2015. “Family
     Economics Writ Large”. Economie d’Avant Garde Research Reports, no. 26.
[64] Guner, Nezih, Kaygusuz, Remzi and Gustavo Ventura. 2012. “Taxation and
     Household Labor Supply.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(3): 1113-1149.
[65] Guner, Nezih and Remzi Kaygusuz. 2012. “Taxing Women: A Macroeconomic
     Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Carnegie-NYU-Rochester Confer-
     ence Series on Public Policy, 59(1): 111-127.
[66] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten and Gianluca Violante. 2010. “The
     Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States”.
     Journal of Political Economy 118: 681-722.
[67] Herrendorf, Berthold, Rogerson, Richard and Akos Valentinyi. 2013. “Growth
     and Structural Tranformation”, in P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf (eds.) Handbook
     of Economic Growth Vol 2A: 855-941. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[68] International Labour Organization. 1990. Economically Active Population Esti-
     mates and Projections, 1950-2025: Volume 6.
[69] King, Miriam, Steven Ruggles, J. Trent Alexander, Sarah Flood, Katie Genadek,
     Matthew B. Schroeder, Brandon Trampe, and Rebecca Vick. 2010. Integrated
     Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 3.0. [Machine-
     readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

                                        31
[70] Kleven, Henrik J., Camille Landais and Jacob E. Sogaard. 2015. “Children and
     Gender Inequality: Evidence from Denmark.” Unpublished.

[71] Lavy, Victor. 2013. “Gender Differences in Market Competitiveness in a Real
     Workplace: Evidence from Performance-based Pay Tournaments among Teach-
     ers”, Economic Journal 123: 540–573.

[72] Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen. 1990. “Male-Female Wage Differentials
     in Job Ladders,” Journal of Labor Economics 8: S106–123.

[73] Lebergott, Stanley. 1993. Pursuing Happiness. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
     NJ.

[74] Lee, Donghoon and Ken Wolpin. 2006. “Intersectoral Labor Mobility and the
     Growth of the Service Sector.” Econometrica 74: 1–46.

[75] Lee, Donghoon and Ken Wolpin. 2010. “Accounting for Wage and Employment
     Changes in the U.S. from 1968-2000: A Dynamic Model of Labor Market Equi-
     librium.” Journal of Econometrics 156: 68–85.

[76] Leibbrandt, Andrea and John List. 2014. “Do Women Avoid Salary Negotiations?
     Evidence from a Large Scale Natural Field Experiment”. Management Science
     2016–2014.

[77] Luci, Angela. 2009. “Female Labour Market Participation and Economic
     Growth.” International Journal of Innovation and Sustainable Development, Vol.
     4, 2/3. (doi : 10.1504/IJISD.2009.028065; ISSN 1740-8822).

[78] Lundberg, Shelly. 2010. “The Sexual Division of Labour.” In The Shape of the
     Divison of Labour: Nations, Industries and Households, edited by Robert M.
     Solow and Jean-Philippe Touffut, pp. 122–48. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

[79] Mammen, Kristin and Christina Paxson. 2000. “Women’s Work and Economic
     Development.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14: 141–164.

[80] Minnesota Population Center. 2014. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, In-
     ternational: Version 6.3 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of
     Minnesota.

[81] Mitchell, Brian. 1998a. International Historical Statistics; Europe 1750-1993. 3rd
     edition, Macmillan ; Stockton, London : New York.

[82] Mitchell, Brian. 1998b. International Historical Statistics; The Americas 1750-
     1993. 3rd edition, Macmillan, Basingstoke, England.

[83] Mitchell, Brian. 1998c. International Historical Statistics; Africa, Asia & Oceania
     1750-1993. 3rd edition, Macmillan ; Stockton, London : New York.

                                          32
[84] Ngai L. Rachel and Cristopher A. Pissarides. 2007. “Structural Change in a
     Multisector Model of Growth.” American Economic Review 97: 429–443.

[85] Ngai L. Rachel and Cristopher A. Pissarides. 2008. “Trends in Hours and Eco-
     nomic Growth.” Review of Economic Dynamics 11: 239–256.

[86] Ngai L. Rachel and Barbara Petrongolo. 2015. “Structural Transformation, Mar-
     ketization and Female Employment.” Unpublished.

[87] Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. “Do Women Shy Away from Com-
     petition? Do Men Compete too Much? Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:
     1067–1101.

[88] Olivetti, Claudia. 2006. “Changes in Women’s Hours of Market Work: The Role
     of Returns to Experience,” Review of Economic Dynamics 9: 557–587.

[89] Olivetti, Claudia. 2014. “The Female Labor Force and Long-run Development:
     The American Experience in Comparative Perspective. ” Chapter 5 in L. Platt
     Boustan, C. Frydman and R.A. Margo (eds.), Human Capital in History: The
     American Record. University of Chicago Press.

[90] Olivetti, Claudia, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2008. “Unequal Pay or Unequal Em-
     ployment? A Cross-Country Analysis of Gender Gaps.” Journal of Labor Eco-
     nomics 26: 621–654.

[91] Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo. 2014. “Gender Gaps across Countries
     and Skills: Supply, Demand and the Industry Structure.” Review of Economic
     Dynamics

[92] O’Mahony, Mary and Marcel P. Timmer. 2009. “Output, Input and Productivity
     Measures at the Industry Level: The EU KLEMS Database.” The Economic
     Journal 119: F374–F403.

[93] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2002. Employment
     Outlook, Paris: OECD.

[94] Pencavel J. 1986. Labor Supply of Men. Chapter 1 in Handbook of Labor Eco-
     nomics, vol. 1, pg. 3–102, edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard.

[95] Ragan, Kelly. 2013. “Taxes and Time-Use: Fiscal Policy in a Household Produc-
     tion Model”. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5: 168–192.

[96] Rendall, Michelle. 2010. “Brain versus Brawn: The Realization of Women’s Com-
     parative Advantage.” Unpublished.

[97] Rendall, Michelle. 2014. “The Service Sector and Female Market Work: Europe
     vs. US.” Unpublished.

                                       33
 [98] Reid, Margaret (1934). Economics of Household Production. Wiley, New York.

 [99] Rigdon, Mary. 2013. “An Experimental Investigation into Gender Differences in
      Negotiations”. Unpublished.

[100] Rogerson, Richard (2008). “Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of
      European Labor Market Outcomes.”Journal of Political Economy 116: 235–259.

[101] Roter, Debra, Judith Hall and Yutaka Aoki (2002). “Physician Gender Effects in
      Medical Communication.” Journal of the American Medical Association 288(6),
      756–764.

[102] Weinberg, Bruce A. 2000. “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers.”
      Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53: 290–308.




                                        34
                                                    Table 1
                         The share of services and female intensity within sectors (%)

                                                        Sector share                          Female intensity
                                                (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
   Country                     Sector          Start        End      Change           Start        End        Change
   Aus (1982-2005)             Goods           38.6        27.9       -10.7           21.5         20.5         -1.0
                              Services         61.4        72.1        10.7           40.0         49.9          9.9
   Aut (1980-2005)             Goods           46.2        29.4       -16.8           31.3         27.1         -4.2
                              Services         53.8         70.6       16.8           48.6         46.2         -2.4
   Bel (1980-2005)             Goods           38.1        23.6       -14.5           19.1         19.6         0.5
                              Services         61.9        76.4        14.5           44.2         50.7          6.5
   Can (1970-2005)             Goods           40.1        26.2       -13.8           16.7         20.3          3.5
                              Services         59.9         73.8       13.8           37.3         48.9         11.5
   Dnk (1980-2005)             Goods           35.4        25.1       -10.3           23.9         22.8         -1.0
                              Services         64.6         74.9       10.3           52.2         53.0          0.8
   Fin (1970-2005)             Goods           59.5        33.4       -26.0           26.2         24.0         -2.2
                              Services         40.5         66.6       26.0           59.0         59.2          0.2
   Fra (1982-2005)             Goods           41.4        28.5       -13.0           22.8         21.5         -1.3
                              Services         58.6         71.5       13.0           47.2         50.5          3.3
   Ger (1991-2005)             Goods           40.7        29.8       -10.9           26.1         24.2         -1.9
                              Services         59.3         70.2       10.9           54.3         55.1          0.8
   Grc (1971-2001)             Goods           55.8        36.3       -19.5           13.8         18.1          4.3
                              Services         44.2         63.7       19.5           17.9         39.5         21.7
   Ita (1970-2005)             Goods           60.3        32.7       -27.5           27.0         27.4          0.4
                              Services         39.7         67.3       27.5           36.1         47.1         11.0
   Jpn (1973-2005)             Goods           52.0        34.6       -17.4           25.9         23.1         -2.8
                              Services         48.0         65.4       17.4           36.4         39.8          3.4
   Kor (1970-2005)             Goods           66.1        35.2       -30.9           21.5         22.0          0.5
                              Services         33.9         64.8       30.9           24.2         33.9          9.6
   Nld (1979-2005)             Goods           36.2        24.4       -11.9           11.0         15.3          4.3
                              Services         63.8         75.6       11.9           31.0         41.8         10.8
   Prt (1991-2001)             Goods           53.2        42.5       -10.8           31.1         30.9         -0.2
                              Services         46.8         57.5       10.8           47.5         51.8          4.4
   Spa (1980-2005)             Goods           50.9        35.9       -15.0           19.7         17.8         -2.0
                              Services         49.1         64.1       15.0           38.2         50.7         12.4
   UK (1970-2005)              Goods           50.2        23.1       -27.1           32.0         21.4        -10.6
                              Services         49.8         76.9       27.1           50.4         51.5          1.2
   US (1970-2005)              Goods           36.8        23.1       -13.7           17.9         19.5          1.6
                              Services         63.2         76.9       13.7           35.6         48.1         12.5

Notes: Sample periods for each country are in parentheses. Figures reported are shares of annual hours (×100). Columns (1)-
(3) report the sector hours share at the start and end of the period and its change. Columns (4)-(6) report the same statistics
for the share of the female hours within each sector. The goods sector includes: (1) Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing;
(2) Mining, quarrying and utilities; (3) Manufacturing; (4) Construction. The service sector includes: (5) Wholesale and
retail trade, hotels and restaurants; (6) Transport and storage; (7) Financial intermediations; (8) Real estate; (9) Public
administration and defence; (10) Education; (11) Health and social work; (12) Other community, social or personal services,
and private household services. Data Sources: Greece and Portugal: IPUMS International (Minnesota Population Center,
2014). France: Enquête Emploi. For all the remaining countries data are from EU Klems, March 2008 release (available at
http://www.euklems.net/).
                                                      Table 2
                             Decomposition of the rise in female hours by industry (%)

                                                                                      Decomposition
  Country                             Gender Share
                                                                         12 industries            Goods/services
                              (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)
                             Start         End         Change        Between       Within    Between        Within
  Aus (1982-2005)            32.9          41.7          8.8           2.5           6.3         2.6          6.3
  Aut (1980-2005)            40.6          40.6          0.0           3.0          -3.0         3.1         -3.1
  Bel (1980-2005)            34.7          43.4          8.7           4.3           4.4         4.1          4.6
  Can (1970-2005)            29.1          41.4         12.3           2.7           9.6         3.4          8.9
  Dnk (1980-2005)            42.1          45.4          3.3           3.3          -0.1         3.0          0.3
  Fin (1970-2005)            39.5          47.4         7.9            9.8          -1.9         8.9         -0.9
  Fra (1982-2005)            37.1          42.2          5.1           4.7           0.4         3.4          1.7
  Ger (1991-2005)            42.8          45.9          3.1           3.9          -0.8         3.2         -0.1
  Grc (1971-2001)            15.6          31.8         16.2           2.5          13.7         2.5         13.7
  Ita (1970-2005)            30.6          40.7         10.1           3.1           6.9         4.0          6.1
  Jpn (1973-2005)            30.9          34.0          3.1           2.6           0.5         2.4          0.7
  Kor (1970-2005)            22.4          29.7          7.3           4.6           2.7         2.3          5.0
  Nld (1979-2005)            23.8          35.3         11.6           2.9           8.7         2.8          8.8
  Prt (1991-2001)            38.8          43.0          4.2           1.7           2.5         2.0          2.2
  Spa (1980-2005)            28.8          38.9         10.0           2.4           7.6         3.9          6.2
  UK (1970-2005)             41.2          44.6         3.4            8.0          -4.6         6.6         -3.2
  US (1970-2005)             29.1          41.5         12.4           4.4           8.1         3.2          9.3

  Average                    32.9          40.4           7.5           3.9            3.6             3.6            3.9

Notes: Sample periods for each country are in parentheses. Figures reported are shares of annual hours (×100). Columns (1)-
(3) report the female hours share at the start and end of the period and its change. Columns 4 and 6 and columns 5 and 7 report
the between-industry and within-industry component of the total change, respectively (obtained from equation (1)). Column 4
and 5 are based on a 12 sector classification (sectors are: (1) Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing; (2) Mining, quarrying
and utilities; (3) Manufacturing; (4) Construction; (5) Wholesale and retail trade, hotels and restaurants; (6) Transport and
storage; (7) Financial intermediations; (8) Real estate; (9) Public administration and defence; (10) Education; (11) Health and
social work; (12) Other community, social or personal services, and private household services). Column 6 and 7 are based on
the twofold sector classification defined in the notes to Table 1. Data sources: See notes to Table 1.
                                                   Table 3
     Decompositions of the rise in the female hours share along industry and occupation dimensions (%)


                                      (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)
                                 Change in
                                                     Between              Within           Between             Within
                                female hours
                                                     industry            industry         occupation         occupation
                                   share
   US (1967-2008)                  15.3                 5.2                10.1               0.7                 9.4
   Canada (1981-2001)                6.8                2.2                4.6                0.2                 4.4
   UK (1975-2008)                    4.9                5.8                -0.9               -5.5                4.5
   France (1975-2006)                8.7                4.8                3.9                -1.5                5.4
   Greece (1971-2001)                13.9               1.2                12.7               -0.3               13.0

Notes: Sample periods for each country are in parentheses. Figures reported are shares of annual hours (×100). Column (1)
presents the total change in female hours share from start to end of period. Column (2) and (3) report the between-industry and
within-industry component, respectively, of the total change (obtained from equation (1)). The decomposition is based on the
two-sector classification defined in the notes to Table 1. Column (4) and (5) further decompose the within-industry component
in column (3) into a between-occupation and within-occupation component (from equation (2)), respectively. We consider the
following five-fold classification of occupations for all countries except France: professionals and managers; clerical
occupations; sales occupations; service occupations; manual occupations. For France we use the major occupation group
directly provided by the survey: agricultural managers; other managers; professionals; intermediate professions; white and blue
collars. Data Sources: United States: Current Population Survey (King et al., 2010); United Kingdom: UK Labour Force
Survey; France: Enquête Emploi; Canada and Greece: IPUMS International (Minnesota Population Center, 2014).
                                                 Table 4
        Decomposition of the change in female hours by industry relative to the US: 1980s and 2000s


                     (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)               (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
                                      1980s                                                      2000s
                              Difference         Between                                 Difference         Between
    Country        Share                                                     Share
                              w.r.t. US    12 sect.   2 sect.                            w.r.t. US     12 sect.   2 sect.
    Aus             34.7         -2.8       -1.3       -1.0                   42.6           0.7        -1.9       -1.3
    Aut             40.2          2.7       -2.7       -2.4                   40.6          -1.3        -1.9       -1.5
    Bel             36.2         -1.3       -1.4       -0.8                   42.4           0.5        -0.9       -0.3
    Can             36.6         -0.9       -0.8       -0.4                   41.0          -0.9        -1.0       -0.7
    Dnk             43.6          6.1        1.6       -0.6                   45.1           3.2         1.3       -0.8
    Fin             44.3          6.7       -5.1       -4.5                   47.0           5.1        -2.8       -3.4
    Fra             38.1          0.5       -2.3       -1.8                   42.2           0.3        -1.0       -1.4
    Ger              -             -          -          -                    45.1           3.2        -1.8       -2.1
    Grc             18.9        -18.6       -7.2       -3.4                   31.8         -10.1        -5.4       -3.0
    Ita             33.0         -4.5       -2.9       -2.3                   39.2          -2.7        -2.7       -2.3
    Jpn             31.6         -5.9       -3.3       -2.2                   33.6          -8.3        -3.1       -2.6
    Kor             25.3        -12.2       -5.5       -3.3                   29.1         -12.8        -4.7       -2.6
    Nld             26.0        -11.5       -0.3       -0.6                   34.3          -7.6        -0.6       -0.4
    Prt              -             -          -          -                    43.0           1.1        -5.9       -4.5
    Spa             29.7         -7.8       -3.6       -3.1                   37.6          -4.3        -5.4       -3.7
    Uk              41.2          3.6       -2.2       -1.7                   44.6           2.7        -1.0       -0.4
    Usa             37.5           -          -          -                    41.9            -           -          -

     Average        34.3          -3.3          -2.6        -2.0              39.9           -2.0          -2.4        -1.9


Notes: Figures reported are shares of annual hours (×100). Columns (1) reports the average female hours share over the 1980s,
column (2) reports its difference with respect to the US, and columns (3) and (4) the between-industry component of this
difference, based on a 12-fold and 2-fold classification, respectively. Columns (5)-(8) report the corresponding values for the
2000s. See notes to Table 2 for additional details. Samples: Greece: 1981 and 2001; Portugal: 2001. For all remaining
countries: averages over the 1980s and the 2000s. Data sources: See notes to Table 1.
          Figure 1: Trends in Female Employment (age 15 and above), 1850-2005




Notes: Figures report employment rates defined as the fraction of women aged 15 and above who are
“economically active” according to the International Labour Organization (ILO) definition. Pre-1980 data
are available at 10 or 5-year intervals. Post-1980 we use centred 5-year averages of all the available data
points. Data sources: International Historical Statistics (IHS, Mitchell, 1998a, 1998b and 1998c), Goldin
(1990) and ILO. See Olivetti (2014) for details on the construction of the data set.
           Figure 2: Trends in Employment of Working Age Women, 1947-2008




Notes: Figures report employment rates defined as the fraction of working age women (aged 15-64) who
are “economically active” according to the International Labour Organization (ILO) definition. Pre-1980
data are available at 10 or 5-year interval. Post-1980 we use centred 5-year averages of all the available
data points, except for 2008 based on single year (the last available). United Kingdom data for 1995, 2000
and 2005 are also single year. Data sources: ILO. For the United Kingdom 1995, 2000, and 2005 data are
from the Labour Force Survey. This is because the working age figure cannot be calculated from ILO data.
                    Figure 3: Trends in Female Hour Shares, 1970-2005




Notes: Figures reported are female shares of annual hours. Data sources: See notes to Table 1.
          Figure 4: Trends in Female/Male Median Earnings Ratio, 1970-2010




Notes: Figures report the female/male ratio of median gross earnings of full-time employees.
Data source: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) “Time series
on gender wage gap” (11 February 2015 update) available at:
http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/onlineoecdemploymentdatabase.htm\#earndisp. See the link for
definitions and sources by country.
             Figure 5: Convergence in Female Hours and the Size of the Service Sector




Notes: The Figure reports the service sector share (x-axis) and the female share (y-axis) of annual hours by decade.
Each marker represents a decade, and the corresponding values are decade-long averages (1970-79, 1980-89, etc.). See
notes to Table 1 for sample periods and data sources.
                                                   Table A1
                    Average sector shares and growth rates for 12 industries and 17 countries.
                     1         2         3        4         5        6         7         8        9        10        11       12
Aus    level        6.3       2.6      15.1       8.0      23.1     7.3       4.0       9.3      4.4       6.5       7.9      5.4
       growth      -0.16     -0.07     -0.28     0.09     -0.05    -0.04     -0.01     0.33     -0.01     0.05      0.08     0.08
Aut    level        9.1       1.2      20.1      7.3      21.8       7.0      3.0       7.4       6.5      5.0       7.3      4.3
       growth      -0.25     -0.02     -0.39    -0.01     0.05      0.01     0.01      0.34      0.04     0.01      0.15     0.07
Bel    level        2.4       1.2      20.3      6.2       17.1     8.1       3.9       9.9     10.9       6.6       7.8      5.6
       growth      -0.06     -0.05     -0.40    -0.02     -0.04    -0.03     -0.02     0.49     -0.03     0.00      0.17     -0.01
Can    level        5.4       2.0      17.6      6.9      23.3       6.2      4.0       5.9      8.0       5.6       6.7      8.2
       growth      -0.13     0.00      -0.24    -0.04     0.12      0.02     0.04      0.14     -0.07     -0.03     0.05     0.15
Dnk    level        5.1       0.8      18.1      6.3      17.6      7.4       3.1      8.1       6.7      7.1       14.8     4.7
       growth      -0.17     -0.01     -0.18     0.00     0.03      0.00     -0.02     0.24     -0.03     0.00      0.06     0.07
Fin    level        14.6      1.2      20.2      8.9      15.9      7.3      2.0       5.8       6.5      4.5       9.8      3.3
       growth      -0.50     -0.01     -0.18    -0.06     0.00      0.05     0.00      0.23      0.08     0.09      0.22     0.07
Fra    level         2.1      2.3      22.3      7.1      15.2      7.9       5.9       5.9      11.4      6.5       8.3      5.2
       growth       0.08     -0.05     -0.51    -0.09     0.15     -0.15     -0.20     0.57      0.03     0.01      0.30     -0.14
Ger    level        3.4       1.4      21.9      8.0      18.9      6.1       3.4      10.0      7.7       5.1       8.6      5.6
       growth      -0.12     -0.06     -0.40    -0.17     0.09     -0.08     0.01      0.47     -0.09     0.08      0.19     0.09
Grc    level        16.7      1.7      18.8      9.4      18.1      9.6       2.1       4.0      6.0       4.4       3.5      5.6
       growth      -0.38     -0.03     -0.27    -0.01     0.43     -0.15     0.05      0.15     -0.09     -0.03     0.10     0.24
Ita    level        12.1      0.9       24.2     7.2      21.7       6.1      2.1       5.6       5.4      4.1       4.5      6.3
       growth      -0.50     -0.01     -0.28    -0.06     0.15      0.06     0.03      0.30      0.00     0.05      0.06     0.19
Jpn    level        9.5       0.6      22.4      10.2      24.4     6.1      2.7       6.9       3.5      2.8       4.5      6.3
       growth      -0.34     -0.01     -0.17     0.03     -0.02     0.02     0.01      0.25     -0.01     0.00      0.15     0.08
Kor    level        22.9      0.8      23.9      6.6      22.4      5.1      2.1       3.3       2.6      4.3       1.4      4.5
       growth      -1.22     -0.02     0.04      0.14     0.37      0.08     0.09      0.26      0.05     0.08      0.04     0.08
Nld    level        5.4       0.8      16.8      7.0      19.8       6.7      3.7      12.2      7.7       4.8       9.6      5.5
       growth      -0.09     -0.02     -0.33    -0.02     0.04      0.00     -0.01     0.48     -0.13     -0.04     0.07     0.05
Prt    level        9.3        0.8     25.5      12.2     20.3      4.7       1.9       4.4      7.2      4.6       4.5       4.6
       growth      -0.68      0.00     -0.53     0.14     0.50     -0.01     0.01      0.29     -0.03     0.18      0.18     -0.04
Spa    level        11.0      1.0      19.1       9.7     22.1      5.9       2.4      5.8       7.4      4.3       4.8      6.7
       growth      -0.52     -0.03     -0.20     0.20     0.16     -0.01     -0.02     0.29      0.02     0.03      0.09     0.00
UK     level        3.1       2.1      22.6      8.4      19.9      6.9       3.4      10.9      5.7       5.1       7.5      4.5
       growth      -0.05     -0.11     -0.57    -0.03     0.13     -0.02     0.05      0.35     -0.03     0.07      0.12     0.10
US     level        4.1       1.5      18.2       5.9     22.8       4.6      4.3       9.7      9.2       5.9       7.4      6.4
       growth      -0.09     -0.03     -0.33     0.04     0.01      0.00     0.03      0.27     -0.10     0.04      0.10     0.06


Notes. The “level” variable denotes the time average of the industry share of total hours for each country. The “growth”
variable denotes its annual growth rate. All figures are in percentage points. Industries are: (1) Agriculture, hunting, forestry
and fishing; (2) Mining, quarrying and utilities; (3) Manufacturing; (4) Construction; (5) Wholesale and retail trade, hotels and
restaurants; (6) Transport and storage; (7) Financial intermediation; (8) Business activities and real estate; (9) Public
administration and defence; (10) Education; (11) Health and social work; (12) Other community, social or personal services,
and private household services. See notes to Table 1 for sample periods and data sources.
                                                                                  Table A2
                                  The contribution of each industry to the between-industry component of the change the female hours share

         Change in          Between
           female           industry            1           2            3            4            5            6            7            8            9           10           11          12
         hours share       component
Aus         8.84              2.54           -1.22        -0.22        -1.75         0.25        -0.37        -0.45         0.25        3.31         0.05         0.64        1.16          0.89
Aut         -0.03             2.96           -2.75        -0.08        -2.71        -0.10         0.84         0.04         0.13        3.41         0.26         0.21        2.81          0.91
Bel         8.70              4.30           -0.31        -0.13        -2.39        -0.13        -0.21        -0.18        -0.11        4.24         0.13         0.18        3.14          0.06
Can         12.27             2.66           -0.85         0.02        -2.05        -0.03         1.59         0.07        0.79         1.67        -0.92        -0.69        0.70          2.36
Dnk         3.26              3.31           -0.86        -0.03        -1.68        -0.04         0.08        -0.06        -0.17        2.69        -0.10         0.22        2.47          0.80
Fin         7.91              9.81           -4.62        -0.05        -1.64        -0.17         0.50         0.48         0.07        4.18         1.42        1.61         6.32          1.72
Fra         5.15              4.72           0.56         -0.21        -3.45        -0.14         1.37        -0.72        -1.67        4.74         0.31        0.56         4.46         -1.10
Ger         3.11              3.95           -0.53        -0.21        -1.94        -0.17         0.65        -0.33        0.09         3.28        -0.64        0.81         2.16          0.79
Grc         16.17             2.47           -1.49        -0.12        -2.04        0.00          3.10        -0.42        0.51         1.49        -0.81        -0.73        1.52          1.46
Ita         10.05             3.14           -6.30        -0.03        -2.62        -0.11         1.83         0.37         0.41        3.59         0.04        1.41         1.18          3.37
Jpn         3.09              2.63           -3.23        -0.04        -2.00         0.01         0.01         0.05        0.21         1.96        -0.02         0.18        4.43          1.06
Kor         7.26              4.61           -5.93        -0.07         1.64         0.49         2.55         0.55         0.48        2.13         0.46         0.96        0.68          0.68
Nld         11.56             2.91           -0.30        -0.05        -1.37        -0.05        -0.09         0.00        -0.07        2.95        -0.50        -0.19        2.09          0.50
Prt         4.19              1.70           -2.06         0.01        -2.35        0.08          2.25        -0.03        0.02         1.46        -0.09         1.36        1.38         -0.31
Spa         10.04             2.42           -3.26        -0.06        -1.63         0.17         1.62        -0.01        -0.12        2.62         0.29         0.66        1.47          0.68
UK          3.41              8.00           -0.51        -0.80        -7.06        -0.08         2.11        -0.18         0.89        6.27         0.00         2.14        3.27          1.94
US          12.44             4.35           -0.40        -0.08        -3.02         0.12         0.17        -0.04         0.53        3.07        -1.01         1.11        2.90          1.01


Notes. All figures are in percentage points. Industries are: (1) Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing; (2) Mining, quarrying and utilities; (3) Manufacturing; (4) Construction; (5) Wholesale
and retail trade, hotels and restaurants; (6) Transport and storage; (7) Financial intermediation; (8) Business activities and real estate; (9) Public administration and defence; (10) Education; (11)
Health and social work; (12) Other community, social or personal services, and private household services. See notes to Table 1 for sample periods and data sources.
