NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIQUIDITY RULES AND CREDIT BOOMS
Kinda Cheryl Hachem
Zheng Michael Song
Working Paper 21880
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21880

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016, Revised December 2018

This paper absorbs an earlier draft entitled “Liquidity Regulation and Unintended Financial
Transformation in China.” We thank Jeff Campbell, Jon Cohen, Eduardo Dávila, Doug Diamond,
Darrell Duffie, Gary Gorton, Narayana Kocherlakota, Randy Kroszner, Gary Richardson, Rich
Rosen, Felipe Saffie, Martin Schneider, John Shea, Aleh Tsyvinski, Harald Uhlig, Tom
Wollmann, Yao Zeng and seminar participants at various institutions and conferences for helpful
comments. Financial support from Chicago Booth and CUHK is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kinda Cheryl Hachem and Zheng Michael Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Rules and Credit Booms
Kinda Cheryl Hachem and Zheng Michael Song
NBER Working Paper No. 21880
January 2016, Revised December 2018
JEL No. E44,G28
ABSTRACT
We show that stricter bank liquidity standards can trigger unintended credit booms when there is
heterogeneity in interbank pricing power. Attempts to circumvent the regulation change the
allocation of savings across institutions, eliciting strategic responses that also change the
allocation of lending across markets. More credit is generated per unit of savings in the new
equilibrium. A quantitative application to China illustrates the practical relevance of the
mechanisms in our model.

Kinda Cheryl Hachem
University of Virginia
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22906
and NBER
hachemk@darden.virginia.edu
Zheng Michael Song
Department of Economics
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
zheng.michael.song@gmail.com

1

Introduction

A decade after the 2007-09 …nancial crisis, the debate about bank regulation remains unsettled. Politicians cite the crisis as prima facie evidence of under-regulation, central bankers
are weary of the unintended consequences of over-regulation, and the academic literature has
yet to agree on what would constitute optimal regulation. In the words of Stanley Fischer,
former Vice Chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve, a “tightening in regulation of the banking
sector may push activity to other areas – and things happen.” Exactly what happens, he
argues, is di¢ cult to predict as there is limited theoretical work on the interactions between
regulated and unregulated institutions and the economic incentives that drive them.1
These gaps in our understanding seem especially pronounced when it comes to liquidity
regulation. Diamond and Kashyap (2016) characterize the new liquidity rules agreed upon
by the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision as “a situation where practice is ahead of
both theory and measurement.” Allen and Gale (2017) go even further in their survey of
existing literature and conclude that “with liquidity regulation, we do not even know what to
argue about.”Understanding which features of the economic environment are important for
shaping the aggregate e¤ects of liquidity regulation would thus propel the literature forward.
In this paper, we establish that heterogeneity in interbank pricing power is, to …rst order,
one such feature.
Our model is one where banks engage in maturity transformation, borrowing short and
lending long in the spirit of Diamond and Dybvig (1983). We …x the return on long-term
lending and endogenize the interest rates that banks o¤er to attract short-term funds from
savers. Maturity transformation leaves banks vulnerable to idiosyncratic withdrawal shocks,
giving rise to an ex post interbank market where banks with insu¢ cient liquidity can borrow
from banks with surplus liquidity at an endogenously determined price. Such interbank
markets exist in Bhattacharya and Gale (1987) and Allen and Gale (2004). We then add
two ingredients to this environment.
The …rst ingredient is that banks di¤er in size. Without loss of generality for the main
results, we model a large bank and a continuum of individually small banks. By de…nition,
the large bank internalizes the e¤ect of its choices on the rest of the economy. The individually small banks do not. Absent any other di¤erences between large and small banks, our
model predicts that the large bank chooses a lower ratio of long-term lending to short-term
borrowing than the small banks. The large bank is more liquid because, when choosing the
composition of its assets, it internalizes that its demand for liquidity will increase the price of
1

Speech delivered at the 2015 Financial Stability Conference, Washington D.C., December 3,
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/…scher20151203a.htm.

2

liquidity on the interbank market. The small banks, in contrast, are interbank price-takers.
If the government were more likely to rescue a large bank with liquidity problems than a
small one, the price of liquidity may not increase in response to demand by the large bank,
distorting the large bank’s incentive to maintain liquidity. Without this distortion, however, small banks will be endogenously more constrained by the introduction of a liquidity
regulation that caps the ratio of long-term lending to short-term borrowing at each bank.
The second ingredient is that each bank can choose how much maturity transformation to
conduct in the regulated sector and how much to conduct outside the perimeter of regulation.
We show that, in response to liquidity regulation, small banks …nd it optimal to o¤er a new
savings instrument and manage the funds raised by this instrument on a balance sheet that
is not subject to the regulation (e.g., the funds are managed in an o¤-balance-sheet vehicle
that can make the loans the bank cannot make on its balance sheet without violating the
liquidity minimum). This constitutes shadow banking: it achieves the same type of credit
intermediation as a regular bank without appearing on a regulated balance sheet. It also
achieves the same type of maturity transformation as a regular bank, with long-term assets
…nanced by short-term liabilities.
As small banks push to attract savings into o¤-balance-sheet instruments, our model
predicts that they raise the interest rates on these instruments above the interest rates on
traditional deposits. On the margin, the premium that small banks are willing to pay for
o¤-balance-sheet funding is exactly equal to the tax implicitly imposed on their deposits by
a binding liquidity minimum.
All else constant, the emergence of a savings instrument that pays a premium relative to
traditional deposits poaches some deposits away from the large bank. We demonstrate that
the large bank responds to this loss of funding in two ways. First, it issues its own highreturn savings instruments, competing directly with the small banks. Second, it decreases
the amount of liquidity it makes available to the interbank market. The second response
involves a more subtle form of competition, wherein the large bank uses its price impact on
the interbank market to change the incentives of the small banks. Naturally, the incentive to
evade a liquidity minimum is weaker when liquidity is expected to be expensive. Therefore,
by tightening the interbank market and making liquidity more expensive, the large bank
can compel the small banks to behave less aggressively in their quest for o¤-balance-sheet
business and thus lessen the extent to which they poach deposits. The large bank is also
increasing the price of liquidity for itself should it need to borrow in the interbank market
but it does so in exchange for less competition for funding from the small banks.
The new equilibrium is characterized by an unintended credit boom, with more credit per
unit of savings relative to the pre-regulation equilibrium. There are two channels behind this
3

result. Together, these channels more than o¤set the decline in on-balance-sheet lending by
small banks triggered by the regulation. First, the migration of some savings from deposits at
the large bank to the higher-return o¤-balance-sheet instruments of the small banks increases
credit because the small banks, as interbank price-takers, make more long-term loans per
unit of funding than the large bank. Second, the strategic response of the large bank on
the interbank market contributes directly to the credit expansion: rather than sitting idly
on the liquidity that it intends to withhold from the interbank market, the large bank lends
more to non-…nancial borrowers.
We call the increase in credit that culminates from these two channels a supply-side credit
boom because it originates from the banks themselves. These channels would not operate if
o¤-balance-sheet vehicles were precluded, as small banks would have to mechanically switch
from loans to more liquid assets in order to comply with the liquidity minimum. These
channels also would not operate if the banking sector were only populated by a continuum
of ex ante identical small banks, regardless of access to o¤-balance-sheet vehicles. To this
point, we show that liquidity regulation still generates shadow banking but has the desired
e¤ect of decreasing credit in our model when there is no large bank.
The result that an aggregate credit boom can be born out of stricter liquidity regulation
is surprising. However, our model generates it under a minimal set of assumptions, namely
heterogeneity in interbank pricing power and accounting standards that do not outlaw o¤balance-sheet business. The second assumption is satis…ed around the world because of the
discretion available in accounting rules.2 The …rst assumption is a joint statement about the
size distribution of banks and the conduct of monetary policy. Most countries have at least
some banks that are large enough to shift the demand for liquidity relative to the supply,
leading to sudden changes in the price that clears the interbank market. If the central
bank does not automatically o¤set all such changes by targeting the interbank rate, large
banks will have greater price impact than small banks and the assumption of heterogeneity
in interbank pricing power will be satis…ed. E¤ectively, the large bank’s in‡uence over the
interbank market is decreasing in the responsiveness of the central bank’s liquidity injections
to the interbank rate and, in the quantitative analysis described below, we …nd that liquidity
regulation leads to smaller credit booms when the central bank is more responsive to the
interbank rate than when it is less responsive. This implication of our model is important
because there are several settings where an automatic o¤set by the central bank does not
2

In particular, the legality of o¤-balance-sheet vehicles re‡ects the discretion available in accounting rules
(e.g., U.S. GAAP, IFRS standards, etc). Banks can capitalize on this discretion, changing the form of an
activity for reporting purposes without changing the true economic substance. For this reason, accounting
assets and liabilities can di¤er from economic assets and liabilities.

4

exist. For example, central banks in countries with managed exchange rates are bounded
in their ability to lean against ‡uctuations in the interbank market. The Federal Reserve’s
history also includes long periods of time where a short-term policy rate was not targeted
Our next contribution is to use the model to explore recent developments in China’s
economy. We choose China for the following reasons. Between 2007 and 2014, the ratio of
debt to GDP in China exploded from 110% to 200%. The ratio of private credit to private
savings, sometimes a more conservative gauge, also rose markedly from 65% to 75% over the
same period. This credit boom appears to have occurred on the heels of stricter liquidity
regulation. Around 2008, Chinese regulators began enforcing an old but hitherto neglected
loan-to-deposit cap which forbade banks from lending more than 75% of their deposits to
non-…nancial borrowers. Our model predicts that some credit booms are caused by stricter
liquidity regulation so we are interested to know whether stricter liquidity regulation can
account for at least part of the Chinese experience.
We use a rich, transaction-level dataset to establish that there is a high degree of heterogeneity in interbank pricing power among China’s commercial banks. We then calibrate
the model to Chinese data. The calibrated version of our model shows that loan-to-deposit
enforcement alone generates one-third of the increase in China’s aggregate credit-to-savings
ratio between 2007 and 2014. We then pursue a quantitative extension that allows for multiple shocks to the Chinese economy: shocks to liquidity regulation, shocks to loan demand
stemming from the …scal stimulus package announced by China’s State Council in late 2008,
and money supply shocks. We …nd that loan demand shocks and money supply shocks produce counterfactual correlations between key market-determined interest rates, speci…cally
interbank interest rates and spreads on the high-return savings instruments o¤ered by small
versus big banks. Allowing for all three shocks simultaneously, the quantitative extension
matches a broad set of empirical moments almost perfectly, while still assigning a dominant
role to variation in loan-to-deposit rules.

1.1

Related Literature

The literature on bank regulation is concerned with unintended consequences. Within this
literature, there are many papers on capital requirements, largely because capital regulation
was used more widely than liquidity regulation before the 2007-09 …nancial crisis. In the
models of Harris, Opp, and Opp (2014), Plantin (2015), and Huang (2015), higher capital
requirements lead to shadow banking, with various channels through which …nancial stability
is a¤ected. See also Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2013), Demyanyk and Loutskina (2016),
and Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski, and Seru (2018) for empirical evidence of regulatory arbi5

trage in the context of capital-related regulations. In the model of Begenau (2018), higher
capital requirements make deposits scarce, lowering overall bank funding costs by enough
to increase lending. A related model that allows for both traditional and shadow banks is
studied in Begenau and Landvoigt (2017).
The liquidity problems experienced during the crisis and the subsequent introduction of
global liquidity standards are now shifting attention towards liquidity regulation. Allen and
Gale (2017) provide an excellent survey of this literature. Other, more recent contributions
include Gorton and Muir (2016) who examine arbitrage during the U.S. National Banking
Era to evaluate the merits of liquidity coverage ratios; Van den Heuvel (2016) who compares
the welfare costs of liquidity and capital requirements; Adrian and Boyarchenko (2018) who
present a dynamic model where liquidity requirements are preferable to capital requirements
as a prudential policy tool; Banerjee and Mio (2018) who …nd no evidence that bank lending
fell after the U.K. tightened liquidity regulation in 2010; Jin and Xiong (2018) who argue
that macroprudential reserve requirements will unintentionally push banks to choose greater
currency mismatch; and Davis, Korenok, Lightle, and Prescott (2018) who use experimental
methods to explore whether liquidity regulations will improve interbank trade in response
to shocks. An earlier contribution to which our paper most closely relates is Farhi, Golosov,
and Tsyvinski (2007, 2009) who theoretically analyze the e¤ect of liquidity regulation on
market interest rates in a broad set of speci…cations.
We contribute to the literature on bank regulation by linking the e¤ect of liquidity standards to interbank market structure and by developing a theory of unintended credit booms.
Research on past …nancial crises demonstrates the importance of understanding interbank
markets. Mitchener and Richardson (2016) show how a pyramid structure in U.S. interbank
deposits propagated shocks during the Great Depression; Gorton and Tallman (2016) show
how cooperation among members of the New York Clearinghouse helped end pre-Fed banking panics; and Frydman, Hilt, and Zhou (2015) show how a lack of cooperation with and
between New York’s trust companies contributed to the Panic of 1907. Relative to these
papers, we focus on liquidity regulation and how it can be endogenously undermined when
large banks have pricing power over small banks on the interbank market. Drechsler, Savov,
and Schnabl (2017) also study the implications of non-competitive markets in banking but
focus instead on the market power of banks over depositors in concentrated markets and
how this can explain the transmission of monetary policy in the U.S. since the mid-1990s.
Our paper also relates to new work on the implications of size asymmetries in banking.
Corbae and D’Erasmo (2013, 2014) study the relationship between bank entry, exit, and risktaking in a quantitative model where large banks make lending decisions before small ones.
Dávila and Walther (2018) instead focus on bank leverage and government bailouts when
6

large banks internalize that their decisions directly a¤ect the government’s bailout policy.
They show that large banks choose more leveraged positions than small banks in this case,
which would be consistent with large banks in the U.S. being more constrained by capital
requirements than small banks. We show that large banks choose more liquid positions than
small banks in an equilibrium model with endogenous interbank pricing, which is consistent
with large banks in China being less constrained by liquidity requirements than small banks.
See Hachem (2018) for further discussion, including a comparison between shadow banking
in the U.S. and China.
Finally, our quantitative application is related to a rapidly growing literature on China’s
…nancial system. See Hachem (2018) and Song and Xiong (2018) for surveys. Chen, Ren,
and Zha (2018) argue that an additional form of shadow banking emerged in China as
an unintended consequence of contractionary monetary policy. The analysis is based on a
di¤erent shock and a di¤erent set of …nancial products but their main …nding echoes one of
several …ndings original to our paper: policy tightenings in China have been undermined by
the shadow banking products they triggered.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 present the model. To help
isolate the e¤ect of interbank market structure, Section 2 lays out a benchmark model with
only small banks and studies the equilibrium properties. Section 3 extends the benchmark
to include a large bank, studies how the equilibrium properties are a¤ected, and presents the
main analytical results. All proofs are in Appendix A. Section 4 then applies the model to
China, presenting the calibration results along with a structural estimation to evaluate the
importance of various shocks. Section 5 concludes.

2

Benchmark Model

There are three periods, t 2 f0; 1; 2g, and a unit mass of risk neutral banks, j 2 [0; 1]. Let
Xj denote the funding obtained by bank j at t = 0. Each bank can invest in a project which
returns (1 + iA )2 per unit invested. Projects are long-term, meaning that they run from t = 0
to t = 2 without the possibility of liquidation at t = 1. To introduce a tradeo¤ between
investing and not investing, banks are also subject to short-term idiosyncratic liquidity shocks
which must be paid o¤ at t = 1. More precisely, bank j must pay j Xj at t = 1 in order to
continue operation. The exact value of j is drawn from a two-point distribution:

j

=

(

`
h

prob:
prob: 1

7

where 0 < ` < h < 1 and 2 (0; 1). Each bank learns the realization of its shock in t = 1.
Prior to that, only the distribution is known.

2.1

Bank Liabilities

The liquidity shocks just described can be ‡eshed out using Diamond and Dybvig (1983).
Speci…cally, the economy has an aggregate endowment X > 0 at t = 0 and banks attract
funding by o¤ering liquidity services to the owners of this endowment (ex ante identical
households). The liquidity service o¤ers households more than the long-term project if
liquidated at t = 1 but less than this project if held until t = 2.
The traditional liquidity service is a deposit. To set notation, a dollar deposited at t = 0
becomes 1 + iB if withdrawn at t = 1 and (1 + iD )2 if withdrawn at t = 2. In Diamond and
Dybvig (1983), banks choose iB and iD to achieve optimal risk-sharing for households. In
Diamond and Kashyap (2016), banks take iB and iD as given and, with iB = iD = 0, the
traditional deposit is equivalent to storage.
In our model, each bank j can o¤er a liquidity service which delivers storage plus a return
j . To ease the exposition, suppose j accrues at t = 2. As we will explain in Section 2.4,
bank j chooses j at t = 0 to maximize its expected pro…t subject to household demand for
liquidity services. If bank j chooses j = 0, then it is content o¤ering storage. If bank j
chooses j > 0, then it is choosing to o¤er more than storage.3
In practice, banks may have more elaborate liability structures, where they pay di¤erent
prices for di¤erent units of funding. What matters for the analysis are the spreads so it
su¢ ces to …x characteristics and price for one type of funding and let the rest vary relative
to it. To this end, we allow each bank j to simultaneously o¤er storage and another liquidity
service that pays an endogenously chosen j 0. We refer to the other liquidity service as a
deposit-like product (DLP), with a choice of j = 0 implying that no DLPs are o¤ered. The
shock j represents the fraction of households that withdraw funding from bank j at t = 1.
Let us now specify how households allocate their endowment at t = 0 conditional on
interest rates. Denote by Dj the funding attracted by bank j in the form of storage. The
R
funding attracted in the form of DLPs is denoted by Wj , with Xj Dj +Wj and Xj dj = X.
Appendix B sketches a simple household optimization problem with transactions costs which
motivates the following functional forms:
3

O¤ering j < 0 would create an incentive for early withdrawals and cannot be an equilibrium outcome.
We will be focusing on parameters such that a choice of j = 0 indicates a desire by bank j to o¤er exactly
j = 0, as opposed to indicating that bank j would o¤er j < 0 if there were no concern about creating
incentives for early withdrawals.

8

Wj = !
Dj = X

(!

(1)

j

)

j

(2)

where ! and are non-negative constants and denotes the average DLP return o¤ered by
other banks. Intuitively, ! captures the substitutability between liquidity services within a
bank while governs the intensity of competition among banks. To see this, sum equations
(1) and (2) to write bank j’s funding share as:
Xj = X +

j

(3)

If

= 0, then bank j perceives its funding share as …xed, shutting down competition. If
> 0, then bank j perceives a positive relationship between its funding share and the DLP
return it o¤ers relative to other banks.
Each individual bank will take as given when making decisions. In a symmetric equilibrium, will be such that the pro…t-maximizing choice of j equals for all j.

2.2

Bank Assets and the Interbank Market

We now elaborate on how banks allocate their funding. The maturity mismatch between
investment projects and liquidity shocks introduces a role for reserves (i.e., savings which
can be used to pay realized liquidity shocks). As we will explain in Section 2.4, the division
of Xj into investment and reserves is chosen at t = 0 to maximize expected pro…t.
R
Let Rj 2 [0; Xj ] denote the reserve holdings of bank j at t = 0. If j < Xjj , then bank j
R

has a reserve surplus at t = 1. If j > Xjj , then bank j has a reserve shortage at t = 1. An
interbank market exists at t = 1 to redistribute reserves across banks. A market in which
banks can share risk and obtain liquidity also exists in Bhattacharya and Gale (1987) and
Allen and Gale (2004).
The interbank interest rate in our benchmark is denoted by iL . Banks in the continuum
are atomistic so they take iL as given when making decisions. However, iL is endogenous
and adjusts to clear the interbank market. Interbank lenders (borrowers) are banks with
reserve surpluses (shortages) at t = 1. In practice, central banks also serve as lenders of last
resort so we introduce a supply of external funds, (iL )
iL , where > 0.
We will focus on symmetric equilibrium, in which case Rj and j are the same across
the unit mass of banks. Notice that symmetry of j in equation (3) implies Xj = X. The

9

condition for interbank market clearing is then:
Rj + iL = X

(4)

where
) h is the average liquidity shock. The left-hand side of (4) captures
` + (1
the supply of liquidity at t = 1 while the right-hand side captures the demand. Total credit
in this economy is the total amount of funding invested in projects, X Rj .

2.3

Liquidity Regulation and Possible Arbitrage

We now allow for the possibility of a government-imposed loan limit on each bank. This
limit can also be viewed as a liquidity rule which says the ratio of reserves to funding must
be at least 2 (0; 1). Given the structure of our model, reserves are meant to be used at
t = 1 so enforcement of the liquidity rule is con…ned to t = 0. If the government does not
enforce a liquidity rule, then = 0.
Importantly, the liquidity rule only applies to activities that the bank reports on its
balance sheet. To model this, we allow banks to choose where to manage DLPs and the
projects …nanced by those DLPs. If fraction j 2 [0; 1] is managed in an o¤-balance-sheet
vehicle, then bank j’s reserve holdings only need to satisfy:
Rj

(Xj

j Wj )

(5)

O¤-balance-sheet vehicles can be viewed as accounting maneuvers that legally shift activities
away from regulation without changing the nature of those activities. Such maneuvers
capitalize on the discretion available in accounting rules and constitute regulatory arbitrage.4
Notice that bank j does not need to use o¤-balance-sheet vehicles if just attempting to
change its funding share in equation (3). This is because j and j are separate decisions.
If bank j chooses j > 0 and j = 0, then it is simply o¤ering a deposit with a competitive
interest rate to boost its funding share. If it chooses j > 0 and j > 0, then it is o¤ering this
product to lessen the burden of the liquidity rule and hence engaging in regulatory arbitrage.
The value of j thus reveals the source of any spread between DLP returns and storage.
4

Adrian, Ashcraft, and Cetorelli (2013) de…ne regulatory arbitrage as “a change in structure of activity
which does not change the risk pro…le of that activity, but increases the net cash ‡ows to the sponsor by
reducing the costs of regulation.” In principle, we could introduce a small cost to pursuing the accounting
maneuvers that permit regulatory arbitrage. We do not do this here as it would clutter the exposition
without producing much additional insight.

10

2.4

Optimization Problem of Representative Bank

The expected pro…t of bank j at t = 0 is:
j

(1 + iA )2 (Xj

iL X j + X j + 1

Rj ) + (1 + iL ) Rj

j Wj

2

Xj2

(6)

where Wj and Xj are given by (1) and (3) respectively. The …rst term in (6) is revenue
from investment. The second term is revenue from lending reserves on the interbank market.
The third term is the bank’s expected funding cost, namely the expected cost of borrowing
reserves on the interbank market and the expected payments to households. The fourth
term is a general operating cost (with > 0) which is quadratic in the bank’s funding share.
Operating costs will play a minimal role until Section 3.
The representative bank chooses the attractiveness of its DLPs j , the intensity of its
o¤-balance-sheet activities j 2 [0; 1], and its reserve holdings Rj to maximize j subject
to the liquidity rule in (5). The Lagrange multiplier on (5) is the shadow cost of holding
reserves. We denote it by j . The multipliers on j 0 and j 1 are denoted by 0j and
1
j respectively. The …rst order conditions with respect to Rj , j , and j are then:

j

= (1 + iA )2
1
j

j

1

=
|

iL + (1
2 1

0
j

=
)

+

(1 + iL )

(7)

j Wj

(8)

Xj

j

{z

competitive motive

!
}

+

j

2 1
|
{z

j

}

(9)

reg. arbitrage motive

The …rst term on the right-hand side of equation (9) captures what we will call the competitive motive for DLP issuance. If this term is positive, then bank j wants to o¤er higher DLP
returns in order to attract more funding. Recall that bank j’s total funding, Xj , is given by
equation (3). Each bank takes as given so increasing j relative to increases Xj . The
second term on the right-hand side of equation (9) captures what we will call the regulatory
arbitrage motive for DLP issuance. In the absence of a liquidity rule ( = 0), there is no
regulatory arbitrage motive. There is also no such motive when the interbank rate is high
enough to make the shadow cost of holding reserves ( j ) zero.

2.5

Results for Benchmark Model

We now study the equilibrium properties of the benchmark model.

11

We start by establishing the existence of an equilibrium where banks are content o¤ering
only storage (i.e., j = 0, where asterisks denote equilibrium values). We have already
established that there is no regulatory arbitrage motive for DLP issuance without liquidity
regulation ( = 0). The following proposition establishes the conditions under which there
is also no competitive motive:
where is a positive threshold that depends on parameters
Proposition 1 Suppose
other than and . If = 0 and < , then j = 0 if and only if = 0. If = 0 and
> 0, then j = 0 if and only if = .
With = 0, there is no competitive motive for DLP issuance because each bank perceives its
funding share as …xed. With > 0 and a high operating cost (i.e., = ), there is also no
competitive motive because banks do not want to get bigger. Therefore, = 0 with either
one of these parameterizations delivers an equilibrium where only storage is o¤ered.
Suppose the economy starts in such an equilibrium. Proposition 2 shows that increasing
above a threshold value e triggers the issuance of o¤-balance-sheet DLPs. The benchmark
model thus delivers a shadow banking sector after the introduction of a su¢ ciently strict
liquidity rule:
Proposition 2 Suppose = 0. There is a unique e 2 0;
j > 0 with j = 1 otherwise.

such that

j

= 0 if

e and

The incentive to issue DLPs in Proposition 2 does not come from competition since = 0
eliminates the competitive motive. Instead, DLPs are issued because they can be booked
o¤-balance-sheet, away from the binding liquidity rule. Similar intuition can be delivered
with > 0 and su¢ ciently high.
Consider now the aggregate e¤ects. Proposition 3 shows that introducing a liquidity
minimum into the benchmark model lowers both the interbank rate and total credit in
equilibrium:
Proposition 3 Fix all parameters except for . For any
0, the equilibrium under = 0
has a higher interbank rate and more total credit than the equilibrium under any > 0. It
can also be shown, …xing all parameters except for and , that the equilibrium under = 0
and = 0 has a higher interbank rate and more total credit than the equilibrium under any
combination of > 0 and > 0.
Proposition 3 is e¤ectively the market mechanism at work. The interbank market in the
benchmark model is competitive so all banks are price-takers. Suppose there is no government intervention ( = 0). At low interbank rates, none of these price-taking banks will
12

…nd it pro…table to hold reserves. Instead, they will all want to invest heavily in the longterm project to earn a return, relying on the interbank market for cheap liquidity to pay o¤
liquidity shocks. Liquidity demand at t = 1 will then exceed liquidity supply, which cannot
be an equilibrium. The equilibrium interbank rate must therefore be high to incent banks
to hold reserves when = 0. The introduction of a liquidity minimum by the government
( > 0) substitutes somewhat for this market-based discipline and the equilibrium interbank
rate falls.5 The result on total credit then follows immediately from equation (4), given that
total credit equals X Rj .

3

Full Model: Heterogeneity in Bank Size

We now extend the benchmark model to include a big bank. By de…nition of being big, this
bank will internalize how all of its choices a¤ect the equilibrium.
We keep the continuum of small banks, j 2 [0; 1], and index the big bank by k. DLP
demands are Wj = ! j and Wk = ! k , similar to equation (1). The funding attracted by
each bank is an augmented version of equation (3), namely:
Xj = 1

+

1

Xk =

0

0

j

+

k

1

k

+

2

j

j

j

(10)
(11)

where total funding in the economy has been normalized to X = 1 and j is the average
return on small bank DLPs. Here, 1 is the competition parameter between the big and
small banks while 2 a¤ects the competition among small banks.6 Small banks take j
and k as given, along with being interbank price-takers. In a symmetric equilibrium, the
pro…t-maximizing choice of j equals j .
The big bank does not take j as given. It is also not an interbank price-taker. As a
result, the interbank rate will depend on the big bank’s realized liquidity shock. This makes
the big bank’s shock an aggregate shock so, in Appendix C, we show that adding aggregate
5

Another way to think about this is as follows: the government intervention makes reserves more scarce,
on the margin, which drives down their yield. See Farhi, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2009) for a di¤erent
environment in which a liquidity minimum decreases interest rates.
6
The intuition behind equations (10) and (11) is easy to derive from a household problem with nested
preferences over banks. For example, if households have CES preferences over big versus small banks and,
within small banks, CES preferences over the di¤erent small banks, then Xj will be increasing in (i) the
spread between the average small bank return and the big bank return and (ii) the spread between bank
j’s return and the average small bank return, provided both elasticities of substitution are greater than one.
Equation (10) is a linear representation of this logic. If the elasticity of substitution between small banks
equals one, then bank j’s own return relative to the average small bank return will not matter, which is
what 2 = 0 would capture.

13

shocks to the benchmark model with only small banks does not change Proposition 3. It is
therefore the strategic nature of the big bank’s decision-making that will drive the substantive
di¤erences between the results of the full model being considered here and the results of the
benchmark model considered earlier.
Let isL denote the interbank rate when the big bank realizes s at t = 1, where s 2 f`; hg.
The interbank market clearing condition for s = h is:
Rj + Rk + ihL = Xj +

(12)

h Xk

The left-hand side of (12) captures the supply of liquidity while the right-hand side captures
the demand for liquidity, in an equilibrium where small banks are symmetric. All decisions
are made at t = 0 so it will be enough for the big bank to a¤ect the expected interbank
) ihL . We can therefore simplify the exposition by …xing i`L = 0 and
i`L + (1
rate, ieL
letting ieL move with ihL , where ihL is determined as per equation (12). It will be veri…ed in
the proposition proofs that i`L = 0 does not result in a liquidity shortage when the big bank
realizes ` < h in this class of equilibria.

3.1

Optimization Problem of Big Bank

At t = 0, the big bank’s expected pro…t is:
k

(1 + iA )2 (Xk

Rk )+ 1 + (1

) ihL Rk

(1

) ihL h Xk + Xk + 1

!

2
k

2

Xk2

The interpretation is similar to equation (6): the …rst term is revenue from investment, the
second term is the potential expected revenue from lending reserves, the third term is the
big bank’s expected funding cost, and the fourth term is an operating cost.
The big bank chooses Rk , k , and k to maximize k subject to three sets of constraints.
First are the aggregate constraints, namely funding shares as per (10) and (11) and market
clearing as per (12). The market clearing equation connects Rk and ihL so saying that the
big bank chooses Rk with ihL determined by (12) is equivalent to saying that it chooses ihL
with Rk determined by (12). This is the sense in which the big bank is a price-setter on the
interbank market.
The second set of constraints are the …rst order conditions of small banks. The representative small bank solves essentially the same problem as before. Its objective function is
still given by (6) but with (1
) ihL as the interbank rate and Xj as per equation (10). It
is also still subject to the liquidity rule in (5) with j 2 [0; 1]. The results in Section 2.5 on
which we want to build involved j 0 so we will add this as an explicit condition here.
14

The last set of constraints on the big bank’s problem are inequality constraints, namely
a liquidity rule for the big bank and non-negativity conditions:
Rk

(Xk
k

k Wk )

2 [0; 1]
k

0

j

0

where j is the shadow cost of reserves or, equivalently, the Lagrange multiplier on the
liquidity rule in the small bank problem. Each inequality constraint listed above can be
either binding or slack.

3.2

Results for Full Model

An equilibrium in the full model is characterized by the …rst order conditions from the small
bank problem, the …rst order conditions from the big bank problem, and interbank market
clearing.
Following Section 2.5, we …rst discuss the equilibrium where all banks o¤er only storage.
We know from our analysis of the benchmark model that small banks will have a competitive
motive for DLP issuance if (i) they do not take their funding shares as given and (ii) operating
costs are low enough that they want to expand. Notice from equation (10) that small banks
will not take their funding shares as given if 2 > 0.
If instead 2 = 0, with 1 0, then equation (10) simpli…es to:
Xj = 1

0

+

1

j

k

In a symmetric equilibrium, j = j so there is still an indirect e¤ect of j on the funding
share Xj . However, small banks are not setting j to exploit this e¤ect. Instead, small banks
take their funding shares as given and the …rst order conditions from their optimization
problem deliver:
j

Rj

Xj
j

!

= 0 with complementary slackness

j

= (1 + iA )2
j

=

1 + (1
j

2 1
15

) ihL

(13)
(14)
(15)

with j = 1 for the reasons discussed at the beginning of the proof of Proposition 2. In
words, these …rst order conditions say that small banks are content o¤ering only storage
unless there is a liquidity rule ( > 0) and a shadow cost to holding reserves ( j > 0). With
> 0 and j > 0, small banks would also o¤er o¤-balance-sheet DLPs, which is the same
regulatory arbitrage motive for DLP issuance seen in equations (8) and (9) of the benchmark
model.
Clearly, = 0 will be enough to deliver an initial equilibrium without regulatory arbitrage
so that small banks do indeed o¤er only storage at the combination of = 0 and 2 = 0.
To simplify the analytical exposition and develop clear intuition, this section will study a
move from = 0 to > 0, assuming 2 = 0. In Section 4.2, we will calibrate the starting
and ending values of to data and allow 2 > 0. We will then calibrate an operating cost
parameter for small banks ( j ) that is consistent with minimal DLP issuance in the initial
steady state.7
The property that the big bank o¤ers only storage when = 0 can also be delivered
in one of two ways. The …rst approach is to set 1 = 0 in equation (11) so that the big
bank’s funding share is …xed at Xk = 0 . The second approach is to keep the funding share
endogenous ( 1 > 0) and set a su¢ ciently high operating cost parameter which eliminates
any incentive for the big bank to increase its funding share (and hence issue DLPs) at the
con…guration of parameters in the initial equilibrium. We will present analytical results for
both approaches to isolate how, if at all, an endogenous funding share a¤ects the big bank’s
decision-making. When considering the second approach in the analytical results below, we
will set so that, in the initial equilibrium, k is exactly zero as opposed to being constrained
by zero. The quantitative analysis in Section 4.2 will also follow the second approach and
allow 1 > 0. We will then calibrate a k for the big bank to distinguish it from the j for
the small banks mentioned above.
Having explained the de…ning features of the initial equilibrium, let us consider the
distribution of reserves between big and small banks in this equilibrium. The distribution
of reserves across banks was not a consideration in the benchmark model because all banks
were ex ante identical price-takers. Now, however, we have a big bank who is a price-setter
so its reserve choice may di¤er from that of small banks.
Proposition 4 Suppose
= 0. Consider 2 = 0 and either 1 > 0 with
su¢ ciently
positive or 1 = 0 so that the initial equilibrium has j = k = 0. If iA lies within an
intermediate range, then the initial equilibrium also involves j > 0, Rj = 0, and Rk > 0.
7

With 2 = 0, small banks never have a competitive motive for DLP issuance. With 2 > 0 and j
su¢ ciently high, they have no such motive at the initial equilibrium. The second approach imposes weaker
conditions than the …rst but the main qualitative results do not depend on which approach is used.

16

Proposition 4 says that reserves in the initial equilibrium are held disproportionately by the
big bank when the returns to investment (iA ) are moderate. The big bank’s willingness to
hold liquidity re‡ects its status as an interbank price-setter. In particular, the big bank
understands that not holding enough liquidity will increase its funding costs should it experience a high liquidity shock. In contrast, the price-taking small banks invest all their
funding in projects and rely on the interbank market, which now includes the big bank, to
honor short-term obligations.
We saw in Section 2.5 that introducing a liquidity minimum into the benchmark model
with only small banks decreased both the interbank rate and the total amount of credit. In
other words, regulation had the intended e¤ect. We want to see whether this is still the case
in the full model with big and small banks or whether there are conditions under which the
result is reversed.
To …x ideas, suppose the government moves from
= 0 to
= . As shown next,
introducing a liquidity minimum into the full model can lead to an increase in the interbank
rate, in sharp contrast to the benchmark prediction:
Proposition 5 Keep 2 = 0 as in Proposition 4. The following are su¢ cient for the equilibrium under = to have a higher interbank rate ihL than the equilibrium under = 0,
while preserving slackness of the big bank’s liquidity rule (Rk > Xk ), bindingness of the
small bank liquidity rule ( j > 0), and feasibility of i`L = 0:
1. Suppose 1 = 0 so that the big bank’s funding share is …xed. The su¢ cient conditions
are: su¢ ciently high, ` and ! su¢ ciently low, and iA within an intermediate range.
2. Suppose 1 = ! > 0 so that the big bank’s funding share is endogenous. Also set so
that k is exactly zero at = 0 for the reasons discussed earlier in this section. The
su¢ cient conditions are: su¢ ciently high, ` and ! su¢ ciently low, and iA and 0
within intermediate ranges.
There is a non-empty set of parameters satisfying the su¢ cient conditions in both 1 and 2.
All else constant, the model with an endogenous funding share generates a larger increase in
the interbank rate than the model with a …xed funding share.
We devote Section 3.2.1 to explaining the interbank rate results just established. Section
3.2.2 will then establish several other results that distinguish the full model from the benchmark, including the e¤ect of liquidity regulation on total credit. Note that the parameter
restrictions in Proposition 5 are su¢ cient conditions. In the quantitative analysis of Section
4, we will explore the size of the parameter space that supports the results.
17

3.2.1

Intuition for Interbank Rate Response

To explain Proposition 5, it will be useful to summarize all the forces behind the big bank’s
choice of ihL . Di¤erentiating the big bank’s objective function with respect to ihL , we get:

@ k
_ Rk
X
| {z h }k
@ihL
direct motive

"
|

(1 + iA )2
1

1

ihL

{z

#

reallocation motive

"
@Rk
(1 + iA )2
+
1
@ihL
}
|

1

Xk

h
h iL

{z

#

funding share motive

@Xk
@ihL
}

(16)
= 0 when the relevant inequality constraints in the big bank’s
The equilibrium solves
problem are slack. This is the appropriate case given the statement of Proposition 5. We
will start by explaining the three motives identi…ed in (16). We will then explain how the
strength of each motive varies with in order to understand why moving from = 0 to
= generates a higher interbank rate.
First is the direct motive. The big bank has reserves Rk and a funding share Xk . Its
net reserve position when hit by a high liquidity shock is therefore Rk
h Xk . Each unit
h
of reserves is valued at an interest rate of iL when the big bank’s shock is high so, on the
margin, an increase in ihL changes the big bank’s pro…ts by Rk
h Xk .
Second is the reallocation motive. The idea is that changes in ihL also a¤ect how many
k
reserves the big bank needs to hold in a market clearing equilibrium. If @R
< 0, then an
@ih
L
h
increase in iL elicits enough liquidity from other sources to let the big bank reallocate funding
from reserves to investment. On the margin, the value of this reallocation is the shadow cost
k
of reserves, hence the coe¢ cient on @R
in (16).
@ih
L
Third is the funding share motive. The idea is that changes in ihL also a¤ect how much
k
> 0, then an
funding the big bank attracts when funding shares are endogenous. If @X
@ih
L
increase in ihL decreases the shadow cost of reserves and curtails the DLP o¤erings of small
k
banks by enough to boost the big bank’s funding share. The coe¢ cient on @X
in (16)
@ih
L
captures the marginal value of a higher funding share for the big bank. We will discuss this
coe¢ cient in more detail below.
To gain some insight into how changes in will a¤ect the solution to @@ihk = 0 through
L
each motive, we start with the case of …xed funding shares ( 1 = 0). Consider …rst the direct
motive. Using the market clearing condition:
@ k
@ih
L

ihL

Rk

h Xk

1 =0

=

(1

0)

ihL

1
|

0

! (1
2 1

"
) (1 + iA )2
1
{z

1

Rj as per small bank FOCs in (13) to (15)

18

ihL

#!
}

(17)

For a given value of ihL , the magnitude of the direct motive in (17) depends on through
the reserve holdings of small banks. There are two competing e¤ects. On one hand, higher
forces small banks to hold more reserves per unit of on-balance-sheet funding. On the
other hand, higher can compel small banks to engage in regulatory arbitrage, decreasing
their on-balance-sheet funding as they o¤er o¤-balance-sheet DLPs ( j > 0 with j = 1).
The net e¤ect is ambiguous so we must look beyond the direct motive to fully understand
Proposition 5.
With …xed funding shares, the only other motive is the reallocation motive, where:
@Rk
@ihL

2

! (1
2 1

=
1 =0

)

(18)

<0

This expression is negative for two reasons. First, and as captured by the …rst term in (18),
a higher interbank rate will attract more external liquidity, allowing the big bank to hold
fewer reserves. Second, and as captured by the second term in (18), small banks will increase
their reserves when the interbank rate increases, also allowing the big bank to hold fewer
reserves. The e¤ect of ihL on Rj that underlies the second term in (18) works through the
regulatory arbitrage motive of small banks: there is less incentive to circumvent a liquidity
minimum when liquidity is expected to be expensive. We can also infer from the second
term in (18) that the e¤ect of ihL on Rj strengthens with . This is both because Rj is more
responsive to changes in j at high (see equation (13)) and because j is more responsive
to changes in ihL at high (see equations (14) and (15)).
This discussion helps explain the …rst bullet in Proposition 5: when funding shares are
…xed, high makes it easier for the big bank to use high interbank rates to incent small
banks to share the burden of keeping the system liquid.
Does the same intuition extend to the case of endogenous funding shares? No, because:
@Rk
@ihL

=

+

! (

h

2 1

1 =!

` ) (1

)

(19)

An increase in ihL still decreases j but now a decrease in j also decreases how much funding
Xj small banks attract in equilibrium, which then decreases how many reserves they hold.
This e¤ect is strong enough to make the second term in (19) positive, in contrast to the
second term in (18) which was negative.
We must therefore turn to the funding share motive to fully understand why introducing
a liquidity minimum can increase the equilibrium interbank rate when funding shares are
endogenous. Recall from (16) the expression for the funding share motive and note:

19

@Xk
@ihL

=
1 =!

! (1
2 1

)

>0

(20)

We already know from the discussion of (19) that an increase in ihL decreases j which
then decreases how much funding Xj small banks attract in equilibrium. Total funding is
normalized to one so the decrease in Xj implies an increase in the big bank funding share
Xk . The expression in (20) is therefore positive. The magnitude of this expression increases
with because j is more responsive to changes in ihL at high (see again equations (14)
and (15)). It is therefore easier for the big bank to increase its funding share by increasing
ihL when is high.
There is, of course, a di¤erence between the ability to increase funding share and the
desire to do so. To complete the intuition, let us reconcile the big bank’s desire to increase
its funding share when is high with the existence of convex operating costs. Return to
k
in (16). All else constant, moving from = 0 to = will trigger
the coe¢ cient on @X
@ih
L
regulatory arbitrage by small banks ( j > 0 with j = 1). The presence of j > 0 will then
erode the big bank’s funding share Xk , lowering its marginal operating cost Xk .
We can now understand the second bullet in Proposition 5 as follows: when funding
shares are endogenous, high makes it easier for the big bank to use high interbank rates
to stop small banks from encroaching on its funding share. The last part of Proposition 5
establishes that sizeable increases in the interbank rate are most consistent with this sort of
asymmetric competition, wherein the big bank uses its price impact on the interbank market
to fend o¤ competition from small banks and their o¤-balance-sheet activities.
3.2.2

Credit Boom and Cross-Sectional Predictions

We have now explained how the full model can deliver an increase in the equilibrium interbank rate when a liquidity minimum is introduced. Next, we establish how the introduction
of this regulation changes the liquidity ratios of big and small banks, the liquidity services
they provide, and the total amount of credit generated in equilibrium:
Proposition 6 Invoke the parameter conditions from Proposition 5. The equilibrium under
= has higher total credit (1 Rj Rk ) and a smaller gap between the on-balance-sheet
liquidity ratios of big and small banks at t = 0 than the equilibrium under = 0. Moreover,
= , with k > 0 if and only if funding share is endogenous. This is in contrast
j > k at
to j = k = 0 at = 0.
In sharp contrast to the benchmark model with only small banks, Proposition 6 shows that
introducing a liquidity minimum into the full model increases total credit. The on-balance20

sheet lending of small banks falls but there are several o¤setting channels and, as we will
see below, all rely on the ability of the big bank to a¤ect the interbank market through its
reserve holdings.
As was the case in the benchmark model, small banks move into o¤-balance-sheet DLPs
after the introduction of a su¢ ciently strict liquidity minimum. As they push to attract
funding into these products, the small banks o¤er interest rates that exceed the rates on
traditional deposits (storage). E¤ectively, the tightening of liquidity rules implies a higher
regulatory burden for on-balance-sheet activities relative to o¤-balance-sheet activities and,
when the rule is strict enough to constrain the small banks, they are willing to pay higher
interest rates for o¤-balance-sheet DLPs relative to storage.
Under the parameter conditions in Proposition 5, which are also the parameter conditions
in Proposition 6, the liquidity minimum is strict enough to constrain the small banks but not
strict enough to constrain the big bank. The big bank can unilaterally a¤ect the interbank
market so it internalizes the impact of its reserve holdings on the expected price of interbank
liquidity. Compared to the small banks, then, the big bank always undertakes less long-term
investment per unit of funding attracted. In other words, the big bank has a higher liquidity
ratio than the small banks at t = 0. This is why a liquidity minimum can introduce a binding
constraint on small banks without also introducing one on the big bank.
The big bank thus has no incentive to o¤er o¤-balance-sheet DLPs after the liquidity
minimum in Propositions 5 and 6 is introduced. If its funding share is …xed, the big bank
also has no incentive to o¤er on-balance-sheet DLPs, hence the statement in Proposition 6
that k > 0 if and only if funding share is endogenous. However, as discussed in Section 3.2.1,
tougher liquidity regulation makes the interbank rate a more powerful tool for getting the
small, price-taking banks to share the burden of keeping the system liquid. All else constant,
the interbank market at t = 1 will be less liquid, and the expected interbank rate will rise,
if the big bank holds fewer reserves at t = 0. Proposition 6 shows that the gap between the
on-balance-sheet liquidity ratios of big and small banks narrows after the liquidity minimum
is introduced. The liquidity ratio of small banks, as measured on balance sheet, must rise
to comply with the regulation. The liquidity ratio of the big bank, however, falls as the
big bank shifts from reserves to investment to tighten the interbank market. On net, total
liquidity falls and total credit rises on the heels of the big bank’s strategy.
Consider now the more general case where the big bank’s funding share is endogenous.
All else constant, some funding will migrate from the big bank to the small banks, as the
latter begin o¤ering o¤-balance-sheet DLPs that pay higher interest rates than storage. We
have already explained that the big bank internalizes the impact of its reserve holdings on
the expected price of interbank liquidity and hence has a higher liquidity ratio than the small
21

banks. Therefore, the reallocation of funding from the big bank to the small banks, as the
latter poach from the former, decreases total liquidity and increases total credit. This is one
of two channels for the credit boom when funding shares are endogenous.
The big bank can respond to its loss of funding by o¤ering its own DLPs with high
interest rates. Naturally, this is costly because of the high rates. Proposition 6 shows that
the big bank engages in some of this activity ( k > 0), but not to the same extent as the
small banks ( k < j ). Moreover, unlike the small banks who are constrained by the liquidity
minimum and therefore issue all of their DLPs o¤-balance-sheet ( j = 1), the big bank is
not constrained and is therefore indi¤erent between any k 2 [0; 1].
The big bank can also respond to its loss of funding by using its price impact on the
interbank market. We discussed this motive and its implications for the interbank rate in
Section 3.2.1. Small banks have less incentive to skirt the liquidity minimum if they expect
liquidity to be expensive. The big bank therefore tightens the interbank market to make small
banks scale back their issuance of DLPs. The gap between the on-balance-sheet liquidity
ratios of big and small banks again narrows but, unlike the case with …xed funding shares,
the big bank is now using its price impact on the interbank market to …ght the competitive
pressures that arise as the small banks engage in regulatory arbitrage. While this strategy
by the big bank curbs some of the increase in total credit from the …rst channel, it also
boosts credit directly because the big bank is shifting from reserves to investment to tighten
the interbank market. This is the second channel for the credit boom when funding shares
are endogenous.

4

Quantitative Analysis

We have focused so far on qualitative predictions of the theory. We now want to study
quantitative implications. We choose China as the setting for our quantitative analysis.
In addition to being one of the world’s largest economies, China has experienced a near
doubling of its debt-to-GDP ratio over the past decade, along with unprecedented growth in
its ratio of private credit to private savings. Our model predicts that some credit booms are
caused by stricter liquidity regulation so we are interested to know whether stricter liquidity
regulation can account for at least part of the Chinese experience.
Liquidity rules in China involve reserve requirements and, until late 2015, a loan-todeposit cap. The loan-to-deposit cap was introduced in 1995 to prevent banks from lending
more than 75% of the value of their deposits to non-…nancial borrowers. The remaining
25% had to be kept liquid, with reserve requirements dictating how this liquidity was to be

22

divided between pure reserves and other liquid assets. In practice, enforcement of the 75%
loan-to-deposit cap was lax until 2008, when the China Banking Regulatory Commission
(CBRC) announced a tougher stance and began increasing the frequency of its loan-todeposit monitoring. The enforcement action began with CBRC monitoring the end-of-year
loan-to-deposit ratios of all banks more carefully. CBRC then switched to monitoring endof-quarter ratios in late 2009, end-of-month ratios in late 2010, and average daily ratios
in mid-2011. The increasing frequency of CBRC’s loan-to-deposit enforcement was also
complemented by a rapid increase in the reserve requirements set by the central bank. We
refer the reader to Hachem (2018) and Song and Xiong (2018) for more on China’s regulatory
environment and …nancial institutions.
Heterogeneity in interbank pricing power was central to our theory of unintended credit
booms in Section 3. Credit did not increase after the introduction of a liquidity minimum
in the benchmark model with a competitive interbank market. We would therefore like to
establish that large commercial banks in China can impact the interbank market to a much
greater extent than small commercial banks before applying the model to China. This is
done in Section 4.1. We then calibrate the model to Chinese data in Section 4.2. We use the
calibrated model to study how large a credit boom our model can produce (Section 4.3) and
present a structural estimation to evaluate the importance of various shocks (Section 4.4).

4.1

Interbank Market Structure in China

The Chinese economy is served by both big and small banks. The small banks include
twelve joint-stock commercial banks (JSCBs) which operate nationally, as well as over two
hundred city banks operating in speci…c regions. Many rural banks have also emerged.
The JSCBs are typically larger than the city and rural banks but all of these banks are still
individually small when compared to China’s big banks (the Big Four). The Big Four are the
four commercial banks established by the central government after the Cultural Revolution.
Market-oriented reforms initiated in the 1990s made the Big Four almost entirely pro…tdriven and removed government involvement from day-to-day operations. However, a legacy
of minimal competition between these four banks remains. China’s banking sector is therefore
well approximated by a model with one big bank and many small banks.
Importantly, this big bank, as represented by the Big Four, is large enough to impact
prices on the interbank market. China has both an interbank repo market and an uncollateralized money market. We will focus on the repo market since it is vastly larger. To better
understand the market structure and the relative importance of the Big Four, we obtained
anonymized data on each individual trade that took place in China’s interbank repo market
23

during June 2013. The majority of transactions had either an overnight or a seven-day maturity and there was not much variation in collateral or haircuts so we can focus on interest
rates and loan amounts.
The main sample for the analysis excludes June 20 and 21. There was a dramatic spike in
interbank interest rates on June 20, which many observers characterized as either a market
liquidity crisis or a failure by the government to respond. In Appendix D, we conduct a
detailed analysis of China’s interbank repo market around this spike and demonstrate that
the traditional narrative is incorrect: agents of the government provided generous amounts
of liquidity but interbank rates did not fall because the funds were absorbed by the Big
Four and re-intermediated at much higher interest rates. This is a concrete example of
price-setting by the Big Four and we will refer back to it in what follows.
Figure 1 graphs the interbank network for the main sample. Each node represents a
group of banks. In addition to the Big Four, the JSCBs, and other smaller players, China
has three policy banks which participate in the interbank repo market. The policy banks are
the agents of the government referred to above. They are not commercial banks. Instead,
they raise money on bond markets and take directives from the central government about
where to invest. The ‡ow of funds between the nodes in Figure 1 is indicated by the direction
of the arrows, with thicker arrows signifying more trade.
Eigenvector centrality is one way to put numbers on the approximate importance of
each of the nodes in Figure 1. It is based on the idea that a central node is connected
to other central nodes. We only need to specify an adjacency matrix A that summarizes
the connections between the nodes. The centrality of node i is then the ith element of the
eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue of A. The …rst column in Table 1 reports
the results when the connection from node i to node s in the adjacency matrix is based on
average daily lending from i to s. The second column reports the results when the connection
from i to s is based on average daily borrowing by i from s. It is clear from these two columns
that the policy banks and the Big Four are the central lending nodes in the main sample.
The third and fourth columns of Table 1 repeat the eigenvector centrality analysis with
adjacency matrices constructed using data from June 20, as opposed to the main sample.
We know from the analysis in Appendix D that the spike in interbank rates on June 20 was
driven by the Big Four. The results in Table 1 show minimal change in the centrality of the
policy banks on June 20 relative to the main sample. In contrast, the Big Four became much
less central on the lending side and much more central on the borrowing side. Therefore, the
lending and borrowing decisions of the Big Four have a dramatic e¤ect on the tightness of
the interbank market, even if the policy banks remain a central lending node.
We can also compare the ability of each node in Figure 1 to impact interbank conditions
24

by calculating the elasticity of total lending by the interbank market with respect to the
money that each of these nodes brings into the market. The procedure for computing the
elasticities is described in Appendix E and the results using the main sample are reported in
the last column of Table 1. An elasticity of 0.29 for the Big Four means that, on an average
trading day in the main sample, a 1 percent increase in the amount of money brought into
the interbank market by the Big Four leads to a 0.29 percent increase in total lending by
this market. This is 3.7 times the elasticity for the JSCBs and 0.5 times the elasticity for
the policy banks, which is substantial given the quantity adjustments that the Big Four can
make. The scale of these adjustments was apparent on June 20. Policy banks brought 72
percent more money into the interbank market than they did on an average trading day in
the main sample. Total lending by the interbank market should have then increased by 41
percent, given the elasticity of 0.57 in Table 1. However, the Big Four brought 183 percent
less money into the interbank market than they did on an average trading day in the main
sample and, with an elasticity of 0.29, this leads to a 53 percent decrease in total lending by
the interbank market, more than enough to o¤set the e¤orts of the policy banks.

4.2

Calibration

We calibrate the model to data from 2014. Our primary dataset is the Wind Financial
Terminal, supplemented by data from bank annual reports.
We take the time from t = 0 to t = 2 to be a quarter, with all interest rates quoted on an
annualized basis. China’s central bank (PBOC) set benchmark interest rates for traditional
deposits in China until late 2015. Recall from Section 2.1 that our model has a normalized
liquidity service called storage with iB = iD = 0. In the calibration, we will re-normalize
storage to be a traditional deposit that has iB > 0 and iD > 0 as set by the PBOC. Any
DLPs o¤ered in equilibrium will pay an additional return relative to these positive rates.
We set (1 + iD )2 = 1:026 to match the average benchmark interest rate of 2.6% for 3month deposits in China. We set (1 + iB )2 = 1:004 to match the average benchmark interest
rate of 0.4% for demand deposits. The central bank’s benchmark interest rate for loans with
a maturity of less than six months averaged 5.6%. We set (1 + iA )2 = 1:05 since banks can
o¤er a discount of up to 10% on the benchmark loan rate.8
In Propositions 5 and 6, we considered a tightening of liquidity regulation from = 0
to = . We relax this in the calibration. The starting is not restricted to be zero and
there is no presumed relationship between the new regulation and . Instead, we set the new
8

We are assuming the same return iA for all banks. In practice, di¤erent banks may invest in di¤erent
sectors but, adjusting for political risk, the returns are roughly comparable in China. Some anecdotal
evidence can be found in Dobson and Kashyap (2006).

25

liquidity regulation to = 0:25 since CBRC was strictly enforcing the 75% loan-to-deposit
cap in 2014. We then calibrate the average liquidity shock,
) h , to get an
` + (1
average interbank rate of 3.6% when = 0:25. The 3.6% target is the weighted average
seven-day interbank repo rate in 2014. The seven-day rate is the longest maturity for which
there is signi…cant trading volume. It is di¢ cult to target the level of shorter-term (e.g.,
overnight) repo rates since there are two model periods and each period must be long enough
to match reasonable data on the level of loan returns (iA ). This is merely a level e¤ect: the
correlation between the overnight and seven-day repo rates is around 0.95. We normalize
the low liquidity shock to ` = 0 and set its probability to = 0:75. The calibration of
then pins down the high liquidity shock h .
To set the external liquidity parameter ( ), we look at data on monetary injections by the
PBOC over a su¢ ciently long horizon, namely 2002 to 2014. A 1 percentage point increase
in the weighted average interbank repo rate predicts that the PBOC will inject liquidity
on the order of 0.5% of total savings. We therefore set the external liquidity parameter to
= 0:5. We will allow i`L = iB > 0 in the calibration since surplus reserves can earn a
small interest rate from the central bank. We then rede…ne (iL )
(iL iB ) to preserve
`
iL = 0.
The competition parameters ( 1 and 2 ) and the DLP demand parameter (!) are calibrated to match funding outcomes in 2014. Propositions 5 and 6 used 1 2 f0; !g and 2 = 0
to …x ideas. We relax these restrictions here. The DLPs in our model are well approximated
by wealth management products (WMPs) in China. In 2005, the Chinese government expanded the range of …nancial services banks could provide. This led to the advent of WMPs
which represent a liquidity service provided by banks at endogenous interest rates. Banks
can also choose where to report their WMPs by choosing whether or not to provide an explicit principal guarantee. Any WMPs issued with an explicit principal guarantee must be
reported on-balance-sheet. Absent such a guarantee, the WMP and the assets it invests in
do not have to be consolidated into the bank’s balance sheet. These unconsolidated WMPs
are instead invested o¤-balance-sheet. The lack of explicit guarantees on o¤-balance-sheet
WMPs is only for accounting purposes though: there is a general perception that all WMPs
are at least implicitly guaranteed by traditional banks (Elliott, Kroeber, and Qiao (2015)).
We target a big bank funding share of Xk = 0:45 when = 0:25 since roughly 45% of
total savings in China (i.e., traditional deposits plus WMPs) were held at the Big Four in
2014. We also target DLP issuance of Wj = 0:10 and Wk = 0:05 for small and big banks
respectively when = 0:25. WMPs represented 15% of total savings in China at the end
of 2014. Small banks accounted for roughly two-thirds of WMPs issued and were also much
more involved in o¤-balance-sheet issuance than the Big Four. We present empirical evidence
26

on this point in Appendix F.
To calibrate 0 , we target an aggregate credit-to-savings ratio (1 Rj Rk ) of 75% when
= 0:25. We get this target from the data as follows. Commercial banks in China for which
Bankscope has complete data collectively added RMB 40 trillion of new loans between 2007
and 2014. As a result, the ratio of traditional lending to GDP increased by 20 percentage
points. The ratio of o¤-balance-sheet WMPs to GDP increased by 15 percentage points
over the same period, which accounts for the majority of the growth in broader measures
of shadow banking that can be constructed using data from China’s National Bureau of
Statistics (Hachem (2018)). Adding the growth of the traditional and shadow sectors, we
get a 35 percentage point increase in the ratio of total credit to GDP from 2007 to 2014, which
translates into a roughly 10 percentage point increase in China’s credit-to-savings ratio. The
ratio of private credit to private savings was 65% in 2007. This is easy to calculate since
WMP issuance was minimal prior to 2008 and all the relevant information was therefore
reported on bank balance sheets. It then follows that the credit-to-savings ratio in China
was roughly 75% in 2014.
Finally, we allow big and small banks to have di¤erent operating cost parameters, k and
j respectively. China has around 200 commercial banks so, with a funding share of 45%
for the Big Four in 2014, a big bank was on average 40 times as large as a small one (i.e.,
0:45 0:55
= 196
40). In the context of our model, this size di¤erence implies that the big bank
4
faces k below j . To match the observed size di¤erence in 2014, we set j = 40 k so that
marginal operating costs are the same across banks.9 We then calibrate k to match a loanto-deposit ratio of 0.70 for the Big Four when = 0:25, which is the loan-to-deposit ratio
observed in 2014 data. We will see below that the resulting operating cost parameters are
high enough to deliver minimal WMP issuance in 2007, consistent with the initial equilibrium
considered in the theoretical analysis.10

4.3

Policy Experiment

We now use the calibrated model to predict what would have happened in 2007 had the only
di¤erence between 2007 and 2014 been the strength of CBRC’s loan-to-deposit enforcement.
Recall that 2007 is just prior to China’s adoption of stricter liquidity rules. Comparing the
predicted change in the aggregate credit-to-savings ratio between 2007 and 2014 to the actual
change observed in the data, we get an estimate of the quantitative importance of stricter
9

Di¤erences in can be interpreted as di¤erences in retail networks that stem from exogenous social or
political forces. In robustness checks, we found that cutting the j ratio to …ve (based on the size di¤erence
k
between the Big Four and only the JSCBs) and re-calibrating the model generates very similar results.
10
The calibrated parameters are ! = 126, 0 = 0:55, 1 = 303, 2 = 0:41, k = 0:03, = 0:135.

27

liquidity rules.
The results are summarized in Table 2. Recall that the calibration targeted the 2014
values of all the variables in this table. To obtain the predictions for 2007, we decreased
the liquidity rule from = 0:25 to = 0:14, keeping all other parameters unchanged. We
chose = 0:14 because the loan-to-deposit ratio of small banks in China was 86% in 2007,
suggesting that CBRC was willing to tolerate a ratio of 86% in 2007 despite the 75% cap
having existed since 1995. In contrast, the loan-to-deposit ratio of small banks in China
was just under 75% in 2014, consistent with = 0:25 after CBRC’s decision to begin strict
enforcement of the cap. All loan-to-deposit ratios reported here are calculated using the
average balances of loans and deposits during the year, not the year-end balances, because
the ultimate target of CBRC’s enforcement action was the average loan book of each bank.
See Appendix F for more on the importance of using average balance data.
Table 2 shows that our model generates most of the rise in WMPs in China between
2007 and 2014. It also delivers a 7 percentage point decrease in the Big Four’s funding
share, which is most of the 10 percentage point decrease observed in the data.
We also obtain a large increase in the Big Four’s loan-to-deposit ratio, from 58% in 2007
to the targeted 70% in 2014. This is slightly bigger than the increase from 62% to 70% in the
data, but the general pattern is clearly consistent. Also notice the large di¤erence between
the 2007 loan-to-deposit ratios of big and small banks in China: 62% for the big versus 86%
for the small. Stricter enforcement of the 75% cap starting in 2008 therefore introduced a
binding constraint on China’s small banks but not on the Big Four. This is exactly the type
of liquidity regulation considered in Propositions 5 and 6.
Table 2 also shows that our model generates a 25 basis point increase in the interbank
interest rate between 2007 and 2014. This is half of the 50 basis point increase in the average
seven-day interbank repo rate observed in the data. Since yearly averages can mask some of
the most severe events, it is also useful to consider the peak interbank rates observed in daily
data before and after CBRC’s enforcement action. The peak rate before the enforcement
began was 10.1% while the peak rate after was 11.6%. Of this 150 basis point increase in
the data, our model delivers 90 basis points.
Finally, we obtain a sizeable 3.2 percentage point increase in the aggregate credit-tosavings ratio between 2007 and 2014. The credit boom in the data is roughly 10 percentage
points, as explained earlier. The calibrated version of our model therefore generates onethird of China’s overall credit boom as the outcome of stricter liquidity regulation. The
forces in favor of an increase in credit in Table 2 are the increase in shadow lending by small
banks (which rises from 3% of total savings to 10%) and the increase in traditional lending

28

by large banks (which rises from 0.52*58%=30.2% of total savings to 0.45*70%=31.5%).11
These forces more than o¤set the decrease in traditional lending by small banks (which falls
from (72.1%-3%-30.2%)=38.9% of total savings to (75.3%-10%-31.5%)=33.8%) to produce
the overall increase in credit from 72.1% of total savings to 75.3% in Table 2.
The calibrated model can also be used to conduct a sensitivity analysis with respect to
some key parameters. We …nd that the competition parameters ( 1 and 2 ) and the DLP
demand parameter (!) could each be either doubled or halved from their calibrated values,
holding all other parameters constant, without changing the qualitative conclusion that the
e¤ect of higher on aggregate credit is positive. Anything in between doubling and halving
would also work, and the range of double to half is itself just chosen for convenience. The
su¢ cient conditions used to …x ideas in Section 3.2 are therefore part of a large parameter
space that delivers a credit boom after a tightening of liquidity rules.
Another important parameter is , which captures the responsiveness of external liquidity
to the interbank rate. The higher is , the less control the big bank has over the interbank
rate (i.e., a high rate will prompt a larger liquidity injection by the central bank, bringing
down the rate that prevails in equilibrium). We …nd that our qualitative conclusions are
robust to halving but not to doubling it. Instead, can be increased by at most 50% given
the other calibrated parameters before the big bank has su¢ ciently little control over the
interbank rate that it joins the small banks in being constrained by the liquidity regulation.
Our results are thus strongest for low values of because low values of a¤ord the big bank
the most interbank pricing power.

4.4

Simulation Results

We now subject the calibrated model to various shocks to see how well it matches empirical
moments not targeted in the calibration. We are interested in (i) the overall ability to match
these moments and (ii) the relative importance of each shock in doing so.
Table 3 reports observed correlations between the interbank repo rate and the returns to
WMPs issued by small and big banks. These are the key market-determined interest rates
in China and their correlations were not targeted in the calibration.
The correlations in Table 3 are calculated using monthly data from January 2008 to
December 2014. The time series for iL is the average interbank repo rate weighted by
transaction volume. The time series for j and k are the average returns promised by
small and big banks respectively on 3-month WMPs. Since Wind has only partial data on
11

The Big Four are not constrained by liquidity regulation and hence do not need to book any activities
o¤ the balance sheet so we classify all of their lending as traditional.

29

the amount of funding raised by each WMP, j and k are unweighted averages. We will
introduce error terms to absorb imperfections in the measurement of j and k .
Table 3 shows that iL is positively correlated with each of j , k , and j k . It also shows
that j is positively correlated with each of k and j
k while the correlation between k
and j
k is negative but not highly signi…cant. We would like to know the extent to which
our calibrated model can replicate the correlations in Table 3. We start by considering three
shocks separately: shocks to liquidity regulation, shocks to loan demand, and money supply
shocks. We then simulate the model allowing for all three shocks simultaneously.
4.4.1

Shocks to Liquidity Regulation

We allow , the parameter governing liquidity regulation, to be drawn from a normal distribution:
= +"
(21)
where " is normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 2 . We set = 0:195, which is
the midpoint between the that generates the loan-to-deposit ratio of small banks in 2007
( = 0:14) and the that generates the regulated ratio ( = 0:25).
We draw values of using equation (21) and simulate the model for each value to generate
the average interbank rate, i`L +(1
) ihL , the WMP returns o¤ered by small banks, j +" j ,
and the WMP returns o¤ered by big banks, k + " k . Here, " j and " k denote measurement
errors which are drawn from two independent normal distributions with mean 0 and variances
2
and 2k respectively.12 We then use Simulated Method of Moments to estimate the three
j
unknown parameters , j , and k . Appendix G describes the estimation procedure in
more detail.
The …rst column of Table 4 reports the estimated parameter values (Panel A) and predicted correlations (Panel B). The observed correlations from Table 3 appear in the last
column of Panel B. Notice that
is quantitatively large and highly signi…cant. Also notice
that the estimated model matches very well the observed correlations between iL and each of
are therefore important for generating the right correlations
j , k , and j
k . Shocks to
between the interbank rate and WMP returns. At the same time though, the estimated
model matches less well the magnitudes of the pairwise correlations among WMP returns.
It will thus be useful to also allow for other shocks, as is done next.
12

All distributions are truncated to avoid abnormal values of ,

30

j,

and

k.

4.4.2

Loan Demand Shocks

Shocks to loan demand are introduced by allowing iA to exceed a ‡oor {A . Speci…cally:
iA = {A + j"iA j
where "iA is normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 2iA . The ‡oor represents the
benchmark loan rate after the highest permissible discount is applied. Loan demand shocks
have their own importance in China given that …scal stimulus was undertaken in 2009 and
2010. The stimulus package sought to combat negative spillover from the global …nancial
crisis by providing a direct boost to aggregate demand. To the extent that stimulus increased
loan demand, it did so at all banks in a largely uniform way (Bai, Hsieh, and Song (2016)).
An increase in iA relative to {A captures this.
We simulate the model for di¤erent values of iA while holding = . The results are
reported in the second column of Table 4. The estimated value of iA in Panel A is not
signi…cantly di¤erent from zero and the overall …t in Panel B is much worse than the model
with only variations in .
Intuitively, banks will want more funding when investment opportunities become more
attractive, as is the case when higher loan demand raises iA . Funding shares are given by
equations (10) and (11) so, all else constant, small banks will increase j and the big bank
will increase k following an increase in iA . However, when 2 > 0 as allowed in the calibrated
model, the big bank understands that an increase in k will push small banks to increase j
even further. All else constant, higher k lowers the small bank funding share Xj in (10).
The …rst order condition for j in equation (15) was derived under 2 = 0 so, to understand
the response of j to Xj when 2 > 0, we can just go back to equation (9) when > 0.
There, we easily see that a decrease in Xj elicits an increase in j through the competitive
motive for DLP issuance. Therefore, the big bank internalizes that an increase in k elicits
an increase in j , forcing the big bank to increase k by even more in order to change its
funding share in (11). Each individual small bank takes the actions of other banks as given
so there is no similar ratchet e¤ect when the small banks choose j . This makes the response
of k to iA more dramatic than the response of j to iA . As a result, the correlation between
iL and k is stronger than the correlation between iL and j in the model with only shocks to
iA . The correlation between iL and j
k in the second column of Table 4 is then negative,
contradicting the positive correlation in the data.
Shocks to liquidity regulation generated a positive correlation between iL and j
k in
Section 4.4.1. The response of k to was less dramatic than the response of j to . The

31

di¤erence relative to iA arises because the small banks, as interbank price-takers, want lower
liquidity ratios than the big bank and are therefore endogenously more constrained than the
big bank following an increase in . Accordingly, they respond more than the big bank, even
though they do not internalize any ratchet e¤ects when choosing j .
4.4.3

Money Supply Shocks

Money supply shocks are introduced by allowing for exogenous variation in external liquidity:
(iL ) =

(iL

iB ) + "

where " is normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 2 . We simulate the model
for di¤erent draws of " while holding = and iA = {A . Note that iL is endogenously
determined for each draw.
The results are reported in the third column of Table 4. As was the case with only loan
demand shocks, the estimated value of
in Panel A is not signi…cantly di¤erent from zero
and the overall …t in Panel B is much worse than the model with only variations in .
All else constant, a decrease in external liquidity increases iL but reduces both j and
k . Intuitively, the increase in iL re‡ects the fact that the central bank is tightening the
interbank market by removing liquidity, the decrease in j re‡ects the fact that small banks
have less of a regulatory arbitrage motive when the interbank rate is high, and the decrease
in k re‡ects the fact that the big bank is competing against less aggressive products by the
small banks. Money supply shocks thus generate negative correlations between the interbank
rate and WMP returns, contradicting the positive correlations in the data.
Shocks to liquidity regulation generated these positive correlations in Section 4.4.1. All
else constant, an increase in increases the regulatory arbitrage motive of small banks so
j (where j = 1) goes up. The big bank responds to the resulting loss in its funding share
by increasing k and iL . The increase in iL tempers the increase in j , but j still increases
on net because of the increase in .
4.4.4

Multiple, Simultaneous Shocks

Now consider a version of the quantitative model which has shocks to liquidity regulation,
shocks to loan demand, and money supply shocks, all at the same time. The shocks (" , "iA ,
and " ) and measurement errors (" j and " k ) are drawn from the relevant distributions, all
of which are assumed to be independent of each other. We are able to separately identify ,
since shocks to liquidity regulation, loan demand, and external liquidity imply
iA , and
32

di¤erent correlations between iL , j , and k , as discussed above.
The results are reported in the fourth column of Table 4. The quantitative model with
three shocks matches the six empirical correlations almost perfectly. Moreover, , iA , and
are all statistically signi…cant, indicating that all three shocks are relevant.13 However,
as we saw when we considered each shock separately, shocks to liquidity regulation play a
much more important role than shocks to either loan demand or external liquidity when it
comes to getting the right signs for the correlations.
To this point, we also …nd that variations in explain 46% of the variance of iL in the
data while variations in iA and the intercept of ( ) explain only 21% and 33% respectively.
This complements our …nding in Section 4.3 that changes in liquidity regulation can explain
about half of the increase in the interbank repo rate between 2007 and 2014, along with
explaining one-third of the increase in the aggregate credit-to-savings ratio.

5

Conclusion

This paper has developed a theoretical framework to study the endogenous response of
the banking sector to liquidity regulation and the implications for the aggregate economy.
We showed that stricter liquidity standards can generate unintended credit booms when
there is heterogeneity in interbank pricing power. Liquidity minimums are endogenously
more binding on a small bank than on a large one in this environment. In response, small
banks …nd it optimal to o¤er a new savings instrument and manage the funds raised by this
instrument in an o¤-balance-sheet vehicle that is not subject to liquidity regulation. As small
banks push to attract savings into o¤-balance-sheet instruments, they raise the interest rates
on these instruments above the rates on traditional deposits and poach funding from the big
bank. The big bank responds to this competitive threat both by issuing its own high-return
savings instruments and by tightening the interbank market for emergency liquidity against
small banks. The new equilibrium is characterized by more credit as savings are reallocated
across banks and lending is reallocated across markets.
Applying our framework to China, we found that a regulatory push to increase bank
liquidity and cap loan-to-deposit ratios in the late 2000s accounts for one-third of China’s
unprecedented credit boom between 2007 and 2014. A quantitative extension that allowed
for other, non-regulatory shocks also identi…ed variation in liquidity rules as the dominant
force behind observed co-movements in market-determined interest rates.
13

This can also be seen from estimated measurement errors:
becomes statistically insigni…cant and
j
the magnitude of k is less than a quarter of the previous estimates.

33

References
Acharya, V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez. 2013. “Securitization Without Risk Transfer.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 107(3), pp. 515-536.
Adrian, T., A. Ashcraft, and N. Cetorelli. 2013. “Shadow Bank Monitoring.”Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Sta¤ Reports, no. 638.
Adrian, T. and N. Boyarchenko. 2018. “Liquidity Policies and Systemic Risk.” Journal of
Financial Intermediation, Special Issue on “Banking and Regulation: The Next Frontier”
(eds. M. Dewatripont and D. Hancock), pp. 45-60.
Allen, F. and D. Gale. 2004. “Financial Intermediaries and Markets.” Econometrica, 72(4),
pp. 1023-1061.
Allen, F. and D. Gale. 2017. “How Should Bank Liquidity be Regulated?”
Bai, C., C. Hsieh, and Z. Song. 2016. “The Long Shadow of a Fiscal Expansion.”Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2016.
Banerjee, R. and H. Mio. 2018. “The Impact of Liquidity Regulation on Banks.”Journal of
Financial Intermediation, Special Issue on “Banking and Regulation: The Next Frontier”
(eds. M. Dewatripont and D. Hancock), pp. 30-44.
Begenau, J. 2018. “Capital Requirements, Risk Choice, and Liquidity Provision in a Business
Cycle Model.”Mimeo.
Begenau, J. and T. Landvoigt. 2017. “Financial Regulation in a Quantitative Model of the
Modern Banking System.”Mimeo.
Bhattacharya, S. and D. Gale. 1987. “Preference Shocks, Liquidity, and Central Bank Policy.” In New Approaches to Monetary Economics (eds. W. Barnett and K. Singleton),
Cambridge University Press, pp. 69-88.
Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru. 2018. “Fintech, Regulatory Arbitrage,
and the Rise of Shadow Banks.”Forthcoming in Journal of Financial Economics.
Chen, K., J. Ren, and T. Zha. 2018. “The Nexus of Monetary Policy and Shadow Banking
in China.”Forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Corbae, D. and P. D’Erasmo. 2013. “A Quantitative Model of Banking Industry Dynamics.”
Mimeo.
34

Corbae, D. and P. D’Erasmo. 2014. “Capital Requirements in a Quantitative Model of Banking Industry Dynamics.”Mimeo.
Dávila, E. and A. Walther. 2018. “Does Size Matter? Bailouts with Large and Small Banks.”
Mimeo.
Davis, D., O. Korenok, J. Lightle, and E.S. Prescott. 2018. “Liquidity Requirements and the
Interbank Loan Market: An Experimental Investigation.” Cleveland Fed Working Paper
18-10.
Demyanyk, Y. and E. Loutskina. 2016. “Mortgage Companies and Regulatory Arbitrage.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 122(2), pp. 328-351.
Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.”Journal
of Political Economy, 91(3), pp. 401-419.
Diamond, D. and A. Kashyap. 2016. “Liquidity Requirements, Liquidity Choice, and Financial Stability.”In The Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2 (eds. J. Taylor and H.
Uhlig).
Dobson, W. and A. Kashyap. 2006. “The Contradiction in China’s Gradualist Banking Reforms.”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2006, pp. 103-148.
Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl. 2017. “The Deposits Channel of Monetary Policy.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), pp. 1819-1876.
Elliott, D., A. Kroeber, and Y. Qiao. 2015. “Shadow Banking in China: A Primer.”Brookings
Economic Studies.
Farhi, E., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski. 2007. “A Theory of Liquidity and Regulation of
Financial Intermediation.”NBER Working Paper No. 12959.
Farhi, E., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski. 2009. “A Theory of Liquidity and Regulation of
Financial Intermediation.”Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), pp. 973-992.
Frydman, C., E. Hilt, and L. Zhou. 2015. “Economic E¤ects of Early Shadow Banks: Trust
Companies and the Panic of 1907.”Journal of Political Economy, 123(4), pp. 902-940.
Gorton, G. and T. Muir. 2016. “Mobile Collateral versus Immobile Collateral.”BIS Working
Paper No. 561.

35

Gorton, G. and E. Tallman. 2016. “How Did Pre-Fed Banking Panics End?”NBER Working
Paper 22036.
Hachem, K. 2018. “Shadow Banking in China.”Forthcoming in Annual Review of Financial
Economics.
Harris, M., C. Opp, and M. Opp. 2014. “Higher Capital Requirements, Safer Banks? Macroprudential Regulation in a Competitive Financial System.”Mimeo.
Huang, J. 2015. “Banking and Shadow Banking.”Mimeo.
Jin, H. and C. Xiong. 2018. “Financial Openness, Bank Capital Flows, and the E¤ectiveness
of Macroprudential Policies.”Mimeo.
Mitchener, K. and G. Richardson. 2016. “Network Contagion and Interbank Ampli…cation
During the Great Depression.”Forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy.
Plantin, G. 2015. “Shadow Banking and Bank Capital Regulation.” Review of Financial
Studies, 28(1), pp. 146-175.
Song, Z. and W. Xiong. 2018. “Risks in China’s Financial System.”Forthcoming in Annual
Review of Financial Economics.
Van den Heuvel, S. 2016. “The Welfare E¤ects of Bank Liquidity and Capital Requirements.”
Mimeo.

36

Figure 1
Interbank Network in China, Net Flows

Notes: Based on main sample. Shareholding banks are the JSCBs.

Table 1
Measures of Bank Importance on Interbank Market

Policy Banks
Big Four
JSCBs
City Banks
Rural Banks
Rural Co-ops
Foreign Banks
Other

Eigen-Centrality
Elasticity
Main Sample
June 20
Out
In
Out In
1.00
0.01
1.00 0.07
0.572
0.97
0.23
0.56 0.54
0.287
0.67
0.71
0.47 1.00
0.078
0.77
1.00
0.33 0.95
0.037
0.37
0.34
0.20 0.29
0.018
0.18
0.20
0.11 0.12
0.002
0.08
0.04
0.02 0.06
0.006
0.97
0.73
0.93 0.73
0.000

Notes: Out is based on lending. In is based on borrowing. Last
column is elasticity of total lending by interbank market with
respect to money brought into market by node.

37

Table 2
Calibration Results

Average Interbank Rate ( i`L + (1
Small Bank WMPs (Wj )
Big Bank WMPs (Wk )
Big Bank Funding Share (Xk )
Big Bank Loan-to-Deposit Ratio (1
Credit-to-Savings Ratio (1

) ihL )

Rk
)
Xk

Rk )

Rj

(1)
Model
= 0:14

(2)
Data
2007

(3)
Model
= 0:25

(4)
Data
2014

3.35%
0.03
0.01
0.52
58%

3.1%
NA
NA
0.55
62%

3.6%
0.10
0.05
0.45
70%

3.6%
0.10
0.05
0.45
70%

72.1%

65%

75.3%

75%

Notes: We target the 2014 values of all variables in this table. The 2007 values in (1) are generated
by the calibrated model keeping all parameters except

unchanged. NA denotes negligible issuance.

Table 3
Pairwise Correlations
iL
j

k

j

k

j

k

0.456
(0.077)
0.329
0.736
(0.095) (0.052)
0.259
0.550
-0.152
(0.093) (0.088) (0.147)

Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.

38

Table 4
Estimation Results
Panel A: Parameter Values
Model with Model with Model with Model with
only
only iA
only
, iA ,
0.0680
(3.60)
-

iA

j

104

k

104

-

-

-

0.0551
(1.44)
-

3.12
(1.91)
2.48
(1.65)

6.12
(1.17)
5.68
(2.68)

0.0006
(1.33)
6.36
(1.76)
2.38
(1.55)

0.0281
(7.40)
0.0004
(10.40)
0.0052
(11.96)
0.0013
(0.15)
0.4436
(12.32)

Panel B: Pairwise Correlations
Model with Model with Model with Model with
only
only iA
only
, iA ,
corr iL ; j
corr (iL ; k )
corr iL ; j
corr j ; k
corr j ; j
corr k ; j

k

k
k

0.475
0.318
0.237
0.141
0.811
-0.465

0.115
0.411
-0.227
0.051
0.662
-0.714

-0.008
-0.002
-0.006
-0.004
0.932
-0.367

0.458
0.331
0.263
0.730
0.565
-0.151

Data
0.456
0.329
0.259
0.736
0.550
-0.152

Notes: Panel A reports the estimated parameter values. Bootstrapped t-statistics are in parentheses.
Columns 1 to 4 in Panel B report the simulated correlations using the estimated parameter values in
each model. Column 5 in Panel B reports the correlations in the data as per Table 3.

39

Appendix A –Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
By contradiction. Suppose

> 0. If

j

> 0, then Rj = 0 so (4) implies iL =

X

. Substituting

2

2

1
A)
into (9) then implies j > 0 if and only if < (1+iX
1 (where we have used Xj = X
in symmetric equilibrium). If instead j = 0, then (7) implies iL = (1 + iA )2 1. Substituting
into (9) then implies j > 0 if and only if < 1X (1 + iA )2 1
2 . The condition for
max 1 ; 2 completes the proof.
1 > 2 is also the condition for j > 0. De…ning

Proof of Proposition 2
With

= 0, the equilibrium is characterized by (4), (7), and:
j

j

Rj

X

!

j

=

j

2 1

= 0 with complementary slackness

instead of j = 2 1j j .
)
( )
Both produce j = 0 if
=
0
so
the
re…nement
only
applies
if
>
0.
Return
to
j
j
1
equations (8) and (9) with = 0 and
j > 0. If j > 0, then j > 0. This implies j = 1
which con…rms j > 0. If j = 0, then 1j = 0j . This implies j 2 [0; 1]. However, any
j 2 (0; 1] would return j > 0, violating j = 0. We thus eliminate j = 0 by re…nement.
Instead,
j > 0 is associated with j > 0 and thus j = 1. For this reason, we write
j
j = 2(1 ) . We can now proceed with the rest of the proof. There are two cases:
There is an implicit re…nement here since we are writing

j

=

j

2(1

= 0 and 1 + iL = (1 + iA )2 . Equation (4) then pins down Rj . To
[(1+iA )2 1]
ensure that Rj
X ! j is satis…ed, we need
e 1 . We have
X
now established j = 0 if
e1.

1. If

j

= 0, then

j

2. If j > 0, then complementary slackness implies Rj =
X !
the other equilibrium conditions, we …nd that j > 0 delivers:
2

iL =

! (1 + iA )2
2!

1

2 1

+2

1

j

. Combining with

X

Verifying j > 0 is equivalent to verifying 1 + iL < (1 + iA )2 . This reduces to
If e 1 0, then we have established j > 0 with j = 1 for any > e 1 .
40

(22)
> e1.

De…ning e = max fe 1 ; 0g completes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 3

Consider
= 0. If j = 0, then (7) implies iL = (1 + iA )2 1 which is the highest
feasible interbank rate. If instead j > 0, then the liquidity rule binds. In particular,
Rj = (Xj
= 0. We can then conclude iL = X from
j Wj ) which is just Rj = 0 when
equation (4). Note that j > 0 is veri…ed if and only if X < (1 + iA )2 1.
Based on the results so far, we can see that the interbank rate at = 0 is independent
of . Let iL0 denote the interbank rate at = 0. Let iL1 ( ) denote the interbank rate
Rj1 ( )
, where
at some > 0, allowing for any
0. From (4), we know iL1 ( ) = X
Rj1 ( ) is reserve holdings at the > 0 being considered. The rest of the proof proceeds
by contradiction. In particular, suppose iL1 ( ) > iL0 . Then = 0 must be associated with
j > 0, otherwise iL0 would be the highest feasible interbank rate and the supposition would
Rj1 ( )
. The only way to get
be incorrect. We can thus write iL0 = X and iL1 ( ) = iL0
iL1 ( ) > iL0 is then Rj1 ( ) < 0 which is impossible. We can now conclude iL0 > iL1 ( ).
The result on total credit follows immediately. Total credit equals X Rj , with Rj
as per (4). Therefore, under
> 0, combinations of
and that deliver higher iL in
equilibrium also deliver higher total credit. If instead = 0, then total credit is constant
and independent of either or . Either way then, total credit does not increase.

Proof of Proposition 4
Start with general . The derivatives of the big bank’s objective function are:
@
@

k
k

_

2! 1
1

@ k
_ Rk
@ihL

"

k

h Xk

"

(1 + iA )2
1

(1 + iA )2
1

1

1

ihL

"
(1 + iA )2
@Rk
+
@ k
1

ihL

#

#

"
@Rk
(1 + iA )2
+
1
@ihL

1

1

Xk

Xk

It will be convenient to reduce these derivatives to a core set of variables ( j ,
j > 0, then the complementary slackness in equation (13) implies:
Rj =
With

2

= 0 and

j

=

j,

Xj

!

j

equations (10) and (11) are:

41

h
h iL

h
h iL

k,

#

#

@Xk
@ k

@Xk
@ihL

and ihL ). If

(23)

Xj = 1

+

0

Xk =

+

0

1

1

j

(24)

k

k

(25)

j

Substitute (23) to (25) into equation (12) to write:
Rk =

0 h

+ (1

+

0)

+

h

1

k

+ !

j

ihL

j

(26)

Finally, combine equations (14) and (15) to get:

j

@
@

We can now write

k

1

=

1

h

@ k
@ih
L

We can also write

ihL

k
k

=

1

ihL

#

(27)

= 0 as:
(1 + iA )2

+

1

0

+

[

!+

2 +
(1

2
1

2! 1

+

)]

(1 + iA )2

(1 h +
2(1 )

1

(1
2(1

)

0)

1

1

0 1

2(1

)

2 +

+ !

(1
2(1

)

!+

)

+

1

j

1

2(1

)

1

Note that the second order conditions are:
@2 k
=
@ ( k )2

@
For

@2

k
2

@ ( ih
L)

(28)

(29)

!+

)

+

@2

) ihL

(1

1 j

= 0 as:
+

1

"
) (1 + iA )2
1

(1
=
2 1

k

2
ihL

=

2 (1

2

@Xk
@ k
)

h

h

+

+

2 1

!<0

@Xk @Xk
+ 2 (1
@ihL @ihL

< 0, we need:
@Rk
<
@ihL

2 (1

or, equivalently:
42

@Xk @Xk
) @ihL @ihL

)

@Rk
@ihL

k

j

1

This is certainly true for
take up in Proposition 5.

+
1

(!

1)

+

2

1
(1

)

= 0. It is also true for

2
1

>

4 1

= ! which is the other case we will

1

Remark 1 If the big bank’s inequality constraints are non-binding, the equilibrium is a triple
h
that solves (27), (28), and (29). It must then be veri…ed that the solution to
j ; k ; iL
these equations satis…es k 0 along with Rk > Xk and j > 0. The big bank is technically
indi¤erent between any k 2 [0; 1] if its liquidity rule is slack so, for analytical convenience,
consider k = 0. We also need to check Wj
Xj and Wk
Xk so that deposits are non`
negative. Finally, we want to check that iL = 0 does not result in a liquidity shortage when
the big bank realizes ` at t = 1.
The rest of this proof focuses on = 0. Notice
main text, we also want k = 0. Subbing = 0 and

1

"

1

h+

(1 + iA )2
(1

ihL

j
j

= 0 from (27). As discussed in the
= k = 0 into (28) and (29) yields:

1

#

0

ihL = 0

)

(1
(1 + iA )2 1
+
=
2 (1
)
2

0)

(30)

(31)

To verify k = 0, we must verify that (30) holds when ihL is given by (31). This requires
either 1 = 0 or:
=

1
0

2

1

h

+

2

2

(1 + iA )

1

(1

) (1
2

0)

(32)

0

In other words, we can use either 1 = 0 or the combination of 1 > 0 and =
to get k
exactly zero at = 0. Note that Wj Xj and Wk Xk are trivially true with j = k = 0.
We now need to check Rk > Xk and j > 0. Using (14) and (31), rewrite j > 0 as:
(1 + iA )2
1

1

>

(1

0)

(33)

Note that condition (33) is also su¢ cient for
> 0. With j > 0 veri…ed, we can substitute
= 0 into equation (23) to get Rj = 0. The next step is to check Rk > Xk which is simply
Rk > 0 at = 0. Recall that Rk is given by equation (26). Use = 0 and j = k = 0 along
with ihL as per (31) to rewrite equation (26) as:
43

Rk =

h

0+

(1

0)

(1 + iA )2 1
2 (1
)

(1

0)

2

(34)

The condition for Rk > 0 is therefore:
(1 + iA )2
1

1

<

+

2

0 h

(35)

The last step is to check that there is su¢ cient liquidity at t = 1 when the big bank’s
liquidity shock is low. The demand for liquidity in this case will be Xj + ` Xk . The supply
of liquidity will be Rj + Rk since we have …xed i`L = 0. We already know j = k = 0 at
= 0. Therefore, Xj = 1
0 and Xk = 0 . We also know Rj = 0 and Rk as per (34).
Therefore, Rj + Rk
Xj + ` Xk can be rewritten as:
(1 + iA )2
1

2

1

0

(

`)

h

(1

0)

(36)

Condition (36) is stricter than (35) so we can drop (35). We now just need to make sure
that conditions (33) and (36) are not mutually exclusive. Using
) h , this
` + (1
requires:
1
0
(37)
` < 1
h
+
(1
0
0)
The right-hand side of (37) is positive if and only if:
>

1 2 0
1
0

(38)

Therefore, with ` su¢ ciently low and su¢ ciently high, conditions (33) and (36) de…ne a
non-empty interval for iA , completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 5
Fixed Funding Share Impose = and 1 = 0 on equations (27), (28), and (29). The
resulting system can be written as k = 0 and:

j

ihL =

(1 + iA )2

=
2

1

+!

(1 + iA )2
2

1

+!

1

1
2

(1
44

)

2

"

2

(1
1
1

(39)
)

+!

2

#

(40)

With 1 = 0 in equations (24) and (25), the funding shares are Xj = 1
Impose along with = on equations (23) and (26) to get:
Rk =

h 0

+!

Rj + Rk = (1

0)

0

and Xk =

0.

ihL

j

+

ihL

h 0

where j and ihL are given by (39) and (40) respectively. We now need to go through all the
steps in Remark 1 to establish the equilibrium for = and …xed funding shares. Using
equations (14) and (40), we can see that j > 0 is trivially true. Using k = 0 and Xk = 0 ,
we can also see that Wk Xk is trivially true. The condition for Wj Xj is:
(1 + iA )2
1

2 (1

1

The conditions for Rk > Xk and Rj + Rk
(1 + iA )2
1
(1 + iA )2
1

1

2

"

0)

+

Xj +

1

<

2 (

1

+!

2

1

(1

>

0)

"

(41)

`) 0

(42)

(1

)(

(1

)

Now, for the interbank rate to increase when moving from
exceed (31). Equivalently, we need:
(1 + iA )2
1

)

#

are respectively:

` Xk

2

1

! (1

h

+!

1

2

1+

2
!

`) 0

h

= 0 to

= , we need (40) to

#

(44)

1
2

(43)

(1

)

We must now collect all the conditions involved in the
= 0 and
= equilibria and
make sure they are mutually consistent. There are two lowerbounds on iA , namely (33) and
(44). Condition (44) is clearly stricter so it is the relevant lowerbound. There are also four
upperbounds on iA , namely (36), (41), (42), and (43). For the lowerbound in (44) to not
violate any of these upperbounds, we need:
1
! (1

)

<

2

min

(

`) 0

h

(1

0)

1 ( h
;
2
(1

`) 0
0)

1

This inequality is only possible if the right-hand side is positive. Therefore, we need:

45

`

< 1

1
min f 0 + (1

0
0) ;

(1 +

(45)

h

0 )g

Once again, the right-hand side must be positive so we need:
1 2 0 1
;
1
0 1+

> max

0

(46)

0

Notice that (45) and (46) are just re…nements of (37) and (38). We can now conclude that the
model with …xed funding shares generates the desired results under the following conditions:
su¢ ciently high, ` and ! su¢ ciently low, and iA within an intermediate range.
Endogenous Funding Share Return to equations (27), (28), and (29). Impose
and 1 = ! with =
as per (32). Combine to get:

ihL =

(1 + iA )2
1

k

=

2
1

1

2(1

)+

2
1

(1 )
2

h

(1

0)

2

!

+

+

+

!

!
2(1

!

2

)

2 1

2+

2(1

(1+iA )2 1
1

1

1

(1+iA )2 1
2(1 )

+

!

=

3

! (1 0 )
2 [2(1 )+ ! ]
!
)+

(47)

!

! h
iL
1

i

(48)

We now need to go through the steps in Remark 1 to establish the equilibrium for =
and endogenous funding shares. The expressions here are more complicated so we proceed
by …nding one value of iA that satis…es all the steps in Remark 1. A continuity argument
will then allow us to conclude that all the steps are satis…ed for a non-empty range of iA .
Consider iA such that:

(1 + iA )2
1

Substituting into (32) then pins down
=

1

(49)

=

as:
(1

) 1

h
0

+

2

(50)

From the proof of Proposition 4, we already have (33) and (36) as restrictions on iA . We
also have (37) as an upperbound on ` and (38) as a lowerbound on . It is easy to see that
iA as de…ned in (49) satis…es (33). For (49) to also satisfy (36), we need:

46

2
0
2 0 + (2

< 1

`

>

(51)

h

0)

2 3 0
2
0

(52)

Conditions (51) and (52) are stricter than (37) and (38). We can thus drop (37) and (38).
The …rst step is to verify
(1 + iA )2
1

j

> 0. Use (14) and (47) to write

1

"

1+

2

+

2 1
!

2

(1

#

!

)

j

> 0 as:

(1

>

0)

This is true by condition (33).
The second step is to verify
(1 + iA )
1
Using iA as per (49) and

2

k

> 0. Substituting (47) into (48), we see that we need:
2

14
1

2(1
!

)

2

+

(1

)

3

5<

(1

0)

(53)

as per (50):
1
! (1

)

<

2

2 1
0|

h

0

1
2

0

{z

call this Z1

(54)
}

If Z1 > 0, then (54) requires ! su¢ ciently low. Note that Z1 > 0 can be made true for
2 (3 ) h
any 0 2 (0; 1) by assuming < 2 (1
. This is another
h ) or, equivalently, ` <
2
positive ceiling on ` provided > 3
.
h
The third step is to verify Rk > Xk . Use

Rk =

Xk =

0

+!

h k

0 h

and

=

+!
!

k

1

= ! to rewrite (25) and (26) as:
(55)

j

h

ihL

j

(56)

Therefore, Rk > Xk requires:
ihL <

0

h

+

!

h
k

47

j

+

!
j

Use (48) to replace
"

! (1
1+
2 1
"

"

)

##

h

2 1

2

to replace

=

2 1

! (1
0+
2 2 1

h

<

and (27) with

k

+ !
#
!
0)
!

) (1
+

j:

ihL
(1 + iA )2
2

1

"

3

#

h

2 1

+

4

"

!

1

Now use (47) to replace ihL and rearrange to isolate iA :
(1 + iA )2
1
"
2 0 h
<
1
+

"

1

2

2 1
3
+
2
! (1

h

+

2 1
"

h

2

!

!
!
2 1

0

2

!
+
)
4
(1
2
"

0)

(1
1
#"

)

h

2

! (1
2
1
##
)

1+

2

3 ! (1
0) 1 +
4
1

+ (1

3

+
#

)

We can simplify a bit further by using (32) to replace all instances of
like terms:
2

2

(1 + iA )
1
"

<

4

16
4

1

0

! (1

<

0

|

)
2 2
0

4

"

+

0

2

h
3

2

2

!
4

)

(1

)

h)

(1
2

0)

3

(1
(1

2

+

#"

)

)

h

+

3 !(1
2 (1

2

!
1

0

+

2

! (1
1+
2
1

)

+

1

then grouping

i 3

1

7
5

)

)

##

2

#

as per (50) then rearrange:
0)

+

(1

h

Condition (57) will be true for
rewrite Z2 > 0 as:

(1 )

! (1

h

(1 +
2

h

2

+

h

Substitute iA as per (49) and
1
! (1
"

h

!
1

"

+

1
0

i
2

h)

{z

call this Z2

!

h

+

2

1
! (1

(1

#

)

#"

0

h

##

`

+ (1

)

(57)

h)

}

su¢ ciently low if Z2 > 0. Use

48

1

2

h

to

2

(

h

2
`)

2

h

+

(2 + 3 0 ) (1
0 (2
0)

h)

(

`)

h

+

h

h

+

4 (1
0 (2

h)

<0

0)

Based on the roots of this quadratic, we can conclude that Z2 > 0 requires:

(

h

(2 + 3 0 ) (1
`) > h +
0 (2
0)

v
u
u1
t
2

h)

(2 + 3 0 )2 (1
6 h+
2
0)
0 (2

h
0

h)

!

(58)

Condition (58) is satis…ed by ` = 0 and = 1. The left-hand side is decreasing in ` and
increasing in so it follows that Z2 > 0 requires ` su¢ ciently low and su¢ ciently high.
The fourth step is to verify Wj
Wj Xj as:

Xj . Use Wj = !
1

j

and (24) with

1

= ! to rewrite

0

k

!

ihL

as per (47) to replace k . Substitute iA as per (49) and
(1 )
Rearrange to isolate all terms with !(1 ) on one side. The condition for Wj
Now use (48) with

1
! (1

)

"

2

2

+ (1

3

4

(1

h)

|

3

0)

"

2

2

+

h)
0

0
{z

1
+2
! (1

)

##

Xj becomes:

(59)

0

1

2

call this Z3

A su¢ cient condition for Z3 < 0, and hence Wj
The …fth step is to verify Wk

(1

as per (50).

}

Xj , is

Xk . Use Wk = !

k

0

2
.
3

and (55) to rewrite Wk

Xk as:

0
j

!

and ihL as per (47) to replace j . Substitute iA as per (49) and
(1 )
as per (50). Rearrange to isolate all terms with !(1 ) on one side. The condition for
Wk Xk becomes:
Now use (27) with

=

49

1
! (1
2

"

)

(1

h)

1

2

3

0

0

"

1
1
2

0

|

h
0

1

3

2 1
+
! (1

{z

)

##

(60)

0

}

call this Z4

Condition (60) will be true for ! su¢ ciently low if Z4 > 0. Use the de…nition of
Z4 > 0 as:
( h
2 0 ) > h 0 (1 2 0 ) 2 (1
1)
` ) 0 (1
h ) (3 0
If

0

1
,
2

then (61) is always true. If

`

h ) (3 0
0

(61)

< 12 , then (61) reduces to:

0

1 2 (1

<

to rewrite

(1

1)
h

2 0)

(1

)

This is a positive ceiling on ` provided > 1 2(1h 0h(1)(320 0 )1) with
is guaranteed by ` su¢ ciently low, su¢ ciently high, and 0 > 13 .

0

> 13 . Therefore, (61)

The sixth step is to verify feasibility of i`L = 0. This requires Rj + Rk
(23) with = to replace Rj . The desired inequality becomes:
Rk

` Xk

+!

Xj + ` Xk . Use

j

Substituting Xk and Rk as per equations (55) and (56):
h

ihL

`
0

+!

k

j

Use (48) to replace k . Also use (27) with = to replace j . Rearrange to isolate ihL then
use (47) to replace ihL . Substitute iA as per (49) and
as per (50). Rearrange to isolate all
(1 )
terms with !(1 ) on one side. The feasibility condition for i`L = 0 becomes:
1
! (1

)

2
4

(5

0)

4

+ 12

h
0

(
h

`)

h

+ 1

2(

Condition (62) will be true for
Z5 > 0 as:

h

h

!

1
`) 0

h

i

2

1

(1 )

0

1

i 3

+

2

!(1

)

5

"
3
(1
4
|

2
h)

h

`

{z

0

call this Z5

su¢ ciently low if Z5 > 0. Use the de…nition of

50

2

#

}

(62)

to rewrite

2

(

2
`)

h

2

h

+

( +

0 ) (1

h)

(

`)

h

+

h

h

+

2 (1

0

h)

<0

0

Based on the roots of this quadratic, we can conclude that Z5 > 0 requires:

`

<

2s

1 4
2

2

h

(1

h)

+

( +

2

0)

2

(1

( +

h)

0 ) (1

h)
h

2
0

(1

0

This is a positive upperbound on ` provided
su¢ ciently high.
` su¢ ciently low and

h (1
2(1

)2
h)

+1

0

Using iA as per (49) and

1
! (1

)

"

1

h
0

1

> (1

0)

"

+

)5

< 1. Therefore, Z5 > 0 requires

It now remains to check that the interbank rate increases when moving from
= . This requires (47) to exceed (31) or, equivalently:
(1 + iA )2
1

3

4 1

2 1

! (1

)2 1

+

!

+3 !

= 0 to

#

as per (50):

(1 2 0 ) 2 1
+
+
2 (1
! (1
0)

#

3
<
)
4 (1

The right-hand side is positive so (63) will be true for

!

2
0)

1

h

+

0

2

(63)

su¢ ciently low.

Putting everything together, we have shown that the model with endogenous funding
shares generates the desired results under the following conditions:
su¢ ciently high, `
and ! su¢ ciently low, 0 2 13 ; 23 , and iA as per (49). The results then extend to a non-empty
range of iA by continuity.
Comparison We now compare the interbank rate increases in the …xed share and endogenous share models. Notice from the proof of Proposition 4 that the interbank rate at = 0
is the same in both models. Therefore, we just need to show that the interbank rate in the
endogenous share model exceeds the interbank rate in the …xed share model at = . In
other words, we need to show that (47) exceeds (40) for a given set of parameters. This
reduces to:

51

(1 + iA )
1

2

2

14
1

2(1
!

)

2

+

(1

)

3

5<

(1

0)

which is exactly (53), where (53) was the condition for k > 0 at = in the endogenous
share model. To complete the proof, we must now show that there are indeed parameters that
satisfy the conditions in both models. For = 0, we imposed conditions (33) and (36) along
with su¢ ciently high and ` su¢ ciently low. These conditions applied to both models. For
= in the …xed share model, we also imposed conditions (41), (42), (43), and (44) along
with ! su¢ ciently low. For = in the endogenous share model, we added 0 2 13 ; 23 and
iA in the neighborhood of (49). In (51) and (52), we showed that su¢ ciently high and `
su¢ ciently low make (49) satisfy condition (36). We have also shown that condition (44) is
stricter than condition (33). Therefore, we just need to show that (49) satis…es conditions
(41), (42), (43), and (44). Substituting iA as per (49) into these conditions produces the
following inequalities which we must check:
2

1
! (1
`

1
! (1

)

1

)

>

h

1
! (1

0

1)
0)

(64)

h

(65)

1
(1 + 2 0 )

< 1

2(

(2
4 (1

`) 0

<

2

(

h

`) 0

1

(66)

2

)

<

0

2 (1

0)

(67)

A su¢ cient condition for (64) is 0 12 which is still consistent with 0 2 13 ; 23 . Condition
(65) is just another positive upperbound on ` provided > 1+21 0 . In other words, (65)
is satis…ed by ` su¢ ciently low and su¢ ciently high.
h Condition
i (66) will be true for !
1
su¢ ciently low if ( h
or, equivalently, ` < 1
>1
`) 0 >
h with
0 which
0+
again means ` su¢ ciently low and su¢ ciently high. Finally, condition (67) is clearly
satis…ed by ! su¢ ciently low.

Proof of Proposition 6
Evaluate (27) at

=

then subtract (48) to get:

52

sign
j

k

=

"

(1 + iA )2
1

(1

1

0)

#

"

(1 + iA )2
+2
1

1

ihL

#

The expression in the …rst set of square brackets is positive by condition (33). The expression
in the second set of square brackets is proportional to j . The proof of Proposition 5
established j > 0. Therefore, j > k at = .
Now consider total credit:
TC

1

Rj

Rk

Use market clearing as per (12) to replace Rj + Rk :
TC = 1

Xj

h Xk

+ ihL

Use (24) and (25) to replace Xj and Xk :
TC = 1

h

0

+

h

1

j

Proposition 5 showed ihL = > ihL =0 . We also know
= . Therefore, we can conclude T Cj = > T Cj =0 .

j

=

k

k

+ ihL

= 0 at

= 0 and

j

>

k

at

Finally, we want to show that the loan-to-deposit ratios of big and small banks converge.
The equilibrium has j = 1, meaning that small banks move all DLPs (and the associated
investments) o¤-balance-sheet. The loan-to-deposit ratio of the representative small bank is
R
then j 1 Xj jWj . The equilibrium also has k = 0, meaning that the big bank records
Rk
everything on-balance-sheet. Its loan-to-deposit ratio is then k
1 X
. Proposition
k
4 established Rk > 0 = Rj at
= 0 so it follows that k j =0 < 1 = j j =0 . To show
convergence, we just need to show k j = > k j =0 since j j = < j j =0 follows immediately
from equation (23). Use Xj + Xk = 1 along with the de…nition of k to rewrite (12) as:
ihL = +
We know ihL
h

=

> ihL
(1

=0

(1

h

k)

Xk

Rj

so it must be the case that:

kj =

Proposition 4 also established
implies Xk = 0 at = 0 so:

) Xk j
j

=

=

Rj j

k

= 0 at

=

53

>

h

(1

k j =0 )

Xk j

=0

= 0. Substituting into equation (25) then

kj =

Xk j

=

k j =0

0

Rj j

>

=

[1

(

0

|

` )]

h

Xk j

1

=

0

{z

}

call this Z6
X j

1 for any
We have shown j > k at = so equation (25) also implies k 0 =
Therefore, Z6 0 will be su¢ cient for k j = > k j =0 . If 1 = 0, then Z6 _ Rj j =
0 as:
1 = !, then we can rewrite Z6
1

!

0

1

(

`)

h

k

!

j

1

0.
0. If

(68)

k

where j is given by (27) with
= and k is given by (48). Use these expressions to
substitute out j and k then use equation (47) to substitute out ihL . Evaluate iA at (49) and
at (50) to rewrite (68) as:
4

1

(1

0)

! (1
2

! (1
4
1

)
)

+ (2
|

2 (1
|

3 0 ) + (1

4

h)

{z

0

call this e (

0)

3

0

0
(

}

0)

6

3

0

}

o
e
A su¢ cient condition for this is min
( 0) ; ( 0)
0. Notice 0 ( ) < 0 and e 0 ( ) < 0.
n
o
n
o
2
1
e 1
e 2
>
0
and
min
< 0. Therefore, there is a
;
;
Also notice min
2
2
3
3
threshold

0

2

1 2
;
2 3

such that

0

n

{z

call this

2 0 ) + (1

2

h)

0

guarantees Z6

54

0.

Appendix B –Deposit and DLP Demands
Here we sketch a simple household maximization problem which generates the demands in
equations (1) and (2). There is a continuum of ex ante identical households indexed by
i 2 [0; 1]. Each household is endowed with X units of funding. Let Dij and Wij denote the
deposits and DLPs purchased by household i from bank j, where:
X

(Dij + Wij )

(69)

X

j

Assume that buying Wij entails a transaction cost of 2!1 0 Wij2 , where ! 0 > 0.14 As per the
main text, the interest rate on the DLP is zero if withdrawn early and j otherwise. The
interest rate on deposits is always zero and the average probability of early withdrawal is
. The household requires subsistence consumption of X in each state, above which it is
risk neutral. If the household were to bypass the banking system and invest in long-term
projects directly, it would fall below subsistence in the state where it needs to liquidate early
since long-term projects cannot be liquidated early. Therefore, the household does not invest
directly. Instead, it chooses Dij and Wij for each j to maximize:
X

Dij + 1 + 1

j

Wij

j

Wij2
2! 0

subject to (69) holding with equality.15 The …rst order condition with respect to Wij is:
Wij = 1

!0

(70)

j

Substituting (70) into (69) when the latter holds with equality gives the household’s total
P
deposit demand, Di
j Dij . The household is indi¤erent about the allocation of Di across
banks so we assume that it simply allocates Di uniformly. For J banks, this yields:
Dij =

X
J

1

!0
J

(J
j

14

1) 1
J

!0

1
J

1

X

x

(71)

x6=j

We interpret transactions costs broadly. They have been used in many literatures to parsimoniously
model imperfect substitutability between goods.
15
Here is how to recover the two-point distribution of idiosyncratic bank shocks in Section 2 from the
household withdrawals. Each household has probability ` of being hit by an idiosyncratic consumption
shock at t = 1 and having to withdraw all of its funding early. This results in each bank losing fraction `
of its deposits and DLPs at t = 1. Then h
` of the remaining 1
` households observe a sunspot and
withdraw all of their funding from 1
banks at t = 1. The h
banks involved
` households and 1
in the sunspot are chosen at random. Note
) h.
` + (1

55

With a unit mass of ex ante identical households, Wj = Wij and Dj = Dij . As J approaches a
unit mass of equally-weighted banks, (70) and (71) belong to the family of functions speci…ed
by (1) and (2).

56

Appendix C –Benchmark with Aggregate Shock
Consider the benchmark model (only price-taking banks) in Section 2 but with an aggregate
interbank shock. In particular, the interbank rate is i`L with probability
and ihL with
probability 1
. The expected interbank rate is ieL
i`L + (1
) ihL . We will specify how
i`L and ihL are determined shortly. In the meantime, banks take both as given.
The objective function of the representative bank simpli…es to:
j

= (1 + iA )2 (Xj

Rj ) + (1 + ieL ) Rj

Xj + ieL Xj + 1

j Wj

2

Xj2

This is identical to the benchmark model except with the expected interbank rate ieL instead
of the deterministic iL . Therefore, the …rst order conditions are still given by equations (7)
to (9) but with ieL in place of iL .
The goal is to show that ieL is always highest at = 0. The proof follows Proposition 3
but, to proceed, we must replace the deterministic market clearing condition (equation (4))
with conditions for each realization of the aggregate shock. We model the shock as a shock
to the aggregate demand for liquidity at t = 1. In particular, aggregate liquidity demand is
X " with probability and X with probability 1
, where " > 0. The interbank rates
are then i`L and ihL respectively. To avoid liquidity shortages, we need these rates to satisfy:
Rj + i`L

X

Rj + ihL

(72)

"

(73)

X

The equilibrium ihL solves (73) with equality. If ihL
the equilibrium i`L solves (72) with equality.

"

, then we can set i`L = 0. Otherwise,

Let ieL0 denote the expected interbank rate at = 0 and let ieL1 ( ) denote the expected
interbank rate at some > 0. Using (72) and (73), we can write:
ieL1 ( ) =

X

Rj1 ( )

min

X

Rj1 ( ) ; "

(74)

where Rj1 ( ) is reserve holdings at the > 0 being considered. The proof of ieL1 ( ) ieL0
proceeds by contradiction. In particular, suppose ieL1 ( ) > ieL0 . Then (7) implies j > 0 at
= 0. Complementary slackness then implies Rj = 0 at = 0 so we can write:

57

ieL =

X

min

(75)

X; "

Subtract (75) from (74) to get:
Rj1 ( )

ieL1 ( ) = ieL0
There are three cases. If "

X

+

min

X; "

Rj1 ( ) ; "

Rj1 ( )

Rj1 ( ) < " < X, then:
ieL1 ( ) = ieL0

If X

X

Rj1 ( ), then:
ieL1 ( ) = ieL0

If X

min

1

Rj1 ( )

X

"

", then:
1

ieL1 ( ) = ieL0

Rj1 ( )

In each case, ieL1 ( ) > ieL0 would require Rj1 ( ) < 0 which is impossible.

58

Appendix D –The June 20 Event in China
Here we study in more detail the dramatic spike in interbank interest rates that occurred
in China on June 20, 2013. The weighted average interbank repo rate hit an unprecedented
11.6% on this date. For comparison, the average across all other trading days in June 2013
was 6.4%, the average in the prior month (May) was 3.0%, and the average in the following
month (July) was 3.6%.
A common narrative in China is that interbank conditions tightened on June 20 because
the government wanted to discipline the market, either deliberately or by not responding
to some market pressures. An analysis of individual transactions will show whether or not
this narrative is correct. Our identi…cation strategy makes use of the fact that China’s three
policy banks participate in the interbank repo market. The policy banks are agents of the
government so the price and quantity of the liquidity that they provide is easily controlled
by the government. In contrast, China’s big commercial banks have become much more
independent since the market-oriented reforms discussed in Section 4.1. If China’s interbank
repo market tightened at the hands of the government, there should be at least some evidence
of restrictive behavior by policy banks relative to other banks on June 20.
The transaction-level data show that this was not the case. The policy banks provided
a lot of liquidity to the interbank market at fairly low interest rates, to the point that they
became the largest net lenders on June 20. The Big Four, on the other hand, were extremely
restrictive, amassing RMB 50 billion of net borrowing by the end of the trading day.
Figure D.1: Repo Lending (RMB Billions)
By Policy Banks
By Big Banks

Figure D.1 illustrates the sharp di¤erence between the Big Four and the policy banks
in terms of both quantity and price of liquidity provision on June 20. Notice the sizeable
increase in policy bank loans and the more moderate nature of policy bank interest rates.
59

Figure D.1 also reveals that much of the increase in policy bank lending on June 20 was
absorbed by the Big Four, a fact also visible from the ‡ow of funds depicted in Figure D.2.
Figure D.2: Interbank Network on June 20, Net Flows

Were big banks borrowing because they really needed liquidity? Two pieces of evidence
suggest no. First, the Big Four’s ratio of gross lending to gross borrowing was 0.7 on June
20, with 71% of the loans directed towards small banks. If the Big Four were in dire need
of liquidity, we would expect to see very little out‡ow. Second, the repo market activities of
big banks on June 20 involved a maturity mismatch. Overnight trades accounted for 96%
of big bank borrowing but only 83% of big bank lending to small banks. Roughly 80% of
policy bank lending to small banks was also at the overnight maturity. If big banks really
needed liquidity on June 20, we would expect the maturity of their lending to be closer to
the maturity of their borrowing. Instead, it was closer to the maturity o¤ered by policy
banks to borrower groups that policy banks and big banks had in common.
Figure D.3: Interbank Market Spreads

60

The left panel of Figure D.3 shows that big banks also commanded an abnormally high
interest rate spread on June 20. In particular, their weighted average lending rate was 266
basis points above their weighted average borrowing rate. This is high relative to other
banks: JSCBs and city banks commanded spreads of 113 and 46 basis points respectively. It
is also high relative to other days in the sample: on any other day in June 2013, the spread
commanded by big banks was between -40 and 58 basis points. Pricing among big banks was
also much more uniform than pricing among small banks, both on June 20 and throughout
our sample. To this point, we calculate the coe¢ cient of variation (CV) of overnight lending
rates o¤ered by banks in di¤erent groups and …nd that the CV among big banks was 61%
of the CV among JSCBs and 21% of the CV among city banks on June 20. Averaging over
all trading days in June 2013 yields similar …gures, namely 62% and 29% respectively.16
The right panel of Figure D.3 shows that JSCBs paid a lot more for non-policy bank loans
on June 20 than they did for policy bank loans.17 There were no major di¤erences in the
haircuts imposed by policy banks versus other lenders. It then stands to reason that JSCBs
would have liked a higher share of policy bank lending. Instead, they received 20% of what
policy banks lent on June 20, down from an average of 28% over the rest of the month. The
situation was similar for city and rural banks: they faced large price di¤erentials between
policy and non-policy bank loans yet their share of policy bank lending on June 20 was 22%,
well below an average of 47% over the rest of the month.
Taken together, the evidence presented in this appendix has identi…ed a concrete example
of price-setting by the Big Four. Speci…cally, the Big Four can and do change prices on
China’s interbank market, even controlling for government policy. China’s policy banks
provided a sizeable amount of liquidity on June 20 but interbank rates did not fall because
the funds were absorbed by the Big Four and re-intermediated at much higher interest rates.
16

We exclude lending rates charged to policy banks given the proximity of policy banks to the government.
For completeness, the overnight and 7 day maturities shown in the right panel of Figure D.3 were 94%
of JSCB borrowing on June 20. They were also 100% of JSCB borrowing from policy banks on this date.
17

61

Appendix E –Supplement to Table 1
This appendix explains how we calculated the elasticities in Table 1 of the main text.
Consider the N nodes in Figure 1. Let "+
i denote the money that node i brings into
the interbank market and let "i denote the money that node i takes out of the interbank
market. Also let yi;s denote the money that node i lends to node s on the interbank market.
The adding-up constraint for each node i is therefore:
X

yi;s + "i =

s

X

ys;i + "+
i

(76)

s

P
yi;s
.
It will be convenient to rewrite in matrix notation. De…ne yi
s yi;s + "i and mi;s
yi
+
+
Also de…ne an N N matrix M = (mi;s ) and N 1 vectors Y = (yi ) and E = "i . The
system of (76) for all i is just:
Y = M 0Y + E +
which can be rearranged to write:
Y = [I

M 0]

1

E+

(77)

where I is an N N identity matrix. Suppose the matrix M and the vector E + are …xed.
Then, for each node i, we can use (77) to calculate the elasticity of total lending by the
P
interbank market, s ys , to the money that i brings into the interbank market, "+
i .
yi;s
th
, where
To proceed, we need the matrix M . The (i; s) element of M is mi;s
yi
P
yi
s yi;s + "i . For yi;s , we use the average daily lending from node i to node s in June
2013, excluding June 20 and 21. The policy banks and the Big Four are net lenders so we
assume "i = 0 for each of them then use (76) to get their respective "+
i ’s. For each of the
other nodes, we assume that the money it brings into the interbank market ("+
i ) as a fraction
of what the Big Four brings equals the ratio of its deposits to the Big Four’s deposits in
2013. We can then use (76) to get "i for each of these other nodes.

62

Appendix F –WMP Issuance in China
This appendix provides further background on the issuance of WMPs in China. As discussed
in the main text, WMPs are an empirical counterpart to the DLPs in our theoretical model.
Proposition 6 predicts that all banks will issue DLPs in response to tighter liquidity regulation
but the DLPs issued by small banks will have higher interest rates than those issued by large
banks and the issuance of o¤-balance-sheet DLPs will be dominated by small banks.
The …rst column in Table F.1 shows that the realized returns on WMPs issued by the
Big Four were on average 24 basis points lower than the realized returns on WMPs issued by
small and medium-sized banks (SMBs). The regression uses product-level data from 2008 to
2014 from Wind, includes time dummies, and controls for WMP maturity. The second and
third columns of Table F.1 then show that realized returns relative to the expected ‡oors
and ceilings advertised at issuance were higher for Big Four WMPs than for the WMPs
issued by SMBs. Taken together with the …rst column, this suggests that the Big Four were
also more conservative in the range of returns they advertised to investors, with ceilings and
‡oors respectively averaging 29 and 110 basis points below those advertised by SMBs.
The data also corroborate the more aggressive issuance of o¤-balance-sheet WMPs by
SMBs. Between 2008 and 2014, the JSCBs accounted for 73% of all new WMP batches and
issued 57% of their batches without a guarantee. The Big Four issued only 46% of their
batches in this way. The gap in non-guaranteed intensity widens in the second half of the
sample, with the JSCBs at 62% and the Big Four at 43%. These estimates are based on
product counts since Wind does not yet have complete data on the total funds raised by
each product. However, using data from CBRC and the annual reports of the Big Four, we
estimate that SMBs (i.e., JSCBs and smaller) accounted for roughly 64% of non-guaranteed
WMP balances outstanding at the end of 2013.18 This conveys a consistent message with
the batch statistics.
These di¤erences between large and small banks arise because small banks are endogenously more constrained by liquidity regulation. Loan-to-deposit ratios based on average
balances during the year in the early stages of CBRC’s enforcement action provide a reasonable indicator of how constrained a bank would be by full implementation of the action.
Average balance data is tabulated in the net interest analysis of bank annual reports, not
the standard balance sheets that appear at the end of these reports.
Figure F.1 compares loan-to-deposit ratios based on average balance data (dashed lines)
18

The entire WMP balance in Bank of China’s annual report is described in the notes as an unconsolidated
balance yet the micro data in Wind includes several guaranteed batches for this bank that would not have
matured by the end of 2013. We therefore remove Bank of China and rescale the other banks in the Big
Four to back out our 64% estimate for small and medium-sized banks.

63

to those based on end-of-year data (solid lines). We plot ratios for the Big Four (blue) and
the JSCBs (red) from 2005 to 2014. The shaded area is the interquartile range of the endof-year ratios of the JSCBs. Data are from Bankscope and bank annual reports. Historical
data for city and rural banks is spotty, especially when it comes to average balances, so these
banks are excluded from the …gure.19
Figure F.1: Loan-to-Deposit Ratios

It is clear from Figure F.1 that the JSCBs would have been more constrained than the
Big Four as CBRC transitioned towards monitoring average balance ratios. First, there has
never been a sizeable di¤erence between the average balance and year-end loan-to-deposit
ratios of the Big Four. In contrast, the JSCBs had consistently higher average balance ratios
than year-end ratios prior to 2012, the …rst full year of average balance monitoring by CBRC.
Second, the Big Four had both ratios comfortably below 75% before CBRC heralded the era
of stricter and more frequent loan-to-deposit enforcement in 2008. This was not the case for
the JSCBs who, as a group, were well above 75% based on average balance data and very
close to 75% based on year-end data.20
19

One JSCB (Evergrowing Bank) is also excluded for similar reasons.
We make two comments here. First, banks whose loan-to-deposit ratios are materially lower at the
end of the year than on an average day during the year are window-dressing their year-end balance sheets.
Hachem (2018) discusses the practices used in China before 2008 and why these practices could not be used
to window-dress average balance ratios. Second, Figure F.1 shows that the loan-to-deposit ratio of the Big
Four has increased towards 75% since the beginning of the enforcement. In Section 4.3, we demonstrate
that much of this increase can be explained as a strategic response to increased competition from shadow
banking.
20

64

To provide formal evidence that o¤-balance-sheet issuance was driven by the bindingness
of liquidity regulation, we run panel regressions in Table F.2. We use bank-level data for each
bank in the Big Four and the JSCBs. The dependent variable is the log of non-guaranteed
WMP batches issued by bank i in year t scaled by the average balance of deposits at the bank
in that year. The main sample covers 2008 to 2010 inclusive. Recall that CBRC reached
its …nal goal of average balance monitoring in mid-2011, making 2010 the last full year in
which average balance ratios exhibit meaningful variation among constrained banks. In the
…rst column of Table F.2, we regress the dependent variable on the loan-to-deposit ratio of
bank i in year t, as measured using average balance data.21 All columns include year …xed
e¤ects. We also control for the maturity of the non-guaranteed WMPs issued by bank i in
year t. A bank that issues 3-month WMPs will issue twice as many WMP batches as a bank
that issues 6-month WMPs to raise the same amount of funding over the course of a year.
The bank with shorter-term WMPs will therefore have more batches, even if it is otherwise
identical to the bank with longer-term WMPs. Including maturity as a regressor controls
for this.
The results in the …rst column of Table F.2 con…rm that banks with higher average
balance ratios issued more non-guaranteed WMPs than banks with lower ratios. The second
column shows that this …nding is robust to controlling for the average return ‡oor advertised
by bank i when issuing non-guaranteed WMPs in year t. The third column shows that it
is also robust to including bank …xed e¤ects. In the fourth column, we extend the sample
to 2014. The coe¢ cient on the average balance ratio is still positive but its magnitude is
roughly one-third of the magnitudes in the columns based on the main sample, and it is only
statistically signi…cant at the 10% level. The extended sample gives us more observations,
and hence more degrees of freedom, to include the bank …xed e¤ects. However, as noted
earlier, the average balance ratio becomes a truncated indicator after 2010.
In the last two columns of Table F.2, we rerun the main sample regressions with the
average balance ratio decomposed into two components: the regulated ratio of bank i in
year t, as measured at the end of the year, and the degree of window-dressing by bank i
in year t, as measured by the percent di¤erence between the bank’s average balance and
regulated ratios.22 The degree of window-dressing is the indication of constraint in this
21

One may worry about reverse causality here. Speci…cally, the average balance ratio will decrease as the
bank issues non-guaranteed WMPs to move some business o¤-balance-sheet. However, this implies a negative
relationship between the dependent variable and the average balance ratio, which will bias the regression
against us.
22
We have to focus on the main sample in these columns as this is the sample where window-dressing
is an observable (i.e., the average balance ratio becomes the regulated ratio once CBRC begins monitoring
average balance ratios).

65

decomposition. The results in the last two columns corroborate what we found earlier:
banks more constrained by CBRC’s impending monitoring of average balance ratios issued
more non-guaranteed WMPs than banks less constrained.
As a …nal exercise, we conduct Granger causality tests on total WMP issuance in Table
F.3 and …nd that the WMPs issued by the Big Four were a response to the WMP activities of small and medium-sized banks (SMBs). We use di¤erenced monthly data on WMP
batches between January 2008 and September 2014 to run the tests. The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) selects a VAR with 21 lags. As shown in Table F.3, the null hypothesis
that WMP issuance by SMBs does not Granger-cause WMP issuance by the Big Four is
rejected at 1% signi…cance. The opposite hypothesis that WMP issuance by the Big Four
does not Granger-cause WMP issuance by SMBs cannot be rejected at any reasonable level
of signi…cance. Using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) to select the number of lags
yields similar results, as do Granger causality tests based on other orders. The impetus for
WMP activity in China is therefore coming from the SMBs, who are also the constrained
banks and the banks more heavily involved in non-guaranteed issuance.

66

Table F.1: WMP Returns

realized
B4
Maturity
Observations
Year Dummies
Month Dummies
R-squared

r_gap_h

r_gap_l

-0.237*** 0.049*** 0.866***
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.025)
0.092*** -0.044*** -0.021***
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.003)
54,294
X
X
0.293

52,090
X
X
0.069

34,876
X
X
0.090

Notes: “realized” is the realized WMP return, “r_gap_h” is the realized
return less the ceiling expected by the bank at issuance, “r_gap_l” is the
realized return less the ‡oor expected by the bank at issuance. B4 is a
dummy for banks in the Big Four. Maturity is the maturity of the WMP.
Standard errors are in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

67

Table F.2: Non-Guaranteed WMP Issuance

LDR
Maturity

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

8.793***
(1.719)
-0.145***
(0.016)

9.764***
(2.623)
-0.138***
(0.018)
-0.171
(0.105)

8.815**
(3.283)
-0.181***
(0.042)
-0.135
(0.082)

2.720*
(1.381)
-0.045
(0.045)
-0.108
(0.089)

41
X

31
X

0.583

0.654

31
X
X
0.965

79
X
X
0.793

MinROR
WinDress
RegRatio
Observations
Year Dummies
Bank Dummies
R-squared

(5)

(6)

-0.136*** -0.184***
(0.022)
(0.052)
-0.171
-0.127
(0.097)
(0.099)
6.907*
6.179*
(3.583)
(2.938)
10.676***
8.175
(2.491)
(5.874)
31
X
0.658

31
X
X
0.963

Notes: The dependent variable is the log of the total number of non-guaranteed WMPs issued by a bank
in a year scaled by the average balance of deposits at the bank in that year. LDR is the loan-to-deposit
ratio based on average balances of a bank in a year. Maturity and MinROR are respectively the average
maturity and expected return ‡oor on non-guaranteed WMPs issued by a bank in a year. WinDress is
the percent di¤erence between the average balance and year-end loan-to-deposit ratios of a bank in a
year. RegRatio is the year-end ratio of a bank in a year. In all columns except (4), the sample period is
2008-2010. In column (4), the sample period is 2008-2014. Standard errors, clustered at the bank level,
are in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

68

Table F.3: Granger Causality Tests

H0 : SMB WMPs do not cause Big Four WMPs
Criteria

Order

F-statistic

P-value

AIC
BIC

21
1
3
6
9

3.737
17.707
15.276
11.514
2.295

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02

H0 : Big Four WMPs do not cause SMB WMPs
Criteria

Order

F-statistic

P-value

AIC
BIC

21
1
3
6
9

0.236
0.098
0.966
1.590
0.492

0.99
0.75
0.41
0.15
0.88

Notes: We use monthly di¤erenced data on WMP batches. AIC is the
Akaike Information Criterion, which helps select the lag order of a VAR
model for the Granger tests. BIC is the Bayesian Information Criterion.
AIC usually over-estimates the order with positive probability, whereas
BIC estimates the order consistently under fairly general conditions.
Thus, BIC is typically used as the main selection criterion.

69

Appendix G –Estimation Procedure
Let m = 1; :::; 6 index the empirical moments to be matched. The six moments are the six
correlations in Table 3.
1. Bootstrap: Let N denote the total number of random samples generated by bootstrap.
We set N = 500. Denote by gm;n the mth moment in the nth sample. We will target
PN
1
th
moment averaged across N samples.
n gm;n , the m
N

2. Denote by the vector of parameters to be estimated. Given , we can simulate the
model to generate the moments gm ( ). Denote by "m;n = gm ( ) gm;n the residual
for moment m in sample n. De…ne the weighting matrix (M M ) as:
N
1 X
W=
"m;n "Tm;n
N n

3. Minimizing the weighted sum of the distance between the empirical and simulated
moments:
b = arg min h ( )0 W 1 h ( )
where h ( ) is a vector with M elements and hm ( ) = gm ( )

1
N

PN
n

gm;n .

4. We use two-step Simulated Method of Moments. We set W to the identity matrix in
the …rst step and use the variance-covariance matrix of the residuals from the …rst-step
as the weighting matrix for the second-step estimation.
5. Repeat the above exercise 100 times to calculate the standard errors of the estimated
parameters.

70

