NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY ACCORDING TO HANK
Greg Kaplan
Benjamin Moll
Giovanni L. Violante
Working Paper 21897
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21897

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

We thank Yves Achdou, Mark Aguiar, Fernando Alvarez, Adrien Auclert, Jess Benhabib, Luca Dedola,
Emmanuel Farhi, Mark Gertler, Keith Kuester, David Lagakos, Emi Nakamura, Larry Schmidt, Jon
Steinsson, Mirko Wiederholt and seminar participants at various institutions. Damien Capelle and
Julia Fonseca provided superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21897.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Greg Kaplan, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy According to HANK
Greg Kaplan, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 21897
January 2016
JEL No. E0
ABSTRACT
We revisit the transmission mechanism of monetary policy for household consumption in a Heterogeneous
Agent New Keynesian (HANK) model. The model yields empirically realistic distributions of household
wealth and marginal propensities to consume because of two key features: multiple assets with different
degrees of liquidity and an idiosyncratic income process with leptokurtic income changes. In this environment,
the indirect effects of an unexpected cut in interest rates, which operate through a general equilibrium
increase in labor demand, far outweigh direct effects such as intertemporal substitution. This finding
is in stark contrast to small- and medium-scale Representative Agent New Keynesian (RANK) economies,
where intertemporal substitution drives virtually all of the transmission from interest rates to consumption.

Greg Kaplan
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gkaplan@princeton.edu
Benjamin Moll
Department of Economics
Princeton University
106 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
moll@princeton.edu

Giovanni L. Violante
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1119
and NBER
glv2@nyu.edu

1

Introduction

A prerequisite for the successful conduct of monetary policy is a satisfactory understanding of the monetary transmission mechanism – the ensemble of economic forces
that link monetary policy to the aggregate performance of the economy. This paper is concerned with the transmission mechanism of monetary policy for the largest
component of GDP: household consumption.
Changes in interest rates may affect household consumption through both direct and
indirect effects. Direct effects are those that operate even in the absence of any change
in household labor income: when interest rates fall, intertemporal substitution induces
households to save less or borrow more, and therefore to increase their consumption
demand.1 In general equilibrium, additional indirect effects on consumption arise from
the expansion in labor demand, and thus in labor income, that emanates from the
direct effects of the original interest rate cut.
Understanding the monetary transmission mechanism requires an assessment of
the importance of these direct and indirect channels. The relative magnitude of these
effects is determined by how strongly household consumption responds to interest rate
and income changes.
Our first result concerns Representative Agent New Keynesian (RANK) models. In
these commonly used benchmark economies, the aggregate consumption response to a
change in interest rates is driven entirely by the Euler equation of the representative
household. This implies that for any reasonable parameterization, monetary policy
in RANK models works almost exclusively through intertemporal substitution: direct
effects account for the full impact of interest rate changes on the macroeconomy, and
indirect effects are negligible.2
But the idea that there are substantial direct effects of interest rate changes on aggregate consumption is questionable in light of empirical evidence. First, macroeconometric analysis of aggregate time-series data finds a small sensitivity of consumption to
changes in the interest rate after controlling for income (Campbell and Mankiw, 1989,
1991). Importantly, this finding does not necessarily imply that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is small, as other offsetting direct effects can be powerful. First,
simple consumption theory implies that an interest rate cut may have strong negative
1

Other direct effects of changes in interest rates include income effects, wealth effects, portfolio
reallocation, and cash-flow effects from changes in interest payments on debt and changes in borrowing
capacity. As we explain in the paper, in standard representative-agent New Keynesian economies, the
only direct effect is intertemporal substitution.
2
As we show in Section 2, this is true for any representative agent model featuring an Euler
equation, including medium-scale models with investment, government spending, habits, adjustment
costs, and other features useful to match various dimensions of the macro data.

1

income effects on the consumption of rich households. Second, micro survey data on
household portfolios show that a sizable fraction of households (between 1/4 and 1/3)
hold close to zero liquid wealth and face high borrowing costs (Kaplan et al., 2014).
Since these households are at a kink in their budget constraint, they are insensitive to
small changes in interest rates (consistent with evidence in Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002,
that non-asset holders do not respond to interest rate cuts). Third, these same survey data reveal vast inequality in wealth holdings and composition across households
(Diaz-Gimenez et al., 2011). Some households may react to an interest rate cut by
rebalancing their asset portfolio, rather than by saving less and consuming more.
The small indirect effects in RANK models follow from the fact that the representative agent is, in essence, a permanent income consumer and so is not responsive to transitory income changes. This type of consumption behavior is at odds with a vast macro
and micro empirical literature on “excess sensitivity” (Jappelli and Pistaferri, 2010).
The most compelling corroboration of this behavior is perhaps the quasi-experimental
evidence that uncovers (i) an aggregate quarterly marginal propensity to consume out
of unanticipated, transitory, small government transfers of around 25 percent (Johnson
et al., 2006; Parker et al., 2013) and (ii) a vast heterogeneity in consumption responses
across the population which is largely driven by the level and composition of wealth
(Misra and Surico, 2014; Cloyne and Surico, 2014).
Consequently, we argue that the relative strength of the direct and indirect channels
of monetary policy can only be gauged within a framework that contains a detailed
model of household consumption and household finances. To this end, we develop a
quantitative Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) model that combines two
leading workhorses of modern macroeconomics. On the supply side, we follow closely
the standard New Keynesian model by assuming that prices are set by monopolistically competitive producers that face nominal rigidities, in the form of quadratic price
adjustment costs, as in Rotemberg (1982). On the household side, we build on the
standard “Aiyagari-Huggett-İmrohoroğlu” incomplete market model with uninsurable
earnings risk, with two important modifications. First, we follow Kaplan and Violante
(2014) in assuming that households can save in two assets: a low-return liquid asset and
a high-return illiquid asset that incurs a transaction cost on deposits and withdrawals.
Second, households in our model face an idiosyncratic earnings process that generates
a leptokurtic distribution of annual earnings changes, consistent with recent evidence
in Guvenen et al. (2015). We parameterize the model to be consistent with the joint
distribution of earnings, and liquid and illiquid wealth, and thus with microeconomic
household consumption behavior.
Our main finding is that, in stark contrast to RANK economies, in our HANK

2

model the direct effects of interest rate shocks are small, while the indirect effects
are substantial. Monetary policy is effective only to the extent that it generates a
general equilibrium response of labor demand, and hence of household income. A large
body of time-series evidence finds that interest rate changes engineered by open-market
operations have sizable real effects on consumption.3 In our framework, by virtue of
general equilibrium effects, overall consumption responses can be as large as in the
data, even though the strength of the direct channel is modest.
Because of a failure of Ricardian equivalence, in HANK the consequences of monetary policy are intertwined with the fiscal response to a change in interest rates. When
the government is a major issuer of liquid obligations, as in our economy, a change in
the interest rate necessarily affects the intertemporal government budget constraint,
and generates some form of fiscal response. Unlike in a RANK model, the details of
this response, both in terms of timing and distributional burden across households,
matter a great deal for the overall effects of monetary policy and its direct-indirect
channel decomposition.4
These findings have a number of important implications. First, when direct effects
are dominant as in a RANK model, for a monetary authority to boost aggregate consumption it is sufficient to influence real rates: intertemporal substitution ensures that
consumption responds. In contrast, when this direct transmission mechanism is modest, as in HANK, the monetary authority must rely on general equilibrium feedbacks
that boost household income in order to influence aggregate consumption: besides the
usual labor demand channel, our paper emphasizes the companion role of fiscal policy.
Dependence on these indirect channels implies that the responsiveness of aggregate
consumption to monetary policy may be largely outside of the control of the monetary
authority. For instance, there is typically no explicit coordination between monetary
and fiscal policy, and it may therefore be difficult to guarantee a contemporary change
in aggregate consumption of a certain size. Moreover, even if the indirect channel is at
work, the monetary authority must be confident that a demand stimulus does indeed
lead to a rise in household labor income. The technology and labor market structure
implicit in the New Keynesian supply side of our model takes the mapping from goods
demand to household labor income for granted, but any modification that weakens this
relationship would dampen the potency of monetary policy.
In our concluding remarks, we discuss more broadly how the decomposition between
direct and indirect effects matters for the conduct of monetary policy. For example,
3

See for example Christiano et al. (2005) or the survey by Ramey (2015).
The importance of government debt for the monetary transmission mechanism is also emphasized
by Sterk and Tenreyro (2015) in a model with flexible prices and heterogeneous households where
open market operations have distributional wealth effects.
4

3

as we explain in ongoing work (Kaplan et al., 2016), forward guidance is typically less
powerful in HANK than is conventional monetary policy, in contrast to RANK models.
The extent of this difference depends crucially on whether the direct effect of monetary
policy is also the primary impulse setting in motion general equilibrium effects.
We are not the first to integrate incomplete markets and nominal rigidities, and
there is a burgeoning literature on this topic.5 Relative to this literature, our paper adds
an empirically realistic model of the consumption side of the economy by exploiting
state-of-the art ideas for modeling household consumption and the joint distribution
of income and wealth. The combination of a two-asset structure and a leptokurtic
earnings process generates two features of consumption behavior that are essential
for our finding that most of the monetary transmission mechanism is due to indirect
general equilibrium effects. First, the existence of illiquid assets enables us to match the
fraction of wealthy hand-to-mouth households observed in the data. These households
respond strongly to labor income changes and weakly to interest rate changes. Second,
the two-asset structure implies that, even for non hand-to-mouth households, a fall in
the liquid return does not necessarily lead to an increased desire to consume. Instead,
these households primarily rebalance their financial portfolios.
Additionally, the focus of our paper differs from that of earlier papers studying
monetary policy in the presence of incomplete markets (Gornemann et al., 2014; Auclert, 2014; McKay et al., 2015) in that we inspect the transmission mechanism of
conventional monetary policy and decompose it into direct and indirect general equilibrium effects.6 Our emphasis on general equilibrium effects is shared by Werning
(2015) who argues that, in a useful benchmark, direct and indirect channels exactly
offset so that the overall effect of interest rate changes on consumption is unchanged
relative to the representative agent benchmark. We add to his theoretical analysis an
assessment of the relative strength of these effects in a quantitatively realistic model,
where his theoretical results do not hold.
Our paper is also related to the literature that studies New Keynesian models with
limited heterogeneity, building on the spender-saver model of Campbell and Mankiw
(1989, 1991).7 The “spenders” in these models consume their entire income every
period and therefore share some similarities with our hand-to-mouth households in
that they do not respond to interest rate changes. However, these models also fea5

See Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011), Oh and Reis (2012), Ravn and Sterk (2012), McKay and Reis
(2013), Gornemann et al. (2014), Auclert (2014), McKay et al. (2015), Den Haan et al. (2015), Bayer
et al. (2015), and Werning (2015).
6
Work in progress by Luetticke (2015) also emphasizes that the intertemporal substitution channel
is small in incomplete market models.
7
See, e.g., Iacoviello (2005), Gali et al. (2007), Bilbiie (2008) and Challe et al. (2015).

4

ture “savers” who substitute intertemporally and are highly responsive to interest rate
changes. In contrast, in our model even high liquid-wealth households do not increase
consumption much in response to an interest rate cut due to portfolio reallocation
and negative income effects. We show that these spender-saver models feature a monetary transmission mechanism with large indirect effects only if parameterized with
an unrealistically large fraction of hand-to-mouth spenders. Our paper is also related
to Caballero and Farhi (2014) which proposes an alternative framework in which the
transmission of monetary policy works through general equilibrium effects on income
and asset values.8
Finally, we solve the model in continuous time building on Achdou et al. (2014). In
addition to imparting some notable computational advantages, continuous time provides a natural and parsimonious approach to modeling a leptokurtic earnings process:
random (Poisson) arrival of normally distributed jumps generates kurtosis in data observed at discrete time intervals. This process, estimated by matching targets from
Social Security Administration data, may prove useful in other contexts where an empirically realistic representation of household earning dynamics is vital.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the idea of decomposing the monetary transmission mechanism into direct and indirect effects, and
applies it to small- and medium-scale RANK models and spender-saver models. Section 3 lays out our HANK framework, and Section 4 discusses our parameterization.
Section 5 contains our main results. Section 6 concludes.

2

Monetary Policy in Benchmark New-Keynesian Models

In this section, we introduce a formal decomposition of the overall consumption response to an interest rate change into direct and indirect effects.9 Since this decomposition is instrumental to our analysis of the transmission of monetary policy
in our larger quantitative model, we begin by applying it to a series of stylized models of monetary policy. We first demonstrate that, in representative agent economies,
conventional monetary policy works almost exclusively through direct intertemporal
substitution, and that indirect general equilibrium effects are unimportant. Next, we
illustrate how the monetary transmission mechanism is affected by the presence of
non-Ricardian hand-to-mouth households: (i) introducing hand-to-mouth households
8

In our model, there is no distinction between “nominal” and “real” liquid assets. This is because
(i) in continuous time liquid assets have infinitely short maturity; and (ii) quadratic price adjustment
costs imply that the price level does not jump in response to shocks. As a result we abstract from
any potential nominal revaluation effects of monetary policy.
9
This section benefitted greatly from detailed comments by Emmanuel Farhi and some of the
results directly reflect those comments.

5

increases the relative importance of indirect general equilibrium effects; (ii) because
Ricardian equivalence breaks down, the overall effect of monetary policy now depends
on the fiscal response that necessarily arises because monetary policy affects the government budget constraint. Finally, we show that these insights carry over to richer
representative agent economies, such as typical medium-scale monetary DSGE models.
Appendix A contains proofs of all the results in this section.

2.1

Representative Agent Model

Setup A representative household has CRRA utility from consumption Ct with parameter γ > 0, and discounts the future at rate ρ ≥ 0. A representative firm produces
output using only labor, according to the production function Y = N . Both the wage
and final goods price are perfectly rigid and normalized to one. The household commits
to supplying any amount of labor demanded at the prevailing wage so that its labor
income equals Yt in every instant. The household receives (pays) lump-sum government
transfers (taxes) {Tt }t≥0 and can borrow and save in a riskless government bond at rate
rt . Its initial bond holdings are B0 . In absence of aggregate uncertainty, household
optimization implies that the time path of consumption satisfies the Euler equation
Ċt /Ct = γ1 (rt − ρ). The government sets the path of taxes in a way that satisfies its
intertemporal budget constraint.
Since prices are perfectly rigid, the real interest rate rt also equals the nominal
interest rate, so we assume that the monetary authority sets an exogenous time path
for real rates {rt }t≥0 . We restrict attention to interest rate paths with the property
that rt → ρ as t → ∞ so that the economy converges to an interior steady state. Our
results place no additional restrictions on the path of interest rates. However, clean
and intuitive formulae can be obtained for the special case
rt = ρ + e−ηt (r0 − ρ),

t≥0

(1)

whereby the interest rate unexpectedly jumps at t = 0 and then mean reverts at
rate η > 0. In equilibrium, the goods market clears Ct ({rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 ) = Yt , where
Ct ({rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 ) is the optimal consumption function for the household.10 11
10

There are multiple equilibria in this economy. We select an equilibrium by anchoring the economy
in the long run and focusing only on paths for which Yt → Ȳ as t → ∞ for some fixed 0 < Ȳ < ∞.
For any value of steady state output Ȳ , the equilibrium is then unique. Since we are only concerned
with deviations of consumption and output from steady state, the level of Ȳ is not important for any
of our results.
11
Rather than assuming that wages and prices are perfectly rigid, our equilibrium could be viewed
as a “demand-side equilibrium” as in Werning (2015). In this interpretation, we characterize the
set of time paths {rt , Yt }t≥0 that are consistent with optimization on the demand (household) side

6

Overall effect of monetary policy We can analyze the effects of a change in the
path of interest rates on consumption using only two conditions: the household Euler
equation, and the assumption that consumption returns back
 level,
 toR its steady state
1 ∞
Ct → C̄ = Ȳ as t → ∞. Therefore, we have Ct = C̄ exp − γ t (rs − ρ)ds . When
the path of interest rates satisfies (1), this formula collapses to a simple expression for
the elasticity of initial consumption to the initial change in the rate
1
d log C0
=− .
dr0
γη

(2)

The response of consumption is large if the elasticity of substitution 1/γ is high, and
if the monetary expansion is persistent (η is low).
Note that if initial government debt is positive B0 > 0, then a drop in interest rates
necessarily triggers a fiscal response. This is because the time path of taxes must satisfy
the government budget constraint, and therefore depends on the path of interest rates:
Tt = Tt ({rs }s≥0 ). The government pays less interest on its debt and so will eventually
rebate this income gain to households. However, Ricardian equivalence implies that
when the government chooses to do this does not affect the consumption response to
monetary policy. In present value terms, the government’s gain from lower interest
payments is exactly offset by the household’s loss from lower interest receipts.
Decomposition into direct and indirect effects We begin with the case of zero
government debt, Bt = 0 (and Tt = 0) for all t. We use a perturbation argument
around the steady state. Assume that initially rt = ρ for all t so that Yt = Ȳ for
all t. Now consider small changes in interest rates {drt }t≥0 that affect consumption,
while holding the path of income {Yt }t≥0 constant. In equilibrium, this increase in
consumption induces changes in labor income {dYt }t≥0 which lead to further changes
in consumption (indirect effect). Formally, these two effects are defined by totally
differentiating the initial consumption function C0 ({rt , Yt }t≥0 ):
Z
dC0 =
|0

∞

Z ∞
∂C0
∂C0
drt dt +
dYt dt .
∂rt
∂Yt
{z
}
|0
{z
}

direct response to r

(3)

indirect effects due to Y

The income innovations {dYt }t≥0 are equilibrium outcomes induced by the changes in
R∞
interest rates, which satisfy d log Yt = − γ1 t drs ds.12
of the economy without specifying the supply (firm) side. Therefore all our results apply in richer
environments such as the standard New Keynesian model.
12
Adjustments in income dYt can themselves be further decomposed into direct effects and indirect
general equilibrium effects. We nevertheless find this version of the decomposition especially useful.

7

The key objects in the decomposition (3) are the partial derivatives of the consumption function ∂C0 /∂rt and ∂C0 /∂Yt , i.e. the household’s responses to interest
rate and income changes. In this simple model, these two derivatives can be computed
analytically which leads to the main result of this section.13
Proposition 1 Consider small deviations drt of the interest rate from steady state.
R∞
The overall effect on initial consumption d log C0 = − γ1 0 drs ds can be decomposed as
1
d log C0 = −
γ
|

Z
0

∞

ρ
e drt dt −
γ
{z
} |
−ρt

direct response to r

Z

∞

e
0

−ρt

Z

{zt

∞

drs dsdt .
}

(4)

indirect effects due to Y

The decomposition is additive, i.e. the two components sum to the overall effect.
This decomposition of the initial consumption response holds for any time path of
interest rate changes {drt }t≥0 . The relative importance of the direct effect does not
depend on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/γ.
When the interest rate path follows (1), the decomposition becomes:
−

d log C0
1 h
=
dr0
γη

η
ρ+η
| {z }

direct response to r

+

ρ
ρ+η
| {z }

i
.

(5)

indirect effects due to Y

The split between direct and indirect effect depends only on the discount rate ρ and the
rate of mean reversion η. A higher discount rate implies a smaller direct effect and a
larger indirect general equilibrium effect. This reflects the fact that (i) in this model the
discount rate also equals the marginal propensity to consume out of current income; and
(ii) the lower is η the larger is the impact of the interest rate change on the permanent
component of labor income. One important implication of equation (5) is that, for
any reasonable parameterization, the indirect effect is very small, and monetary policy
works almost exclusively through the direct channel. For example in a representative
agent model, a quarterly steady state interest rate of 0.5% (2% annually, as we assume
in our quantitative analysis later in the paper) implies ρ = 0.5%. If monetary policy
mean reverts at rate η = 0.5, i.e. a quarterly autocorrelation of e−η = 0.61, then the
direct effect accounts for η/(ρ + η) = 99% of the overall effect.14
In particular, it allows us to distinguish whether, following a change in interest rates, individual
households primarily respond through intertemporal substitution in and of itself or to changes in
their labor income (a general equilibrium effect).
13
See Theorem 3 in Auclert (2014) for a related decomposition.
14
As suggested by John Cochrane http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2015/08/whitherinflation.html a better name for the standard New Keynesian model may therefore be the “stickyprice intertemporal substitution model.”

8

These results extend to the case where government debt is non-zero, B0 > 0. When
the government issues debt, in equilibrium a monetary expansion necessarily triggers
a fiscal response Tt = Tt ({rs }s≥0 ) in order to satisfy the government budget constraint.
This equilibrium feedback from fiscal policy affects household consumption which now
depends on taxes/transfers Ct ({rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 ). In this case, the direct-indirect decomposition becomes:
Z
dC0 =
0

|

∞


Z ∞
∂C0
∂C0
∂C0
drt dt +
dYt +
dTt dt .
∂rt
∂Yt
∂Tt
0
{z
} |
{z
}

direct response to r

(6)

indirect effects

Thus, in the special case (1) where interest rates mean-revert at rate η, we have:
d log C0
1
−
=
dr0
γη



η
ρ+η
|



B0
+
1 − ργ
Ȳ
{z
}

direct response to r

ρ
ρ+η
| {z }

indirect effects due to Y

+

B0
η
ργ
ρ + η Ȳ
|
{z
}


. (7)

indirect effects due to T

As already noted, due to Ricardian equivalence, the overall effect of monetary policy is
not impacted. Relative to (5), the presence of government debt reduces the direct effect.
This is because households now own some wealth and hence experience a negative
(capital) income effect following an interest rate cut. Ricardian equivalence manifests
itself in the fact that the reduction in the direct effect is exactly offset by an additional
indirect effect due to changes in transfers. The split between these two components
depends on the debt-to-GDP ratio B0 /Ȳ . In principle, with large enough government
debt, direct effects can be small even in RANK. However, for plausible debt levels,
the decomposition is hardly affected relative to (5). For instance, with a quarterly
debt-to-GDP ratio B0 /Ȳ = 4 (roughly the number for the U.S.) and log-utility γ = 1,

η
the direct effect accounts for ρ+η
1 − ργ BȲ0 = 97% of the overall effect.

2.2

Non-Ricardian Hand-to-Mouth Households

We now introduce “rule-of-thumb” households as in Campbell and Mankiw (1989,
1991). The setup is identical, except that we assume that a fraction Λ of households
consume their entire current income, i.e. per-capita consumption of these “spenders”
is given by Ctsp = Yt + Ttsp where Ttsp is a lump-sum transfer to spenders. Spenders
therefore have a marginal propensity to consume out of labor income and transfers
equal to one. The remaining fraction 1 − Λ of households optimize as before, yielding a
consumption function for these “savers” Ctsa ({rt , Yt , Ttsa }t≥0 ). Aggregate consumption
is given by Ct = ΛCtsp + (1 − Λ)Ctsa . In equilibrium Ct = Yt .
9

The results from RANK extend in a straightforward fashion to this Two-Agent
New-Keynesian (TANK) economy. Consider first the case in which Bt = 0 for all t.
For brevity, we again only analyze the generalization of (5):
1
d log C0
=
−
dr0
γη





η
ρ
(1 − Λ)
+Λ .
+ (1 − Λ)
ρ+η
ρ+η
|
{z
}
|
{z
}

direct response to r

(8)

indirect effects due to Y

Note first that the total aggregate effect of monetary policy is exactly as in RANK.
The contribution of the direct effect and the indirect effect are each a weighted average
of the corresponding quantities for spenders and savers, with the weights equal to each
group’s population share. Since the direct effect for spenders is zero and the indirect
effect is one, the overall share of the indirect effect approximately equals the population
share of spenders Λ.
Now consider the case where the government issues debt B0 > 0. As in Section 2.1,
a change in the path of interest rates affects the government budget constraint and
induces a fiscal response. Because Ricardian equivalence need not hold in the spendersaver economy, the effect of monetary policy depends crucially on the specifics of this
fiscal response. In particular, as long as the fiscal response entails increasing transfers to
the hand-to-mouth households, then this will increase the overall response of aggregate
consumption to monetary policy. This mechanism can be seen most clearly in the case
of the exponentially decaying interest rate path (1). If we assume that the government
keeps debt constant at its initial level, Bt = B0 for all t, and transfers a fraction ΛT of
the income gains from lower interest payments to spenders (and the residual fraction
to savers) so that ΛTtsp ({rs }s≥0 ) = −(rt − ρ)ΛT B0 , then initial consumption is15
−

d log C0
1
B0
= (1 − Λ)−1 ΛT
+
,
dr0
γη
Ȳ

(9)

Note the presence of the term ΛT (B0 /Y ): the overall effect of monetary policy differs
from RANK only if there are both a debt-issuing government (B0 > 0) and NonRicardian households who receive a positive share of the transfers (ΛT > 0). It is only
under this scenario that the indirect component of the transmission mechanism could
be much larger in TANK, compared to RANK models. As it will be clear in Section
5, instead, in HANK even if government debt is zero and transfers are not paid to
hand-to-mouth households, the indirect component remains dominant.
15

This is equivalent to assuming that the government maintains budget balance by adjusting lump
sum transfers, which is the baseline assumption we make in our full quantitative model.

10

2.3

Medium-Scale DSGE Model

Is our finding that conventional monetary policy works almost exclusively through direct intertemporal substitution special to these simple models? Compared to typical
medium-scale DSGE models used in the literature, the RANK model in the present
section is extremely stylized. For instance, state-of-the-art medium-scale DSGE models
typically feature investment subject to adjustment costs, variable capital utilization,
habit formation, and prices and wages that are partially sticky as opposed to perfectly
rigid. We therefore conducted a decomposition exactly analogous to that in (4) in
one such state-of-the-art framework, the Smets and Wouters (2007) model (see the appendix for details). The result confirms our earlier findings. With Smets and Wouters’
baseline parameterization, 95.5 percent of the overall consumption response to an expansionary monetary policy shock is accounted for by direct intertemporal substitution
effects. We also conducted a number of robustness checks, particularly with respect to
the habit formation parameter which directly enters the representative agent’s Euler
equation, and found that the share due to direct effects never drops below 90 percent.

3
3.1

HANK: A Framework for Monetary Policy Analysis
Why HANK?

The consumption behavior of the households in the simple representative- (or two-)
agent models of Section 2 is extreme. Spenders respond excessively strongly to income
changes and not at all to interest rate changes, while savers barely react to transitory
income shocks and respond to interest rate changes only because of intertemporal substitution. This stark behavior limits the usefulness of these models for a quantitative
examination of monetary policy. Our view is that a quantitative analysis of the transmission of monetary policy requires a model featuring an equilibrium distribution of
household asset portfolios that is consistent with data, since the vast empirical and
theoretical literature on consumption argues that this is the chief factor determining
the distribution of marginal propensities to consume (see Carroll (2012) for a survey).
The key features of our HANK model that generate realism in these dimensions
are an empirically realistic process for idiosyncratic income risk, combined with the
existence of two saving instruments with different degrees of liquidity. In this environment, wealthy hand-to-mouth households with high marginal propensities to consume
emerge. Thus, our main innovation is a rich representation of household consumption
and saving behavior. In contrast, the model’s supply side is kept purposefully simple,
and we borrow a number of assumptions from the New Keynesian literature: there is

11

price stickiness and a monetary authority that operates a Taylor rule, and we analyze
the economy’s response to an innovation to this Taylor rule. For simplicity, we consider
a deterministic transition following a one-time zero-probability shock.

3.2

The Model

Households The economy is populated by a continuum of households indexed by
their holdings of liquid assets b, illiquid assets a, and their idiosyncratic labor productivity z. Labor productivity follows an exogenous Markov process that we describe in
detail in Section 4.3. Time is continuous. At each instant in time t, the state of the
economy is the joint distribution µt (da, db, dz). Households die with an exogenous Poisson intensity λ, and upon death give birth to an offspring with zero wealth, a = b = 0
and labor productivity z equal to a random draw from its ergodic distribution.16 There
are perfect annuity markets so that the estates of individuals who die are redistributed
to other individuals in proportion to their asset holdings.17
Households receive a utility flow u from consumption ct , housing services ht , and
hours worked `t . The function u is strictly increasing and strictly concave in c and h
and strictly decreasing and strictly convex in `. Preferences are time-separable and the
future is discounted at rate ρ ≥ 0:
Z
E0

∞

e−(ρ+λ)t u(ct , ht , `t )dt,

(10)

0

where the expectation is taken over realizations of idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
Because of the law of large numbers, and the absence of aggregate shocks, there is no
economy-wide uncertainty.
Households take as given time paths for taxes/transfers {T̃t }t≥0 , real wages {wt }t≥0 ,
the real return to liquid assets {rtb }t≥0 and the real return to illiquid assets {rta }t≥0 which
are all determined in equilibrium.
Households can borrow in liquid assets b up to an exogenous limit b < 0 at an
interest rate of rtb− = rtb + κ, where κ > 0 is a wedge between borrowing and lending
rates. With a slight abuse of notation, rtb (bt ) summarizes the interest rate schedule
faced by households. Short positions in illiquid assets are not allowed.
Assets of type a are illiquid in the sense that households need to pay a cost for
16

We allow for stochastic death to help in generating a sufficient number of households with zero
illiquid wealth relative to the data. This is not a technical assumption that is needed to guarantee
the existence of a stationary distribution, which exists even in the case λ = 0.
17
The assumption of perfect annuity markets is implemented by making the appropriate adjustment
to the asset returns faced by surviving households. To ease notation, we fold this adjustment directly
into the rates of return, which should therefore be intended as including the return from the annuity.

12

depositing into or withdrawing from their illiquid account. We use dt to denote a
household’s deposit rate —with dt < 0 corresponding to withdrawals— and χ(dt , at )
to denote the flow cost of depositing at a rate dt for a household with illiquid holdings
at . As a consequence of this transaction cost, in equilibrium illiquid assets will pay a
higher return than liquid assets, i.e. rta > rtb .
Illiquid assets are composed of both productive assets (to be interpreted as claims
on the returns of investment funds, as explained below) and non-productive assets
(to be interpreted as owner-occupied housing). We make the stark, but simplifying,
assumption that each household holds a constant fraction ω of its illiquid assets as
housing.18 The flow of housing services is given by
ht = r̃h ωat + cht ,

(11)

where r̃h = rh − δ h − mh is the service flow from owner-occupied housing, net of
depreciation and maintenance costs, and cht is rental housing. We add rental housing
to the model so that even households with a = 0 can consume housing.
A household’s holdings of liquid assets bt and illiquid assets at evolve according to
ḃt = wt zt `t − T̃ (wt zt `t ) + rtb (bt )bt − dt − χ(dt , at ) − ct − cht ,

(12)

ȧt = rta (1 − ω) at + dt

(13)

bt ≥ −b,

(14)

at ≥ 0.

Savings in liquid assets ḃt equal the household’s income stream – labor income net of
labor income taxes plus liquid-asset interest income – minus deposits into the illiquid
account dt , transaction costs χ(dt , at ), non-durable consumption ct , and consumption
of rental housing cht . Savings in illiquid assets ȧt equal the return on non-housing
illiquid assets plus deposits from the liquid account (or minus withdrawals from the
illiquid one, if d < 0).
The functional form for the transaction cost χ(d, a) is given by
χ(d, a) = χ0 |d| + χ1

d
max{a, a}

χ2

max{a, a},

χ2 > 1, a > 0.

(15)

This transaction cost has two components that play distinct roles. The linear component generates an inaction region in households’ optimal deposit policies because for
18

It is feasible to replace the assumption of constant ω with a function ω (a) to capture observed
cross-sectional variation in illiquid portfolio shares. A frictionless optimal portfolio choice between
productive and non-productive illiquid assets would also be computationally feasible, since it would
not require an additional state variable in the household’s problem.

13

some households the marginal gain from depositing or withdrawing the first dollar is
smaller than the marginal cost of transacting χ0 . The convex component ensures that
deposit rates are finite, |dt | < ∞ and hence household’s holdings of assets never jump.
Finally, scaling the convex term by illiquid assets a above some threshold a delivers
the desirable property that marginal costs χd (d, a) are homogeneous of degree zero in
the deposit rate d/a so that the marginal cost of transacting depends on the fraction
of illiquid assets transacted, rather than the raw size of the transaction. The threshold
a > 0 guarantees that costs remain finite for individuals with a = 0.
Households maximize (10) subject to (11)–(14). In Appendix B.1 we describe the
household’s problem recursively with a Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation. In steady
state, the recursive solution to this problem consists of a consumption decision rule
c(a, b, z; Ψ), a deposit decision rule d(a, b, z; Ψ), a labor supply decision rule `(a, b, z; Ψ),
and a rental-housing decision rule ch (a, b, z; Ψ), with Ψ ≡ (rb , ra , w, T̃ ).19 These decision rules imply optimal drifts for liquid and illiquid assets and, together with a
stochastic process for z, they induce a stationary joint distribution of liquid assets,
illiquid assets, and labor income µ(da, db, dz; Ψ). In Appendix B.1, we describe the
Kolmogorov Forward equation that characterizes this distribution. Outside of steady
state, each of these objects is time-varying and depends on the time path of prices
{Ψt }t≥0 ≡ {rtb , rta , wt , T̃t }t≥0 .
Final goods producers A competitive representative final goods producer aggregates a continuum of intermediate inputs indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]
1

Z

ε−1
ε

ε
 ε−1

yj,t dj

Yt =
0

where ε > 0 is the elasticity of substitution across goods. Cost minimization implies
that demand for intermediate good j is

yj,t (pj,t ) =

pj,t
Pt

−ε

Z
Yt ,

where Pt =

1

p1−ε
j,t dj

1
 1−ε

.

0

Intermediate goods producers Each intermediate good is produced by a monopolistically competitive producer using effective units of capital kj,t and effective units
19

In what follows, when this does not lead to confusion, we suppress the explicit dependence of
decision rules on prices and government policy.

14

of labor nj,t according to the production function
α 1−α
yj,t = Zkj,t
nj,t .

(16)

Intermediate producers rent capital at rate rtk in a competitive capital rental market
and hire labor at wage wt in a competitive labor market. Cost minimization implies
that an intermediate producer’s marginal costs are given by
1
mt =
Z



rtk
α

α 

wt
1−α

1−α
,

(17)

where factor prices equal their respective marginal revenue products.
Each intermediate producer chooses its price to maximize profits subject to price
adjustment costs as in Rotemberg (1982). These adjustment costs are quadratic in the
rate of price change ṗt /pt and expressed as a fraction of produced output, Yt
 2
 
θ ṗt
ṗt
Yt ,
=
Θt
pt
2 pt

(18)

where θ > 0. Suppressing notational dependence on j, each intermediate producer
chooses {pt }t≥0 to maximize
Z

∞

e

−

Rt
0

rsa ds

0


 
ṗt
Πt (pt ) − Θt
dt,
pt

where

Πt (pt ) =

pt
− mt
Pt



pt
Pt

−ε
Yt

(19)

are per-period profits.20
Lemma 1, proved in Appendix B.2, characterizes the solution to the pricing problem and derives the exact New Keynesian Phillips curve in our environment. It is the
combination of a continuous-time formulation of the problem and quadratic price adjustment costs that allows us to derive a simple equation characterizing the evolution
of inflation without the need for log-linearization.
Lemma 1 The inflation rate πt = Ṗt /Pt is determined by the New Keynesian Phillips
20

We assume that intermediate producers discount profits at the rate of return on illiquid assets rta .
Our rationale for this choice is that firms are owned by a representative investment fund whose cost
of raising capital is rta , as explained below. We have considered alternative choices, and we show in
Appendix E that our main results are unaffected by the choice of this discount factor.

15

curve
Ẏt
rta −
Yt

!
πt =

ε
(mt − m∗ ) + π̇t ,
θ

m∗ =

ε−1
.
ε

(20)

The expression in (20) can be usefully written in present-value form as:
ε
πt =
θ

Z

∞

e−

Rs
t

rτa dτ

t

Ys
(ms − m∗ ) ds.
Yt

(21)

The term in brackets is proportional to the marginal payoff to a firm from increasing
its price at time s, Π0s (ps ) = (ε − 1)Ys (ms − m∗ ). Firms raise prices when their markup
ε
. Inflation in (21)
Ms = 1/ms is below the flexible price optimum M∗ = 1/m∗ = ε−1
is the discounted sum of all future marginal payoffs from changing prices.
Investment Fund Sector In our model, we need to take a stand on how the
monopoly profits of the intermediate good producers are distributed back to households. We choose the simplest ownership structure that respects the principle that
profits should be paid out to households in proportion to the size of their investment.
We envision a large measure of competitive investment funds with ownership of the
intermediate good producers. Each of these funds issues an infinitesimal security with
instantaneous return rta (equivalent to a one-period security in discrete time). HouseR
holds’ productive component of illiquid assets, (1 − ω)At where At = adµt , represent
savings into this security.
The investment funds intermediate these assets from households to firms through
a competitive rental market in the form of physical capital, Kt . As is common in
this literature, we allow for variable capital utilization to help generate realistic comovement of investment and output. Higher utilization comes at the cost of faster
depreciation. The total effective units of productive capital rented by firms are uKt ,
and the corresponding depreciation rate is δ(u), where δ is a strictly increasing and
convex function of the utilization rate u ∈ [0, 1].
The fund has two sources of income. First, it receives a rental income flow of
k
(rt u − δ(u))Kt from hiring out capital to firms. Second, it receives profits from its
assumed ownership of the intermediate producers in proportion to its capital stock
which means, in turn, that dividends are paid out to households in proportion to the
fund securities they own at date t. The total flow of dividends is equal to the profits
of intermediate firms, which is defined in (19) and in equilibrium equals (1 − mt )Yt .
We let qt denote the dividend rate per unit of capital so that in equilibrium qt Kt =
(1 − mt )Yt . Optimization by the investment fund then implies that the equilibrium

16

return on illiquid assets is given by
rta = max (rtk u − δ(u)) + qt .
u

(22)

In Appendix B.3, we provide a formal derivation of (22).
Monetary Authority The monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate on
liquid assets it according to a Taylor rule
it = r̄b + φπt + t

(23)

where φ > 1 and t = 0 in steady state. Our results on the effects of an unexpected monetary shock in Section 5 refer to the economy’s adjustment after a temporary change in
t .21 Since our focus is on understanding the transmission mechanism of conventional
monetary policy in normal times, we do not consider cases in which the zero-lower
bound on nominal interest rates becomes binding. Given inflation and the nominal
interest rate, the real return on the liquid asset is determined by the Fisher equation
rtb = it − πt . The real liquid return rtb needs also to be consistent with equilibrium in
the bond market, which we describe in Section 3.3.
Government The government levies a progressive tax on household labor income y
that consists of a lump-sum transfer Tt and a proportional tax τ :
T̃t (y) = −Tt + τ y,

(24)

with Tt , τ > 0. The government issues bonds denoted by Btg , with negative values
denoting government debt. Its budget constraint is
Ḃtg

Z
+ Gt =

T̃t (wt z`t (a, b, z)) dµt + rtb Btg

(25)

where Gt is exogenous government spending. Out of steady state, in our baseline
specification, lump-sum transfers Tt adjust so as to keep the budget balanced, with
government consumption and debt fixed at their steady-state level. In Section 5 we
provide results under various alternative assumptions, including allowing government
expenditure or government debt to adjust in the wake of an unexpected shock.22
21

We assume that the monetary authority responds only to inflation. Generalizing the Taylor rule
(23) to also respond to output is straightforward and does not substantially affect our conclusions.
22
We chose this baseline for two reasons. First, it yields a split between direct and indirect effects in
between the other two cases. Second, Mountford and Uhlig (2009) add fiscal variables to a monetary

17

3.3

Equilibrium

An equilibrium in this economy is defined as paths for prices {wt , rtk , rtb , rta }t≥0 , government policy {T̃t }t≥0 , and corresponding quantities, such that at every t, (i) households,
firms, and investment funds maximize their corresponding objective functions taking
as given equilibrium prices, (ii) the government budget constraint holds, and (iii) all
markets clear. There are four markets in our economy: the liquid asset (bond) market,
the illiquid asset market, the labor market, and the goods market.
The liquid asset market clears when total household saving in government bonds
equals government debt
Bth + Btg = 0,
(26)
R
where Bth = bdµt is total household holdings of liquid assets. The illiquid asset market
clears when physical capital used in production equals household saving in productive
illiquid assets
Kt = (1 − ω)At ,
(27)
R
where At = adµt is total household holdings of illiquid assets.23 The labor market
clears when
Z
Nt = z`t (a, b, z)dµt ,
(28)
and the wage equals the marginal revenue product of labor. Finally, the goods market
clearing condition is:
Yt = C t +

Cth

Z
+ It + Gt + Θt + χt + κ

max{−b, 0}dµt .

(29)

Here Yt is aggregate output, Ct is total non-durable consumption, Cth is total housing rentals, It is total combined investment in productive capital and housing, Gt is
government spending, Θt are total price adjustment costs, and the last two terms reflects adjustment and borrowing costs (to be interpreted as consumption of financial
services). In the national accounts, income and expenditures contain total total consumption of housing services (in our notation of equation 11, Ht = r̃h ωAt +Cth ) and not
just rental housing Cth . Therefore, when calculating GDP and aggregate consumption
in the model we include the flow services from owner occupied housing.
VAR and document that a contractionary monetary policy shock increases net tax revenues (taxes
minus transfers).
23
To simplify the exposition, we folded two equilibrium conditions into one. Households’ supply of
illiquid assets equals the securities issued by the fund, (1 − ω)At = Aft , and the capital demanded by
the intermediate producers equals the capital supplied by the fund, or Kt = Aft .

18

4
4.1

Parameterizing the Model
Calibration Strategy

We have four broad goals in choosing parameters for the model. First, we need to
develop a mapping between our aggregated two-asset (liquid-illiquid) structure and
Flow of Funds (FoF) data on the complex balance sheet of the U.S. household sector.
Second, we seek a calibration of the exogenous stochastic process for labor earnings —
the ultimate source of inequality in the model— that reflects the most recent findings
about skewness and kurtosis of income changes. Third, in order to obtain quantitatively realistic consumption behavior at the microeconomic level, our model must
generate realistic distributions of liquid and illiquid assets. Of particular importance
is the skewness of liquid wealth holdings: matching the fraction of households with
low liquid wealth bears directly on the sensitivity of consumption to income changes,
whereas matching the top of the liquid wealth distribution is key to generate plausible
redistributive effects of interest rate changes. Finally, since the production side of the
model is essentially a textbook New Keynesian model, we want to remain as close as
possible to the parameterization that is well accepted in that literature.

4.2

Fifty shades of K

Mapping the model to data requires classifying assets held by US households as liquid
versus illiquid, and as productive versus non-productive. We label an asset as liquid
or illiquid based on the extent to which buying or selling the asset involves sizable
transaction costs. We define net liquid assets B h as all deposits in financial institutions
(checking, saving, call, and money market accounts), government bonds, and corporate
bonds net of revolving consumer credit. We define illiquid assets A as real estate wealth
net of mortgage debt, consumer durables net of non-revolving consumer credit, plus
equity in the corporate and non-corporate business sectors. We have chosen to include
equity among illiquid assets, because nearly 3/4 of total equity is either indirectly held
(in tax-deferred retirement accounts) or held in the form of private businesses. Both
of these assets are significantly less liquid than all the other asset classes included in
our definition of B h .
We measure the aggregate size of each category of assets and liabilities using data
from the FoF and SCF. We use data from 2004, since this is the last SCF survey year
before the Great Recession. In Appendix C, we undertake a comprehensive comparison
between these two data sources for each component of the balance sheet. Based on
this analysis, we choose to use FoF measures for all assets and liabilities except for the
three main categories of liquid assets —deposits, government and corporate bonds—
19

Liquid B h

Non-productive
B h + ωA

Productive
(1 − ω) A = K

Total



Revolving cons. debt
Deposits
Corporate bonds
Government bonds

Illiquid (A)
−0.03
0.23
0.04
0.02

×

Total

0.60× Net housing
0.60× Net durables

0.60 × 1.09
0.60 × 0.22

Corporate equity
Private Equity
0.40× Net housing
0.40× Net durables

1.02
0.59
0.40 × 1.09
0.40 × 0.22

0.26

B h = 0.26
ωA = 0.79

K = 2.13

2.92

3.18

Table 1: Summary of taxonomy of assets
Notes: Categorization of assets into liquid versus illiquid and productive versus non-productive.
Values are expressed as a multiple of 2004 GDP($12,300B). The value of ω implied by our
calculations is 0.27. See Appendix C for details of all calculations.

for which we use estimates from the SCF. Table 1 summarizes our preferred estimate,
expressed as fractions of annual 2004 GDP ($12,300B). The total quantity of net liquid
assets B h amounts to $2,700B (26% of annual GDP). The total quantity of net illiquid
assets A amount to $36,000B (2.92 times annual GDP).
We assume that all illiquid assets that directly finance firms’ activities, i.e., corporate and private equity, are productive capital. In addition, we assign 40 percent of net
real estate and durables to productive capital to reflect the fact that (i) part of the housing stock owned by households represents commercial space rented out to businesses,
and (ii) a fraction of the stock of both housing and durables is an input into production
(e.g., home-offices, or cars used for commuting to work). With this split, the productive
share of net illiquid assets is 1 − ω = (19, 900 + 0.4 ∗ (25, 100 − 9, 000)) /28, 900 = 0.73
so that the economy’s steady state capital stock is K = (1 − ω)A = 0.73 ∗ 2.92 = 2.13
times annual GDP.

4.3

Continuous Time Household Earnings Dynamics

When households have a choice between saving in assets with different degrees of liquidity, as in our model, the frequency of earnings shocks is a crucial input for determining
the relative holdings of the two assets. Households who face small, but frequent, shocks
have a strong incentive to hold low-return liquid assets to smooth consumption, while
households who face large infrequent shocks would prefer to hold high-return illiquid
assets that can be accessed at a cost in the unlikely event of a sizable windfall or a

20

severe income loss.
In standard discrete-time error component models (e.g., the classical persistenttransitory model), the frequency of arrival of earnings shocks is dictated by the assumed time period. In continuous-time models, the frequency at which shocks arrive is
a property of the stochastic process, and must be estimated alongside the size and persistence of shocks. Empirically, the challenge in estimating the frequency of earnings
shocks is that almost all high quality panel earnings data is available only at an annual
(or lower) frequency. It is thus challenging to learn about the dynamics of earnings
at any higher frequency. Our strategy to overcome this challenge is to infer high frequency earnings dynamics from the high-order moments of annual earnings changes.
To understand why this identification strategy has promise, consider two possible distributions of annual earnings changes, each with the same mean and variance, but with
different degrees of kurtosis. The more leptokurtic distribution (i.e., the distribution
with more mass concentrated around the mean and in the tails) is likely to have been
generated by an earnings process that is dominated by large infrequent shocks; the
more platykurtic distribution (i.e., the distribution with more mass in the shoulders)
by a process that is dominated by small frequent shocks.
In our model, individual flow earnings are given by yit ≡ wt zit `it . As we explain in
Section 4.5, we make assumptions on preferences that imply that all households choose
the same optimal hours `it = `¯t for a given wage wt . Since earnings are proportional
to labor productivity zit in the cross-section, we work directly with the process for zit .
We model log-earnings as the sum of two independent components
log zit = z1,it + z2,it

(30)

where each component zj,it evolves according to a “jump-drift” process
dzj,it = −βj zj,it dt + j,it dNj,it ,

with j,it ∼ N 0, σj2



(31)

and dNj,it is a pure Poisson process with arrival rate λj , i.e. over a small time interval
dt, dNj,it = 1 with probability λj dt and dNj,it = 0 with probability 1 − λj dt.
The process for each component is closely related to a discrete time AR(1) process.24
The key difference is that in our continuous time formulation, the arrival of each
innovation is stochastic, and hence each process has an additional parameter, λj , which
24
In particular, if the innovations j,it always arrived at regular intervals (say, annually), rather than
stochastically at rate λj , then each component would follow an AR(1) process. The drift parameter
βj would correspond to (one minus) the discrete time auto-regressive parameter and the innovation
variance σj2 would describe the size of innovations. In this sense, the model is only a minimal departure
from the familiar persistent-transitory process used to model discrete time earnings data.

21

Moment

Data

Variance: annual log earns
Variance: 1yr change
Variance: 5yr change
Kurtosis: 1yr change
Kurtosis: 5yr change
Frac 1yr change < 10%
Frac 1yr change < 20%
Frac 1yr change < 50%

0.70
0.23
0.46
17.8
11.6
0.54
0.71
0.86

Model
Estimated
0.70
0.23
0.46
16.5
12.1
0.56
0.67
0.85

Model
Discretized
0.74
0.21
0.49
15.5
13.2
0.63
0.71
0.83

Table 2: Earnings Process Estimation Fit
captures the frequency of arrival.25
We estimate the earnings process in (30)-(31) by Simulated Method of Moments
using Social Security Administration (SSA) data on male earnings from Guvenen et al.
(2015).26 These authors report eight key moments that we target in the estimation
(see Table 2).27 Moments of the distribution of earnings changes at multiple durations
are needed to separately identify the two components. Since these data refer to annual
earnings, we simulate earnings from the model at a high frequency, aggregate to annual
earnings and compare moments from model and data.
The fitted earnings process matches the 8 targeted moments well. The estimated
parameter values, reported in Table 3, are consistent with the existence of a transitory
and a persistent component in earnings. The transitory component (j = 1) arrives on
average once every 3 years and has a half-life of around one quarter. The persistent
component (j = 2) arrives on average once every 38 years and has a half-life of around
18 years. Both components are subject to relatively large, similar sized innovations.
In the context of an infinite horizon model, the estimated process thus has the natural
interpretation of a large and persistent “career” or “health” shock that is perturbed by
periodic temporary shocks. Note that relative to a discrete-time model, our estimated
transitory shock is both less frequent, and more temporary than an IID annual shock.
25

Schmidt (2015) models earnings dynamics as a discrete-time compound Poisson process, using a
similar logic.
26
The main benefits of targeting moments from administrative earnings data such as the SSA are
that they are based on a very large sample and so are less prone to measurement error than survey
data, and that they are not top-coded. Both features are important: the sample size and absence of
measurement error allows a precise estimate of higher-order moments, and the absence of top-coding
allows for an accurate portrayal of the right-tail of the income distribution, which is important for
capturing the skewness in wealth holdings.
27
We restrict attention to a symmetric process since Guvenen et al. (2015) find only a small amount
of negative skewness in 1-year and 5-year annual changes. It is possible to generate skewness in annual
changes by allowing the drift parameters βj to differ based on the sign of zj,it .

22

Parameter
Arrival rate
Mean reversion
St. Deviation of innovations

λj
βj
σj

Component
j=1
0.080
0.761
1.74

Component
j=2
0.007
0.009
1.53

Table 3: Earnings Process Parameter Estimates. Rates expressed as quarterly values.
Relative to typical earnings process calibrations based on survey data, and consistent with the cross-sectional earnings distribution in SSA data, our earnings process
features a large amount of right-tail inequality. For our discretized process, the top
10, 1, and 0.1 percent earnings shares are 46%, 14% and 4% respectively.28 This
skewed earnings distribution contributes significantly to the model’s ability to generates skewed distributions of liquid and illiquid assets. However, unlike much of the
existing literature that has generated wealth concentration at the top of the distribution from ad-hoc skewed earnings distributions, here both inequality and dynamics of
earnings are disciplined directly by high quality data.29

4.4

Adjustment Cost Function and Wealth Distribution

Given values for the capital share, demand elasticity and depreciation rate (all set
externally as described in Section 4.5), our target for the capital stock of 2.13 times
output yields a steady-state return to productive illiquid assets ra of 6.5% per annum.
We set the steady-state return on liquid assets at 2% per annum. In steady-state,
nominal and real returns are equal since inflation is zero. Given these returns, and the
exogenous process for idiosyncratic labor income, the key parameters that determine
the incentives for households to accumulate liquid and illiquid assets are the discount
rate ρ, the intermediation wedge κ, the borrowing limit b, and the four parameters of
the adjustment cost function χ0 , χ1 , χ2 and a.
We set a to $10, 000. Borrowing in the model should be interpreted as unsecured
28

When solving for optimal household decision rules, we use a discrete approximation to the estimated earnings process with 11 points for the persistent component and 3 points for the transitory
component. The fit for the discretized process for the 8 targeted moments is shown in Table 2. In
Appendix D.1 we describe the discretization process in detail and report further statistics from the
discretized distribution, including plots of the Lorenz curves for the ergodic distributions from the
continuous and discretized processes. The Lorenz curves line up almost exactly, and hence the top
shares for the estimated continuous process are very similar to those for the discretized process.
29
The existing literature reverse-engineers a process for earnings risk in order to match data on
wealth inequality. This approach typically requires an implausibly extreme characterization of risk,
with a top income state around 1,000 times as large as the median, and a high probability of a large
fall in earnings. In our discretized process, the highest earnings realization is around 100 times as
large as the median, and is realized by only 0.03% of the population.

23

Mean illiquid assets
Mean liquid assets
Frac. with b = 0 and a = 0
Frac. with b = 0 and a > 0
Frac. with b < 0

Data
2.920
0.260
0.100
0.200
0.150

Model
2.920
0.263
0.124
0.162
0.142

Moment
Top 10% share
Top 1% share
Top 0.1% share
Bottom 50% share
Bottom 25% share
Gini coefficient

Liquid Wealth
Data Model
86%
82%
47%
27%
17%
4%
-4%
-1%
-5%
-1%
0.98
0.85

Iliquid Wealth
Data Model
70%
87%
33%
43%
12%
13%
3%
0.3%
0%
0%
0.81
0.80

Table 4: Left panel: Moments targeted in calibration. Moments are expressed as ratios
to annual output. Right panel: Statistics for the top of the wealth distribution not
targeted in the calibration. Data from SCF 2004.
credit, so we set the borrowing limit b exogenously at 1 times quarterly average labor
income.30 We then choose the remaining five parameters (ρ, κ, χ0 , χ1 , χ2 ) to match
five moments of the distribution of household wealth from the SCF 2004: (i)-(ii) the
mean of the illiquid and liquid wealth distributions; (iii)-(iv) the fraction of poor and
wealthy hand-to-mouth households, since these are the most important moments of the
liquid wealth distribution for determining household consumption responses to income
shocks; and (v) the fraction of households with negative net liquid assets, which serves
to identify the borrowing wedge.31
The model matches the five targeted moments well (left panel of Table 4). Figure
1 displays the distributions of liquid and illiquid wealth in the calibrated model. Despite only targeting a couple of moments of each distribution, the model successfully
matches the distributions of liquid and illiquid wealth up to the 99th percentile of the
distributions, as is also clear from the right-panel of Table 4 which reports top wealth
shares from the model and data. The full implied Lorenz curves, together with their
empirical counterpart from the 2004 SCF, are reported in Figure D.3 in Appendix D.32
The calibrated annual borrowing wedge is 6.5% (implying an annual borrowing rate
of 8.5%), and the calibrated annual discount rate is 4.7%.
The calibrated transaction cost function is displayed in Figure D.4 in Appendix
30

In the steady state ergodic distribution only 0.02% of households are at the limit.
We define hand-to-mouth households in the model as those with zero liquid wealth. The targets of 10% and 20% are chosen to replicate the fraction of households with net liquid wealth
∈ [−$1000, $1000] with zero and positive illiquid assets, respectively. These targets are similar to
estimates in Kaplan et al. (2014). The target of 15% of households with negative liquid wealth
reproduces the fraction of households with net liquid wealth < −$1000 in the data.
32
It is notoriously challenging to match the extreme right tail of wealth distributions with labor
income risk alone, so it is not surprising that the model provides a good fit only up to the 99th
percentile. Our model could likely be modified to deliver an even more fat-tailed wealth distribution
by following standard strategies in the literature, for example by adding capital income risk as in
Benhabib et al. (2014).
31

24

Illiquid wealth distribution

Liquid wealth distribution
0.1

0.1

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.07

← P r(b = 0) = 0.29

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0

0

200

← P r(a = 0) = 0.25

400

600

800

0

1000

0

2

4

6

8

10

$ Millions

$ Thousands

(a) Liquid wealth distribution

(b) Illiquid wealth distribution

Figure 1: Distributions of liquid and illiquid wealth.
D. In the resulting ergodic distribution, roughly half of households adjust in a given
quarter. Conditional on making a deposit or withdrawal, the median absolute quarterly
transaction as a fraction of the stock of illiquid assets is 1.3%. The quarterly transaction
cost for a transaction this size is at most 11% of the transaction. In steady-state the
equilibrium aggregate transaction costs, which one can interpret as financial services,
amount to 2% of GDP.

4.5

Remaining Model Parameters

Demographics We set the quarterly death rate λ to
of a household is 45 years.

1
180

so that the average lifespan

Preferences Households have instantaneous utility over consumption and labor supply as in Greenwood et al. (1988), so that there are no wealth effects on labor supply.
As in Bayer et al. (2015), we modify preferences so that labor supply responds only to
changes in the aggregate wage rate per efficiency unit of labor and not to changes in
idiosyncratic labor efficiency:
h
ui (c, h, `) =

(c − vi (`))1−ζ hζ

i1−γ

−1

1

,

1−γ

`1+ ϕ
with vi (`) = ψzi
.
1 + ϕ1

(32)

With these preferences, all households optimally choose to work the same number of
hours for a given aggregate wage rate, which allows us to calibrate directly to earnings
data, and simplifies the numerical solution of the model outside of steady state.
25

We set the curvature parameter γ to 1, the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, ϕ, to
0.5, and the disutility of labor, ψ to 27 so that hours worked are equal to 1/3 of the
time endowment in steady-state. We choose the weight on housing, ζ to replicate the
aggregate expenditure share on housing, which is roughly 15%. Given these parameters
the mean value for the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) in the ergodic
distribution is 0.75.33
Production The elasticity of substitution for final goods producers is set to ε = 10,
implying a steady state markup 1/(ε − 1) of 11%. Intermediate goods producers have
a weight on capital of α = 0.33, which yields a capital share of 30%, a labor share of
60%, and a profit share of 10%.
We parameterize the dependence of depreciation on utilization as δ(u) = δ̄ +

r̄k
1+1/δ u
u
−
1
with δ̄ = 10% per annum, and δ u = 5 implying an elasticity of
u
1+1/δ
depreciation to utilization of 1.2. We set the constant θ in the price adjustment cost
function to 100, so that the slope of the Phillips curve in (20) is ε/θ = 0.1. Both values
are the middle of the range commonly used in the literature.34
Government policy The tax function in (24) consists of a lump-sum transfer T and
a proportional tax rate τ . We set τ to 0.25 and choose T to so that in steady state 40%
of households receive a net transfer from the government, consistent with data from
the Congressional Budget Office (2013). In our baseline model, the government is the
only provider of liquid assets. Given our calibration of household liquid asset holdings,
government debt is equal to 23.1% of annual GDP. Government expenditures are then
determined residually from the government budget constraint (25).
Monetary Policy We set the Taylor rule coefficient φ to 1.25, which is in the middle
of the range commonly used for New Keynesian models.

4.6

Micro Consumption Behavior

How successful is the calibrated model at generating empirically realistic distributions
of household responses to changes in labor income? Some of the most convincing
empirical evidence on marginal propensities to consume (MPCs) comes from household
consumption responses to the tax rebates of 2001 and fiscal stimulus payments of 2008
(see e.g. Johnson et al., 2006; Parker et al., 2013; Misra and Surico, 2014). This
c−v(`)
−uc
The IES is defined as cu
. With our preference specification, this implies the formula (γ+ζ(1−γ))c
.
cc
34
See e.g. the survey by Schorfheide (2008) who cites a range of estimates from 0.005 to 0.135 from
studies using the labor share as a proxy to measure marginal costs, an approach suggested by Gali
and Gertler (1999). We consider robustness analyses in this range.
33

26

Quarterly MPC $500
Fraction of lump sum transfer consumed
0.7
One quarter
Two quarters
One year

0.6

0.4
0.3

0.5
0.2

0.4

0.1

0.3

0
400

0.2

↑
0.1
0

300

0

200

400

600

800

(a)

MPCxτ (a, b, z)dµ

0

100
0

1000

-10

Liquid Wealth ($000)

Amount of transfer ($)

R

20
10

200

Quarterly MPC out of $500 = 17%

Illiquid Wealth ($000)

(b) MPC$500
(a, b, z)
1

by τ, x

Figure 2: MPC Heterogeneity
collective quasi-experimental evidence concludes that households spend approximately
25 percent of these payments (which average around $500) on nondurables in the
quarter that they are received.
Let MPCxτ (a, b, z) be the MPC to consume out of x additional dollars of liquid
wealth over a period of length τ quarters. This notion of MPC is directly comparable
to the empirical evidence cited above. In Appendix B.4 we state the formal definition
and show how to compute it directly from households’ consumption policy functions
using the Feynman-Kac formula.
The average quarterly MPC out of a $500 transfer is 17% in the model, which is
within the range of typical empirical estimates. As seen in Figure 2(a) the fraction
consumed decreases with the size of the transfer, and increases sharply as the horizon
increases. The average MPCs in Figure 2(a) mask important heterogeneity across the
population. This heterogeneity can be seen in Figure 2(b), which plots the function
MPCxτ (a, b, z) for a x = $500 payment over one quarter as a function of liquid and
illiquid assets, for the median value of labor productivity z. The figure illustrates
the strong source of bi-modality in the distribution of consumption responses in the
population. Both in the model and data, the average response of 17% is composed
of a group of households with positive net liquid wealth and very low consumption
responses, and another group of hand-to-mouth households —many of whom have
positive illiquid wealth— with net liquid assets close to zero who display consumption
responses between forty and fifty percent. Note that, as expected, holdings of illiquid
wealth play only a minor role in determining the consumption response to a $500

27

0.5

Total Consumption

0.4
0

Deviation (%)

Deviation (pp annual)

0.5

-0.5

-1

-1.5

Taylor rule innovation: ǫ
Liquid return: rb
Inflation: π

0

5

10

15

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

20

-0.1

0

5

10

Quarters

15

20

Quarters

(a) MP Shock, Interest Rate, Inflation

(b) Output

Figure 3: Impulse Responses of Interest rate, Inflation, and Consumption
payment. This striking heterogeneity in MPCs underlines the importance of obtaining
a realistic distribution of both wealth components. With such distributions in hand,
we now turn to the monetary transmission mechanism.

5

The Monetary Transmission Mechanism

Our main results concern the response of the economy to a one-time unexpected monetary shock. We assume that the economy is initially in steady state and that monetary
policy follows the Taylor rule (23) with t = 0. We consider an experiment in which
at time t = 0, there is a quarterly innovation to the Taylor rule of 0 = −0.25% (i.e.
−1% annually) that then mean-reverts at rate η, i.e., t = e−ηt 0 . We set η = 0.5,
corresponding to a quarterly autocorrelation of e−η = 0.61.

5.1

Impulse Response to a Monetary Shock

Figure 3(a) displays the exogenous time path for the innovation  and the implied
changes in the liquid interest rate and rate of inflation. Figure 3(b) displays the
corresponding impulse responses for aggregate consumption (nondurable plus housing services). In response to an expansionary monetary policy shock, the real return
on liquid assets rtb falls. This stimulates both consumption and investment, and leads
to an increase in both output and inflation. The magnitudes of these responses are,
at least qualitatively, consistent with empirical evidence from VARs. In particular,
output increases by more than consumption and less than investment.35
35

See e.g. Figure 1 in Christiano et al. (2005). Our model cannot generate hump-shaped impulse
responses since we abstract from the modeling ingredients in typical medium-scale DSGE models that

28

How do these magnitudes compare to the corresponding response in simple RANK
and TANK models? In equation (2) in Section 2 we showed that in the RANK model,
the elasticity of consumption with respect to the real interest rate is equal to −(γη)−1 ,
where γ1 is the IES. In our HANK model, the average IES is 0.75, so with a persistence
of η = 0.5, the implied elasticity in a RANK model would be −1.5. In TANK, the
corresponding number is nearly −2.36 Thus, in HANK the elasticity is about 50%
higher (Table 5, Column 1) than in RANK, and closer to the one in TANK. In the next
section, we shed light on the monetary transmission mechanism in HANK by studying
the response of aggregate non-durable consumption to a monetary shock through the
lens of a decomposition analogous to the one developed in Section 2.

5.2

Direct and Indirect Effects of Monetary Policy in HANK

We begin by writing aggregate non-durable consumption Ct explicitly as a function of
the sequence of prices and government policy {rtb , rta , wt , Tt }t≥0 :
Ct ({rtb , rta , wt , Tt }t≥0 )

Z
=

ct (a, b, z; {rtb , rta , wt , Tt }t≥0 )dµt .

(33)

Here ct (a, b, z; {rtb , rta , wt , Tt }t≥0 ) is the household consumption policy function and
µt (da, db, dz; {rtb , rta , wt , Tt }t≥0 ) is the joint distribution of liquid and illiquid assets and
idiosyncratic income.37 The explicit dependence of consumption on the time path of
transfers {Tt }t≥0 , in addition to prices, is important, since in our baseline specification
of fiscal policy, we assume that transfers adjust in response to the monetary shock to
keep the government budget constraint balanced, as we did in Section 2.2.
Totally differentiating (33), we decompose the consumption response at t = 0 as
Z
dC0 =
0

|

∞


Z ∞
∂C0
∂C0 b
∂C0 a ∂C0
dr dt +
dwt + a drt +
dTt dt .
∂wt
∂rt
∂Tt
∂rtb t
0
{z
} |
{z
}

direct effect

(34)

indirect effects

The first term in the decomposition reflects direct effects of a change in the path of
the liquid return, holding labor income, the illiquid return and fiscal policy constant.38
generate these dynamics, such as external habits and investment adjustment costs.
36
This calculation is based on equation (9) under the same debt-GDP ratio as in the model, a
fraction of spenders Λ = 0.3, and the assumption that the government distributes transfers uniformly
in the population, i.e. ΛT = Λ.
37
Strictly speaking, because households are forward-looking the consumption policy function at
time t is only a function of the sequence of prices from time t onwards {rsb , rsa , ws , Ts }s≥t . Similarly,
the distribution is backward-looking and is only a function of the sequence of prices up to time t,
{rsb , rsa , ws , Ts }s<t . We chose the somewhat less precise notation above for simplicity.
38
We define the direct effect of a monetary policy with respect to changes in rtb because this is

29

The path of liquid rates enters the households’ budget constraint and households therefore respond directly to interest rate changes. This direct effect itself consists of intertemporal substitution, as well as income effects which arise because aggregate liquid
assets are in positive net supply and unequally distributed in the cross section.39
The remaining terms in the decomposition reflect the indirect effects of changes in
wages, illiquid return, and the government budget constraint that arise in general equilibrium. There are three separate indirect channels. First, when the liquid return falls,
the aforementioned direct effects cause households to increase consumption. In order
to meet this additional demand for goods, intermediate firms increase their demand for
labor, which pushes up the wage. Households respond to the increase in labor income
by further increasing their consumption expenditures. Second, if the illiquid return
changes in response to the change in the liquid return, consumption may be further
affected through deposits into/withdrawals from the illiquid account. Third, households respond to variation in income transfers that result from the fiscal response to a
lower liquid return. The fiscal response is due to both the change in the government’s
interest payments on its debt and because additional labor income results in a growth
in tax revenues for the government, which loosens the government budget constraint,
and leads to an increase in transfers.
We now evaluate each of these components numerically. We do this by feeding each
element of the time paths of equilibrium prices and government policy {rtb , rta , wt , Tt }t≥0 ,
into the households’ optimization problem one at a time, while keeping the remaining
elements fixed at their steady state values. For example, we compute the first term in
(34), the direct effect of changes in the liquid return {rtb }t≥0 , as
b
Ctr

Z
=

c(a, b, z; {rtb , r̄a , w̄, T̄ }t≥0 )dµrt

b

b

where µtr = µt (da, db, dz; {rtb , r̄a , w̄, T̄ }t≥0 ). That is, the direct effect on consumption
of changes in {rtb }t≥0 is the aggregate partial-equilibrium consumption response of a
continuum of households that face a time-varying interest rate path {rtb }t≥0 but an
illiquid asset return r̄a , wage w̄ and lump-sum transfer T̄ constant at their steady-state
values. The other terms in the decomposition are computed in a similar fashion.
the relevant price from the point of view of households. Alternatively, we could define it “even more
directly” with respect to the monetary policy shock t . With this alternative decomposition, the direct
effect in (34) would be split further into a direct due to t and an indirect effect due to inflation πt .
This follows because rtb = r̄b + (φ − 1)πt + t from (23) and the Fisher equation. Figure 3(a) shows
that the drops in rtb and t are almost equal so that the twoR decompositions are quantitatively similar.
∞
39
Auclert (2014) further decomposes this direct effect 0 (∂C0 /∂rtb )drtb into various components
using insights from consumer theory.

30

5

0.5
Total Response
Direct: rb
Indirect: ra
Indirect: w
Indirect: T

b

Liquid return: r (pp annual)
Iliquid return: ra (pp annual)
Real wage: w (%)
Lump sum transfer: T (%)

Deviation

3

0.4

Deviation (%)

4

2
1
0
-1

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

5

10

15

-0.1

20

Quarters

0

5

10

15

20

Quarters

(a) Prices

(b) Consumption Decomposition

Figure 4: Direct and Indirect Effects of Monetary Policy in HANK
Notes: Returns are shown as annual percentage point deviations from steady state. Real wage and
lump sum transfers are shown as log deviations from steady state.

The equilibrium time paths for the prices that we feed into the households’ problem
are displayed in Figure 4(a), alongside the resulting decomposition in Figure 4(b). In
the bottom panel of Table 5 we explicitly report the contribution of each component
to the overall first quarter consumption response.40
The decomposition reveals two quantitative insights into the monetary transmission
mechanism, which turn out to be extremely robust. First, the combined indirect effects
are substantially larger than the direct effect. In our HANK model, the indirect effects
account for 90 percent of the first quarter consumption response, while the direct effect
accounts for only 10 percent of the response. This is in stark contrast to typical RANK
models, as we argued in Section 2. In RANK models, aggregate consumption rises in
response to a fall in interest rates, even holding income constant, because households
substitute current consumption for future consumption.
Second, in HANK the fiscal response to the monetary policy shock, captured by
the term labeled “Indirect: T ”, plays a significant role in the overall dynamics of
aggregate consumption. Transfers rise when the interest payments on government
debt fall and aggregate income rises, and these additional transfers are largely spent
by hand-to-mouth households. This mechanism shares similarities with TANK models
with government debt where, like in HANK, the presence of non-Ricardian households
means that the fiscal response may be a potentially important component of the indirect
40

In principle, the contribution of the components need not add to 100%, since the exact decomposition holds only for infinitesimal changes in prices, as in Proposition 1 for the stylized model of
Section 2. In practice, though, they almost exactly do.

31

Baseline
(1)

δu = 0
(2)

Sticky wages
(3)

φ = 1.1
(4)

φ = 2.0
(5)

ε
θ

Change in rb (pp)

-0.23%

-0.22%

-0.23%

-0.24%

-0.18%

-0.21%

-0.24%

Change in Y0 (%)
Implied elasticity Y0

0.41%
-1.77

0.17%
-0.79

0.61%
-2.65

0.43%
-1.78

0.33%
-1.81

0.38%
-1.78

0.44%
-1.79

Change in C0 (%)
Implied elasticity C0

0.50%
-2.20

0.48%
-2.17

0.70%
-3.06

0.53%
-2.21

0.42%
-2.26

0.47%
-2.22

0.54%
-2.23

9%
69%
24%
0%

12%
59%
32%
0%

12%
58%
30%
0%

12%
58%
31%
0%

13%
59%
32%
0%

Component of Change in C due to:
Direct effect: rb
12%
12%
Indirect effect: w
59%
58%
Indirect effect: T
32%
31%
Indirect effect: ra
0%
0%

= 0.2
(6)

ε
θ

= 0.02
(7)

Table 5: Decomposition of monetary shock on non-durable consumption
Notes: First quarter responses of quarterly flows. Column (1) is baseline specification as described in
main text. In column (2) there is no variable capital utilization. In column (3) we assume partial
real wage stickiness. In columns (4)-(5) we alter the Taylor rule coefficient. In columns (6)-(7) we
alter the wage stickiness parameter.

effects of monetary policy.
Both of these findings are robust. The remaining columns of Table 5 report analogous results from various alternative model specifications. In the baseline model we
allowed for variable capital utilization to help increase the response of investment to
the monetary shock. When variable capital utilization is fixed (column 2), the smaller
investment volatility means that the response of output is only half as large as in the
baseline. However, both the consumption response and its decomposition are unaffected by this change. In the baseline model we assumed full wage flexibility. Allowing
for wage stickiness (column 3) leads to a 50% larger overall response of both output
and consumption, which is weighted even more heavily towards the general equilibrium
increase in labor income.41 Since marginal costs do not rise as much when wages are
sticky, the aggregate demand effects are stronger and household labor income increases
even more than in the baseline. The remaining columns of Table 5 show that the two
key parameters that determine the strength of the New Keynesian elements in the
41

See Appendix B.5 for details of the model with sticky wages. We assume that the real wage is
an equally weighted geometric average of households’ real marginal rate of substitution and the real
steady state wage, and that equilibrium labor is determined solely by labor demand. This is a simple
and commonly used strategy for incorporating sticky wages (see e.g. Shimer, 2010).

32

T adjusts
(1)

G adjusts
(2)

B g adjusts
(3)

Change in rb (pp)

-0.23%

-0.21%

-0.25%

Change in Y0 (%)
Implied elasticity Y0

0.41%
-1.77

0.81%
-3.86

0.13%
-0.52

Change in C0 (%)
Implied elasticity C0

0.50%
-2.20

0.64%
-3.05

0.19%
-0.77

9%
91%
0%
0%

37%
48%
15%
0%

Component of Change in C due to:
Direct effect: rb
12%
Indirect effect: w
59%
Indirect effect: T
32%
Indirect effect: ra
0%

Table 6: Decomposition of monetary shock on non-durable consumption
Notes: First quarter responses of quarterly flows. Column (1) is baseline specification as described in
main text. In column (2) government expenditure adjust to balance the government budget
constraint instead of lump sum transfers adjusting. In column (3) government debt adjusts.

model —the Taylor rule coefficient φ and the degree of price stickiness θ— affect the
overall size of the consumption response, but not its decomposition. Finally, we note
that these are all variations of the model that deliver very different output responses,
but the consumption decomposition remains unaltered.
In Table 5.2 we report the overall first quarter response and decomposition for
alternative assumptions about how the government satisfies its intertemporal budget
constraint. Column 1 contains the baseline case, in which government expenditures
and debt are held constant, and transfers adjust in every instant. When instead we
hold transfers and government debt constant and let expenditures adjust in every
instant (column 2), the overall impact of monetary policy is stronger. When transfers
adjust, only high MPC households increase consumption, and by less than one-for-one
with the transfer, whereas when government expenditures adjust, the reduced interest
payments on debt translate one-for-one into an increase in aggregate demand. As a
consequence, in this latter case, almost all of the increase in private consumption is
due to the general equilibrium boost in labor income.
The remaining alternative is to hold both transfers and government expenditure
constant, and to let government debt absorb the majority of the fiscal imbalance on
impact. To do this, we assume that lump-sum transfers jump by a very small amount on
impact and then decay back to their steady state level at a slow exogenous rate. Given
33

the assumed rate of decay, the initial jump is chosen so that the government’s budget
constraint holds in present value terms. When government debt absorbs the slack,
the monetary shock has a much smaller impact on the economy. In the economies
of columns (1) and (2), a sizable fraction of the overall effect of monetary policy is
due to additional government transfers or expenditures from reduced debt payments.
Without this stimulus to aggregate demand, labor income does not increase as much.42
We conclude that the type of fiscal policy adjustment that follows a monetary policy
shock influences the overall effectiveness of monetary policy, but in all cases the direct
effect of the change in rb is weak.

5.3

The Distribution of the Monetary Transmission

To better understand why the indirect effects of an unexpected reduction in interest
rates are large in HANK, while the direct effects are small, it is instructive to inspect
the consumption response to the monetary policy shock across the entire distribution
of liquid wealth holdings.
Figure 5(a) shows the elasticity of average consumption of households with a given
liquid wealth level to the change in the interest rate at each point in the liquid wealth
distribution (black line, left axis), along with the corresponding consumption shares of
each liquid wealth type (light blue histogram, right axis). Integrating the elasticities
in the figure weighted by these consumption shares yields (the negative of) the overall
elasticity of the monetary shock, which is −2.2 (Table 5, column (1)).43 The distribution of consumption responses features spikes larger than 5 at the borrowing constraint
b = b and at b = 0. Households with positive liquid assets contribute an elasticity that
is slightly below 2.
Why are indirect effects large? Figure 5(b), which shows the split of the distribution of consumption responses into direct and indirect effects, reveals that in all parts
of the distribution, the indirect effects are stronger than the direct effect.
The presence of hand-to-mouth households is a key determinant of the overall impact of monetary policy on the macroeconomy. For households with near-zero liquid
wealth and those at the borrowing limit, the indirect response of consumption is around
42
In Column (3) the transfer decays at a quarterly rate of 0.05. We experimented with a decay rates
between 0.02 and 0.10 and our main conclusions are unchanged: the overall change in C0 varies from
0.09% to 0.12% and the direct effect from rb varies from 13% to 35%. Clearly, with a lower (higher)
decay rate, transfers at impact increase by less (more) and, as a result, the instantaneous effect of
monetary policy on aggregate consumption is slightly lower (higher).
43
R The average consumption of households with a given liquid wealth
R ∞ level b is defined as Ct (b) =
ct (a, b, z)µt (da, b, dz) so that aggregate consumption satisfies Ct = b Ct (b)db. Therefore the overall
elasticity satisfies is a consumption weighted average of the elasticities at each level of liquid wealth.

34

7

0.2

0.2

0.18

1.4

0.16

1.2

0.14

1

0.14

0.8

0.12

0.6

0.1

Direct Effects
Indirect Effects

6

0.12

4

% Change

Elasticity

5

0.1
3

0.08

0.16

0.08

0.4

0.06

2

0.18

0.06
0.2

0.04

0.04

1

0

0.02
0

0

50

100

150

200

0.02
-0.2

0
250

0

$ Thousands

50

100

150

200

0
250

$ Thousands

(a) Elasticity with respect to rb

(b) Consumption Change: Indirect and direct

Figure 5: Consumption Responses by Liquid Wealth Positions
1.4%, four times the response of high wealth households (around 0.35%). Figure 6(a),
which offers a breakdown of the indirect effect among its three components, shows that
these households respond strongly to the change in both labor income and government
transfers that occur in equilibrium in the wake of a monetary shock. As explained in
Section 4, the fraction of hand-to-mouth households in our model is consistent with empirical evidence. Moreover, because many of these households have moderate income
and own illiquid assets, the consumption share of the hand-to-mouth group (which are
the relevant weights for the overall elasticity) is around 15% and, hence, much larger
than in models where all hand-to-mouth households are income- and wealth-poor.
The indirect consumption response remains positive even for high liquid wealth
households. Figure 6(a) reveals that this is partly due to the labor-income component
of the indirect effect: our assumption of GHH utility implies a complementarity between
consumption and labor supply which amplifies the consumption response to the general
equilibrium increase in wages.44 To explore the importance of this complementarity, we
have computed results for a version of our model where we artificially adjust preferences
so that the marginal utility of consumption is not affected by changes in labor supply
in response to the monetary policy shock. In this economy, the overall effect of the
shock is smaller, but the indirect channel remains dominant – its contribution falls
from 88% to 77%.
Finally, the indirect effect due to ra is close to zero everywhere in the distribution,
including for rich households, since the equilibrium change in ra is insignificant.
44

An increase in the wage w leads to an increase in labor supply `, and our utility function (32)
implies that the cross-partial uc` (c, h, `) > 0. For recent micro-evidence on the complementarity
between work-hours and expenditures, see, e.g. Aguiar et al. (2013).

35

0.2

% Change

1.2

0.2
1.4
1.2

0.16

1

0.14

0.8

0.12

0.6

0.1
0.08

0.4

Consumption Response (Direct)
Deposit Response (Direct)

0.18

% Change

Indirect Effect: ra
Indirect Effect: T
Indirect Effect: w

1.4

0.18
0.16

1

0.14

0.8

0.12

0.6

0.1
0.08

0.4

0.06

0.06

0.2

0.2
0.04

0.04

0

0
0.02

-0.2
0

50

100

150

200

0.02
-0.2

0
250

0

$ Thousands

50

100

150

200

0
250

$ Thousands

(a) Breakdown of indirect effect

(b) Direct response vs deposit response

Figure 6: Consumption Responses by Liquid Wealth Position
Why are direct effects small? Figure 5(b) reveals that the direct effects of monetary policy are very small throughout the whole distribution of liquid wealth, with
the exception of indebted households near the borrowing limit who gain from lower
interest rates because of a positive cash-flow effect: lower interest payments on their
debt translate into higher consumption.45 Why do high liquid wealth households not
respond more strongly to the reduction in interest rates? There are two reasons: a
negative income effect and portfolio reallocation. First, the pronounced skewness in
the liquid wealth distribution implies that the vast majority of aggregate consumption
is accounted for by households with more liquid wealth than per-capita government
debt. In Figure 5(b), these are households with more than $35,000 of liquid wealth,
and the sum of their consumption shares is large. The net income effect of the reduction of interest rates for these households is negative, because the increase in transfers
is less than the reduction in interest earnings, and offsets the positive intertemporal
substitution effect.
Second, the direct consumption response is small even for households with liquid
wealth that is below the debt-per-capita threshold, but positive. This is somewhat
surprising because, for these unconstrained households, the net income effect is positive and reinforces intertemporal substitution. The reason why consumption of these
households responds so weakly to the fall in rb is due to the two-asset structure. A
reduction in rb makes saving in liquid assets less attractive. In a one-asset model this
implies an incentive for households to reduce savings and consume more. In contrast,
45

Di Maggio et al. (2014) and Cloyne et al. (2015) study borrowers with adjustable rate mortgages
who faced changes in monthly interest payments, and find evidence of a positive consumption response
to a drop in monthly payments.

36

in a two-asset model, households also have the option to shift funds from their liquid to
illiquid accounts. If the return on illiquid assets does not fall too much, then households
may respond to the fall in rb by rebalancing their portfolio rather than their raising
consumption. Figure 6(b) shows that this is exactly what happens. The solid blue line
is the consumption response to the direct change in rb , while the dashed red line shows
the response of net deposits d (expressed as a fraction of steady-state consumption
for comparability). Portfolio reallocation between the two savings instruments, which
occurs through an increase in illiquid deposits, is more sensitive to changes in relative
returns than is reallocation between consumption and savings.46

6

Conclusion

In our Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) framework, monetary policy affects aggregate consumption primarily through indirect effects that arise from a general
equilibrium increase in labor demand. This finding is in stark contrast to Representative Agent New Keynesian (RANK) economies, where intertemporal substitution
drives virtually all of the transmission from interest rates to consumption. Moreover,
in HANK, the way that fiscal policy adjusts in response to an interest rate change
profoundly affects the overall effectiveness of monetary policy – a result that is also at
odds with the Ricardian nature of standard RANK economies.
An accurate representation of the cross-section of household portfolios, wealth distribution, and consumption behavior lies at the heart of these results. First, the
co-existence of liquid and illiquid assets in our households’ portfolio enables us to
match the sizable fraction of hand-to-mouth households observed in the data. These
households are highly responsive to labor income changes and unresponsive to interest rate changes. Moreover, since they are non-Ricardian, their consumption responds
to changes in the timing of taxes and transfers. Second, the vast inequality in liquid
wealth and the two-asset structure imply that, even for non hand-to-mouth households,
a cut in liquid rates leads to strong offsetting income effects on consumption and, to
the extent that the spread between asset returns grows (as in our model), adjustments
46

The model’s implication that the spread between the illiquid and the liquid return increases seems,
at a first pass, consistent with the evidence on how the returns on equity and housing respond to a
monetary policy shock. Indeed, the evidence is even consistent with an increase in ra following an
interest rate cut, which would reinforce our finding that some households respond to changes in the
liquid return by rebalancing their portfolio rather than increasing consumption (Jordà et al., 2015;
Rigobon and Sack, 2004). We also ran an experiment where we feed into the household problem a
fall in ra of the same magnitude as the fall in rb , so that the ra − rb spread remains constant. As
expected, the response of net deposits is substantially smaller, but consumption still barely responds
in that part of the distribution, for two reasons. First, there is an additional negative income effect
from the fall in ra . Second, part of illiquid assets is housing on which the service flow is not affected.

37

in financial portfolios towards more lucrative assets, instead of inducing an increased
desire to consume.
A corollary of these findings, which is important for the conduct of monetary policy,
is that the monetary authority must rely on powerful general equilibrium feedbacks that
boost household labor income by increasing aggregate demand in order to induce an
economic expansion. In this paper we emphasized the mechanism that operates through
the fiscal policy reaction function. In ongoing work (Kaplan et al., 2016), we illustrate
that, even in the absence of this feedback from fiscal policy, HANK can still generate
large indirect, and total, effects of monetary policy through an alternative mechanism
based on investments and return spreads. When a fall in the liquid rate lowers the
cost of funds for the financial sector, the rate of firms’ profts (and thus the return to
the illiquid asset) increases, and households shift resources towards illiquid productive
assets: this investment boom triggers a multiplier effect on the macroeconomy.
When the monetary authority is constrained in its ability to lower nominal rates,
forward guidance may be a tempting alternative policy instrument. Viewed through the
lens of RANK models, this strategy holds great promise (Del Negro et al., 2012). Recent
research by McKay et al. (2015) and Werning (2015) examines to what extent this
finding carries over to economies with incomplete markets. In Kaplan et al. (2016), we
are exploring the implications of our findings for the effectiveness of forward guidance.
Forward guidance is effective at increasing current aggregate consumption as long as the
same households who account for the initial response to conventional monetary policy
increase their consumption today in response to future growth in income.47 However,
in HANK, it is hand-to-mouth households who mostly account for the impulse that
then propagates the monetary policy shock. Then, once again depending on the type
and timing of the fiscal response, the power of forward guidance relative to that of
conventional monetary policy may be greatly weakened.

47

For this reason, as emphasized by Werning (2015), forward guidance can be very powerful even
when liquidity constraints bind for a nontrivial fraction of households, to the extent that unconstrained
households are responsible for the initial impulse.

38

References
Achdou, Y., J. Han, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2014): “Heterogeneous
Agent Models in Continuous Time,” Discussion paper, Princeton University.
Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, et al. (2013): “Deconstructing Life Cycle Expenditure,” Journal
of Political Economy, 121(3), 437–492.
Auclert, A. (2014): “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” Discussion paper,
MIT.
Bayer, C., R. Luetticke, L. Pham-Dao, and V. Tjaden (2015): “Precautionary Savings, Illiquid Assets, and the Aggregate Consequences of Shocks to Household Income
Risk,” Discussion paper, University of Bonn.
Benhabib, J., A. Bisin, and S. Zhu (2014): “The Wealth Distribution in Bewley Models
with Investment Risk,” Discussion paper, NYU.
Bilbiie, F. O. (2008): “Limited asset markets participation, monetary policy and (inverted)
aggregate demand logic,” Journal of Economic Theory, 140(1), 162–196.
Caballero, R. J., and E. Farhi (2014): “The Safety Trap,” NBER Working Papers
19927, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Campbell, J. Y., and N. G. Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income and Interest Rates:
Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Volume
4, NBER Chapters, pp. 185–246. National Bureau of Economic Research.
(1991): “The Response of Consumption to Income : A Cross-Country Investigation,”
European Economic Review, 35(4), 723–756.
Carroll, C. D. (2012): “Representing Consumption and Saving without A Representative
Consumer,” in Measuring Economic Sustainability and Progress, pp. 115–134. University
of Chicago Press.
Challe, E., J. Matheron, X. Ragot, and M. Rubio-Ramirez (2015): “Precautionary
Saving and Aggregate Demand,” Discussion Paper 535, Banque de France.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
1–45.
Cloyne, J., C. Ferreira, and P. Surico (2015): “Monetary Policy when Households
Have Debt: New Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism,” Discussion paper, London
Business School.
Cloyne, J., and P. Surico (2014): “Household Debt and the Dynamic Effects of Income
Tax Changes,” Discussion paper, Bank of England.
Congressional Budget Office (2013): “The Distribution of Federal Spending and Taxes
in 2006,” Discussion paper, Congress of the United States.
Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2012): “The forward guidance puzzle,” Discussion paper.
Den Haan, W., P. Rendahl, and M. Riegler (2015): “Unemployment (Fears) and
Deflationary Spirals,” Discussion paper, University of Cambridge.
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and R. Ramcharan (2014): “Monetary Policy PassThrough: Household Consumption and Voluntary Deleveraging,” Discussion paper, University of California, San Diego.
Diaz-Gimenez, J., A. Glover, and J.-V. Rı́os-Rull (2011): “Facts on the Distributions
of Earnings, Income, and Wealth in the United States: 2007 update,” Federal Reserve

39

Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 34(1), 2–31.
Gali, J., and M. Gertler (1999): “Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 44(2), 195–222.
Gali, J., J. D. Lopez-Salido, and J. Valles (2007): “Understanding the Effects of
Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
5(1), 227–270.
Gornemann, N., K. Kuester, and M. Nakajima (2014): “Doves for the Rich, Hawks
for the Poor? Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy,” Discussion paper, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), 402–17.
Guerrieri, V., and G. Lorenzoni (2011): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
Liquidity Trap,” NBER Working Papers 17583, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2015): “What Do Data on Millions
of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?,” NBER Working Papers 20913,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Iacoviello, M. (2005): “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764.
Jappelli, T., and L. Pistaferri (2010): “The Consumption Response to Income
Changes,” Annual Review of Economics, 2, 479–506.
Johnson, D. S., J. A. Parker, and N. S. Souleles (2006): “Household Expenditure
and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 96(5), 1589–1610.
Jordà, Ò., M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2015): “Betting the House,” Journal of
International Economics, 96, S2–S18.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2016): “A Note on Unconventional Monetary
Policy in HANK,” Discussion paper, Princeton University.
Kaplan, G., and G. L. Violante (2014): “A Model of the Consumption Response to
Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, 82(4), 1199–1239.
Kaplan, G., G. L. Violante, and J. Weidner (2014): “The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 48(1 (Spring), 77–153.
Krusell, P., and A. A. Smith (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867–896.
Luetticke, R. (2015): “Transmission of Monetary Policy and Heterogeneity in Household
Portfolios,” Discussion paper, University of Bonn.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2015): “The Power of Forward Guidance
Revisited,” NBER Working Papers 20882, National Bureau of Economic Research.
McKay, A., and R. Reis (2013): “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business
Cycle,” NBER Working Papers 19000, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Misra, K., and P. Surico (2014): “Consumption, Income Changes, and Heterogeneity:
Evidence from Two Fiscal Stimulus Programs,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4), 84–106.
Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2009): “What are the effects of fiscal policy shocks?,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24(6), 960–992.
Oh, H., and R. Reis (2012): “Targeted transfers and the fiscal response to the great
recession,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(S), S50–S64.

40

Parker, J. A., N. S. Souleles, D. S. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2013): “Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008,” American Economic Review, 103(6), 2530–53.
Ramey, V. (2015): “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation,” Discussion paper,
University of California, San Diego.
Ravn, M. O., and V. Sterk (2012): “Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions,” Discussion
Paper 1501, Centre for Macroeconomics (CFM).
Rigobon, R., and B. Sack (2004): “The impact of monetary policy on asset prices,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(8), 1553–1575.
Rotemberg, J. J. (1982): “Sticky Prices in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, 90(6), 1187–1211.
Schmidt, L. (2015): “Climbing and Falling Off the Ladder: Asset Pricing Implications of
Labor Market Event Risk,” Discussion paper.
Schorfheide, F. (2008): “DSGE model-based estimation of the New Keynesian Phillips
curve,” Economic Quarterly, (Fall), 397–433.
Shimer, R. (2010): Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton University Press.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.
Sterk, V., and S. Tenreyro (2015): “The Transmission of Monetary Policy through
Redistributions and Durable Purchases,” Discussion paper.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825–853.
Werning, I. (2015): “Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand,” Working Paper 21448,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

41

Appendix: For Online Publication
A

Proofs and Additional Details for Section 2

This Appendix spells out in more detail the simple RANK and TANK models in Section
2 and proves the results stated there.

A.1

Details for Section 2.1

A representative household has preferences over utility from consumption Ct discounted
at rate ρ ≥ 0
Z ∞
C 1−γ
,
γ > 0.
(35)
e−ρt U (Ct )dt,
U (C) =
1−γ
0
There is a representative firm that produces output using only labor according to the
production function Y = N . Both the wage and final goods price are perfectly rigid
and normalized to one. The household commits to supplying any amount of labor
demanded at the prevailing wage so that its labor income equals Yt in every instant.
The household receives (pays) lump-sum government transfers (taxes) {Tt }t≥0 and can
borrow and save in a riskless government bond at rate rt . Its initial bond holdings are
B0 . The household’s budget constraint in present-value form is
Z

∞
−

e

Rt
0

rs ds

Z
Ct dt =

∞

e−

Rt
0

rs ds

(Yt + Tt )dt + B0 .

(36)

0

0

The government sets the path of taxes/transfers in a way that satisfies its budget
constraint
Z ∞ R
t
e− 0 rs ds Tt dt + B0 = 0.
(37)
0

As described in Section 2, the monetary authority sets an exogenous time path for real
rates {rt }t≥0 .
An equilibrium in this economy is a time path for income {Yt }t≥0 such that (i)
the household maximizes (35) subject to (36) taking as given {rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 , (ii) the
government budget constraint (37) holds, and (iii) the goods market clears
Ct ({rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 ) = Yt ,

(38)

where Ct ({rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 ) is the optimal consumption function for the household.
The overall effect of a change in the path of interest rates on consumption is determined from only two conditions. First, household optimization implies that the
time path of consumption satisfies the Euler equation Ċt /Ct = γ1 (rt − ρ). Second, by
42

assumption, consumption returns back to its steady state level Ct → C̄ = Ȳ as t → ∞.
Therefore, we have


1
Ct = C̄ exp −
γ

A.2

∞

Z


(rs − ρ)ds

1
d log Ct = −
γ

⇔

t

Z

∞

drs ds.

(39)

t

Proof of Proposition 1

The proof covers both the case B0 = 0 as in Proposition 1 and the case B0 > 0 as
in (7). A key virtue of the simple model we consider is that it admits a closed-form
solution for the household’s optimal consumption function.
Lemma A.2 For any time paths {rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 , initial consumption is given by
Z ∞ R

1
− 0t rs ds
e
C0 ({rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 ) =
(Yt + Tt )dt + B0 ,
χ
0
Z ∞
γ−1 R t
1
e− γ 0 rs ds− γ ρt dt.
χ=

(40)
(41)

0

The derivatives of the consumption function evaluated at (rt , Yt , Tt ) = (ρ, Ȳ , T̄ ) are:48
∂C0
1
= − Ȳ e−ρt + ρB0 e−ρt
∂rt
γ

∂C0
∂C0
=
= ρe−ρt .
∂Yt
∂Tt

(42)

Proof of Lemma A.2 Integrating the Euler equation forward in time, we have
1
log Ct − log C0 =
γ

Z

t

(rs − ρ)ds

 Z t

1
Ct = C0 exp
(rs − ρ)ds
γ 0

⇒

0

Substituting into the budget constraint (36):
Z
C0

∞
−

e

Rt
0

rs ds+ γ1

Rt

0 (rs −ρ)ds

Z
dt =

0

∞

e−

Rτ
0

rs ds

(Yτ + Tτ )dτ + B0 ,

0

or, equivalently, (40) with χ defined in (41).
Next, consider the derivatives ∂C0 /∂rt , ∂C0 /∂Yt and ∂C0 /∂Tt . Differentiating C0
Rt
in (40) with respect to Yt yields ∂C0 /∂Yt = χ1 e− 0 rs ds . Evaluating at the steady state,
we have
∂C0
= ρe−ρt .
(43)
∂Yt
48

In our continuous-time model the interest rate rt and income Yt are functions of time. Strictly
speaking, the consumption function C0 ({rt , Yt , Tt }t≥0 ) is therefore a functional (i.e. a “function
of a function”). The derivatives ∂C0 /∂rt , ∂C0 /∂Yt and ∂C0 /∂Tt are therefore so-called functional
derivatives rather than partial derivatives.

43

The derivative with respect to Tt is clearly identical.
Next consider ∂C0 /∂rt . Write (40) as

1
Y P DV + T P DV + B0 ,
χ
Z
Z ∞ R
− 0τ rs ds
P DV
e
Yτ dτ,
T
=
=

C0 =
Y

P DV

∞

e

−

Rτ
0

(44)
rs ds

Tτ dτ.

0

0

We have
∂C0
1
=
∂rt
χ



∂Y P DV
∂T P DV
+
∂rt
∂rt




1 ∂χ
Y P DV + T P DV + B0 .
2
χ ∂rt

−

(45)

We calculate the different components in turn. From (44)
∂Y P DV
∂
=
∂rt
∂rt

∞

Z

e

−

Rτ
0

rs ds

0

∂
Yτ dτ =
∂rt

Z

∞

e−

Rτ
0

rs ds

Yτ dτ

(46)

t

Rτ

where we used that e− 0 rs ds Yτ does not depend on rt for τ < t. Next, note that for
τ >t
Z τ
Rτ
Rτ
∂ − R τ rs ds
∂
−
r
ds
s
e 0
= −e 0
rs ds = −e− 0 rs ds
∂rt
∂rt 0
R
τ
where the second equality uses ∂r∂ t 0 rs ds = 1 for τ > t. Substituting into (46), we
have
Z ∞ R
τ
∂Y P DV
e− 0 rs ds Yτ dτ.
=−
∂rt
t
Similarly
∂T P DV
=−
∂rt
and

∂
∂χ
=
∂rt
∂rt

Z

∞

− γ−1
γ

e
t

Rτ
0

rs ds− γ1 ρτ

∞

Z

e−

Rτ
0

rs ds

Tτ dτ,

(47)

t

γ−1
dτ = −
γ

Z

∞

e−

γ−1
γ

Rτ
0

rs ds− γ1 ρτ

dτ.

t

Plugging these into (45)
∂C0
1
=−
∂rt
χ

Z

∞

e
t

−

Rτ
0

rs ds

1 γ−1
(Yτ +Tτ )dτ + 2
χ γ

Z

∞

e−

γ−1
γ

Rτ
0

rs ds− γ1 ρτ


dτ Y P DV + T P DV + B0 .

t

Evaluating at the steady state and using χ̄ = 1/ρ, Y P DV = Ȳ /ρ, T P DV = T̄ /ρ and
R ∞ −ρτ
e dτ = e−ρt /ρ:
t

∂C0
γ − 1 −ρt
= −(Ȳ + T̄ )e−ρt +
e
Ȳ + T̄ + ρB0 .
∂rt
γ
44

(48)

The government budget constraint is T P DV +B0 = 0, so that in steady state T̄ = −ρB0
and hence (48) reduces to the expression in (42).
Conclusion of Proof Plugging (42) into (3), we have

Z ∞
Z ∞
Z ∞
1
−ρt
−ρt
e−ρt dTt dt.
e dYt dt + ρ
dC0 = − Ȳ + ρB0
e drt dt + ρ
γ
0
0
0

(49)

It remains to characterize dYt and dTt and to plug in. First, from (39) in equilibrium
Z

1
d log Yt = −
γ

∞

drs ds.

(50)

t

Next, totally differentiate the government budget constraint
∞

Z
0

∂
∂rt

Z

∞
−

e

Rτ
0

rs ds


Tτ dτ

Z
drt dt +

0

∞

e−

Rτ
0

rs ds

dTτ dτ = 0.

0

R∞
R∞
Using (47) and evaluating at the steady state − ρ1 0 T̄ e−ρt drt dt+ 0 e−ρt dTτ dτ . Using
that T̄ = −ρB0 ,
Z
Z
∞

∞

e−ρt dTτ dτ = −B0

0

e−ρt drt dt

(51)

0

Plugging (50) and (51) into (49), we have

Z ∞
Z
Z
Z
1
ρ ∞ −ρt ∞
B0
B0 ∞ −ρt
−ρt
e drt dt −
drs dsdt − ρ
d log C0 = − + ρ
e
e drt dt.
γ
γ 0
Ȳ
Ȳ 0
0
t
{z
} |
{z
}
{z
} |
|
direct response to r

indirect effects due to Y

indirect effects due to T

(52)
Equation (4) in Proposition 1 is the special case with B0 = 0.
To see that this decomposition is additive, consider the second term in (52) and
integrate by parts:
ρ
γ

Z

∞
−ρt

Z

e
0

t

∞

Z
Z ∞
Z Z
∞
ρ ∞ −ρs
ρ ∞ ∞ −ρs
drs dsdt = −
e ds
drs ds −
e dsdrt dt
γ t
γ 0
t
t
0
Z
Z
∞
ρ 1 −ρt ∞
ρ 1 ∞ −ρt
=− e
drs ds −
e drt dt
γρ
γρ 0
t
0
Z
Z
1 ∞ −ρt
1 ∞
=
drs ds −
e drt dt.
γ 0
γ 0

Therefore it is easy to see that the first, second and third terms in (52) sum to
R∞
− γ1 0 drs ds.
45

Remark: The fact that second term in (4) scales with 1/γ —and therefore the result that with B0 = 0 the split between direct and indirect effects is independent of
1/γ— is an equilibrium outcome. In particular, without imposing equilibrium, the
decomposition with B0 = 0 (4) is
1
d log C0 = −
γ
|

∞

Z

Z

−ρt

e drt dt + ρ
{z
} |

0

direct response to r

But in equilibrium d log Yt = − γ1

R∞
t

0

∞

e−ρt d log Yt dt .
{z
}

GE effects due to Y

drs ds which scales with 1/γ. Also see footnote 12.

R∞
Derivation of (5): In the special case (1), we have drt = e−ηt dr0 . Hence 0 e−ρt drt dt =
R∞
R∞
R∞
R ∞ −(ρ+η)t
R∞
1
dtdr0 = ρ+η
e
dr0 . Similarly 0 e−ρt t drs dsdt = 0 e−ρt t e−ηs dsdtdr0 =
0R
1 ∞ −(ρ+η)t
1
e
dtdr0 = η1 ρ+η
dr0 . Plugging these into (4) yields (5).
η 0

A.3

Details for Section 2.2

In the environment described in Section 2.2, aggregate consumption is given by
Ct = ΛCtsp + (1 − Λ)Ctsa .

(53)

Savers face the present-value budget constraint
Z

∞
−

e

Rt
0

rs ds

Ctsa dt

Z
=

0

∞

e−

Rt
0

rs ds

(Yt + Ttsa )dt + B0sa ,

0

The government budget constraint is
Z

∞

e−

Rt
0

rs ds

(ΛTtsp + (1 − Λ)Ttsa )dt + B0 = 0,

(54)

0

where Bt is government debt. The market clearing condition for government debt is
Bt = (1 − Λ)Btsa .

(55)

We additionally assume that the economy starts at a steady state in which Ctsp =
Ctsa = C̄ = Ȳ (and hence T̄ sp = 0).
We now show how to derive the results of Section 2.2. First, consider the overall
effect of interest rate changes on aggregate consumption. Asbefore, the consumption
R∞
response of savers is given by Ctsa = C̄ exp − γ1 t (rs − ρ)ds . From (53) and because

46

spender consumption equals Ctsp = Yt + Ttsp , therefore
Ct = Λ(Yt +

Ttsp )



1
+ (1 − Λ)C̄ exp −
γ

Z

∞


(rs − ρ)ds .

t

Using that in equilibrium Ct = Yt :


Z
1 ∞
Λ
sp
T ({rs }s≥0 ) + C̄ exp −
(rs − ρ)ds
Ct =
1−Λ t
γ t

(56)

We next show how equation (8) is derived. When Bt = 0 for all t and hence spenders
receive no transfers Ttsp = 0, we have
1
d log Yt = d log Ct = −
γ

Z

∞

drs ds.
t

The total response of aggregate consumption and income in this simple TANK model
is therefore identical to that in the RANK version above. Given this expression for
income changes, the consumption response of savers can be decomposed exactly as in
Proposition 1:
d log C0sa

1
=−
γ

Z

∞
−ρt

e
0

ρ
drt dt +
γ

Z

∞

e
0

−ρt

Z

∞

drs dsdt
t

From (53) d log C0 = (1−Λ)d log C0sp +Λd log Y0 . Therefore, the analogue of Proposition
1 is
Z
Z
Z
Z
Λ ∞
1 − Λ ∞ −ρt
ρ(1 − Λ) ∞ −ρt ∞
e drt dt −
e
drs dsdt +
drs ds .
d log C0 = −
γ
γ
γ t
0
0
t
|
{z
} |
{z
}
direct response to r

GE effects due to Y

Equation (8) then follows from the fact that in the special case (1), drt = e−ηt dr0 .
Finally, (9) is derived as follows. The government budget constraint (54) can be
written in flow terms as Ḃt = rt Bt + ΛTtsp + (1 − Λ)Ttsa . Under the assumption that
the government keeps debt constant at its initial level, Bt = B0 , we need
Λ(Ttsp − T̄ sp ) + (1 − Λ)(Ttsa − T̄ sa ) + (rt − ρ)B0 = 0
Alternatively, denoting by ΛT the fraction of income gains that is rebated to spenders
and using the assumption that T̄ sp = 0:
ΛTtsp = −ΛT (rt − ρ)B0
47

Equation (9) is obtained by differentiating the special case of (56) with this transfer
specification and with the interest rate time path (1).

A.4

Details on Medium-Scale DSGE Model (Section 2.3)

The Smets-Wouters model is a typical medium-scale DSGE model with a variety of
shocks and frictions. The introduction of Smets and Wouters (2007) provides a useful
overview and a detailed description of the model can be found in the paper’s online
Appendix.49 We here only outline the ingredients of the model that are important for
the purpose of our decomposition exercise as well as some details on the implementation
of this exercise.
An important difference relative to the stylized model of Section 2.1 is that the
representative household’s utility function features external habit formation:
E0

∞
X
t=0

1
(Ct (j) − hCt−1 )1−σc exp
β
1 − σc
t



σc − 1
Lt (j)1+σl
1 + σl


(57)

where Ct (j) is consumption of one of a continuum of individual households and Ct
is aggregate consumption (in equilibrium the two are equal). The parameter h ∈
[0, 1] disciplines the degree of external habit formation. As mentioned in the main
text, the model also features investment with investment adjustment costs and capital
utilization, as well as partially sticky prices and wages.
Our starting point for the decomposition are the impulse response functions (IRFs)
to an expansionary monetary policy shock in a log-linearized, estimated version of
the model. We set each of the model’s parameters to the mode of the corresponding
posterior distribution (see Table 1 in Smets and Wouters (2007) for the parameter
values). The IRFs are computed in Dynare using an updated version of the replication
file of the published paper.50 For our purposes, the relevant IRFs are the sequences
{Ct , Rt , Yt , It , Gt , U Ct , Lt }∞
t=0 for consumption Ct , interest rates Rt , labor income Yt ,
investment It , government spending Gt , capital utilization costs U Ct = a(Zt )Kt−1 and
labour supply Lt . We further denote consumption at the initial steady state by C̄.
Given these IRFs, we decompose the overall consumption response to an expansionary monetary policy shock into direct and indirect effects as follows. Suppressing
49
50

Available at https://www.aeaweb.org/aer/data/june07/20041254_app.pdf
Available at http://www.dynare.org/phpBB3/viewtopic.php?f=1&t=3750.

48

j-indices for individual households, the budget constraint of households is
Ct +

Bt−1
Bt
+ Tt ≤
+ Mt
Rt Pt
Pt
W h Lt Rth Kt−1 Zt
Divt Πt
Mt = t
+
− a(Zt )Kt−1 +
+
− It
Pt
Pt
Pt
Pt

(58)
(59)

where the reader should refer to the online Appendix of Smets and Wouters (2007)
for an explanation of each term (the budget constraint is their equation (9)).51 In
present-value form
∞
∞
X
X
1
1
Ct =
(Mt − Tt )
t−1
t−1
Πk=0 R̃k
Πk=0 R̃k
t=0
t=0
t
denotes the real interest rate. Households maximize (57) subject to
where R̃t = R
Πt
this budget constraint. For any price sequences, initial consumption C0 then satisfies:

!
∞
B−1 X
1
X+
(Mt + Tt )
+
t−1
P0
Π
R̃
k
k=0
t=0
 k !
∞
t
X
X
1
h
χ=
x
t−k
g
Πt−1
k=1 R̃k
t=0
k=0
 k+1
∞
t−1
X
X
1
h
C̄
X=
xt−k
t−1
g
Πk=1 R̃k k=0
t=0



1/σc
σc − 1
s s−1
xs = β̄ Πk=0 R̃k
(Ls − L0 )
exp
σc (1 + σl )

1
C0 =
χ

(60)

where β̄ = gβσc and g is the gross growth rate of the economy. The direct effect
of consumption to interest rate changes is then computed from (60) by feeding in the
∞
equilibrium sequence of real interest rates {R̃t }∞
t=0 while holding {Mt , Tt , Lt }t=0 at their
steady state values. When computing this direct effect in practice, we simplify the righthand side of (60) further taking advantage of the fact that most terms are independent
of the sequence of real interest rates {R̃t }∞
t=0 . In particular, in equilibrium, profits and
labor union dividends are Πt = Pt Yt − Wt Lt − Rth Zt Kt−1 and Divt = (Wt − Wth )Lt and
therefore, substituting into (59)
Mt = Yt − a(Zt )Kt−1 − It .
51

(61)

Note that Smets and Wouters’ budget constraint features some typos: it does not include dividends
from firm ownership Πt and there is a “minus” in front of Tt suggesting it is a transfer even though
it enters as a tax in the government budget constraint (equation (24) in their online Appendix).

49

Further, the government budget constraint in present-value form is
∞
X

1

Πtk=0 R̃k
t=0

Tt =

∞
X

1

Πtk=0 R̃k
t=0

Gt .

(62)

Substituting (61) and (62) into (60), we have
C0 =


1
X + Y P DV − I P DV − GP DV − U C P DV
χ

(63)

where Y P DV , I P DV , GP DV and U C P DV are the present values of {Yt , It , Gt , U Ct }∞
t=0
∞
∞
discounted at {R̃t }t=0 . Note that although the series {Ct , R̃t , Yt , It , Gt , U Ct , Lt }t=0 are
generated using a log-linearized approximation around the trend, we compute the initial
direct and overall effect on consumption using the exact Euler equation. We check that
for small shocks the total effect computed with the exact formula is very close to the
output from Dynare.
As already stated in the main text, our main result is that – at the estimated
parameter values of Smets and Wouters (2007) – the direct effect amounts for 95.5
percent of the total response of initial consumption to an expansionary monetary policy
shock. We have conducted a number of robustness checks with respect to various
parameter values, and in particular with respect to the habit formation parameter h.
The results are robust. In the case without habit formation h = 0, 95.1 percent of the
overall effect are due to direct intertemporal substitution effects. Finally, note that a
difference between (57) and the specification of preferences in textbook versions of the
New Keynesian model is the non-separability between consumption and labor supply.
We have conducted an analogous decomposition exercise with a separable version of
(57). The decomposition is hardly affected.

B
B.1

Additional Details on the Model
HJB and Kolmogorov Forward Equations for Household’s
Problem

We here present the households’ HJB equation, and the Kolmogorov Forward equation
for the evolution of the cross-sectional distribution µ. We focus on the stationary
versions of these equations under the assumption that the logarithm of income yit =
log zit follows a “jump-drift process”
dyit = −βyit dt + it dNit ,

50

it ∼ N 0, σ 2



and where dNit is a pure Poisson process with arrival rate λ. The stationary version
of households’ HJB equation is then given by
ρV (a, b, y) = max u(c, r̃h ωa + ch , `) + Vb (a, b, y)(wey ` − T̃ (wey `) + rb (b)b − d − χ(d, a) − c − ch )
c,d,ch

+ Va (a, b, y)(ra (1 − ω) a + d)
Z ∞
(V (a, b, x) − V (a, b, y)) φ(x)dx
+ Vy (a, b, y)(−βy) + λ

(64)

−∞

where φ is the density of a normal distribution with variance σ 2 .
Similarly, the evolution of the joint distribution of liquid wealth, illiquid wealth and
income can be described by means of a Kolmogorov Forward equation. To this end,
denote by g(a, b, y, t) the density function corresponding to the distribution µt (a, b, z),
but in terms of log productivity y = log z. Furthermore, denote by sb (a, b, y) and
sa (a, b, y) the optimal liquid and illiquid asset saving policy functions, i.e. the optimal
drifts in the HJB equation (64). Then the stationary density satisfies the Kolmogorov
Forward equation
0 = − ∂a (sa (a, b, y)g(a, b, y)) − ∂b (sb (a, b, y)g(a, b, y))
Z ∞
− λg(a, b, y) + λ
g(a, b, x)φ(x)dx.

(65)

−∞

Achdou et al. (2014) explain in detail how to solve (64) and (65), including how to
handle the state constraints, using a finite difference method.

B.2

Proof of Lemma 1 (Derivation of Phillips Curve)

The firm’s problem in recursive form is


a

r (t)J (p, t) = max
π


−ε
p
p
θ
− m(t)
Y (t) − π 2 Y (t) + Jp (p, t) pπ + Jt (p, t)
P (t)
P (t)
2

where J (p, t) is the real value of a firm with price p. The first order and envelope
conditions for the firm are
Jp (p, t) p = θπY
p
  p −ε−1 Y
 p −ε Y
a
(r − π)Jp (p, t) = −
−m ε
+
+ Jpp (p, t) pπ + Jtp (p, t).
P
P
P
P
P

51

In a symmetric equilibrium we will have p = P , and hence
θπY
p

Jp (p, t) =

(66)

(ra − π)Jp (p, t) = − (1 − m) ε

Y
Y
+ + Jpp (p, t) pπ + Jtp (p, t).
p
p

(67)

Differentiating (66) with respect to time gives
Jpp (p, t) ṗ + Jpt (p, t) =

θY π̇ θẎ π θY ṗ
+
−
.
p
p
p p

Substituting into the envelope condition (67) and dividing by θY /p gives
ra −

Ẏ
Y

!
π=

1
(− (1 − m) ε + 1) + π̇.
θ

Rearranging, we obtain (20).

B.3

Investment Fund Problem

This Appendix spells out the problem of the investment fund summarized in Section
3.2 and formally derives the equation for the return on illiquid assets (22).
There is a continuum of identical, competitive investment funds. The representative
fund maximizes the present discounted value of dividends, denoted by Dtf , which equal
the aggregate profits from the intermediate producers Πt = (1 − mt )Yt . To maintain
generality, we assume that the fund discounts these dividends at an arbitrary sequence
of discount rates {rtf }t≥0 . The stationary version of the fund’s problem is given by:
Z
max

{Dt ,It ,ut }t≥0

Dtf

∞

f

e−r t Dtf dt s.t.

0

+ Itk + Ȧft = rtk ut Kt + qKt + ra Aft
K̇t = Itk − δ(ut )Kt .

To raise capital, the fund issues infinitesimal securities −Aft paying an interest rate
rta . The market clearing condition for illiquid assets is Af + (1 − ω)A = 0. These are
the liabilities on the fund’s balance sheets. Its assets are the capital Kt . The fund’s
net worth is therefore W = K + Af . As discussed in the main text, the fund’s two
sources of income are income from renting capital rk uKt and income from ownership of
intermediate firms qKt = (1−m)Y . The fund’s problem can then be written recursively
52

as
rf V (W ) = max D + V 0 (W )Ẇ
D,K,Af ,u

Ẇ = (rk u − δ(u) + q)K + ra Af − D
W = K + Af .
Taking first-order conditions, we obtain the expression for the return to illiquid assets
(22), which is independent of the choice for the fund’s discount factor. It is natural,
however, choose rta as a discount factor, since this is the cost of raising capital for the
fund. This is therefore the assumed rate at which intermediate firms discount profits,
as evident from equation (20) that defines the Phillips curve.
Equation (22) also implies the equilibrium condition K = −Af = (1 − ω)A, as well
as W = 0 since all the profits are paid out every period to households.

B.4

Computation of Marginal Propensities to Consume

We begin by stating a notion of an MPC in our model that is directly comparable to
the empirical evidence:
Definition 1 The Marginal Propensity to Consume over a period τ for an individual
with state vector (a, b, z) is given by
MPCτ (a, b, z) =

∂Cτ (a, b, z)
,
Z ∂b
τ

Cτ (a, b, z) = E

where

(68)


c(at , bt , zt )dt|a0 = a, b0 = b, z0 = z .

(69)

0

Similarly, the fraction consumed out of x additional units of liquid wealth over a period
τ is given by
Cτ (a, b + x, z) − Cτ (a, b, z)
MPCxτ (a, b, z) =
.
(70)
x
The conditional expectation Cτ (a, b, z) in (69) and, therefore, the MPCs in Definition 1 can be conveniently computed using the Feynman-Kac formula. This formula
establishes a link between conditional expectations of stochastic processes and solutions to partial differential equations. Applying the formula, we have Cτ (a, b, z) =

53

Γ(a, b, y, 0), with y = log z, where Γ(a, b, y, t) satisfies the partial differential equation
0 = c(a, b, y) + Γb (a, b, y, t)sb (a, b, y) + Γa (a, b, y, t)sa (a, b, y)
Z ∞
[Γ(a, b, x, t) − Γ(a, b, y, t)] φ(x)dx
+ Γy (a, b, y)(−βy) + λ
−∞

on [0, ∞) × [b, ∞) × [ymin , ymax ] × (0, τ ), with terminal condition Γ(a, b, y, τ ) = 0, and
where c, sb and sa are the consumption and saving policy functions that solve (64).

B.5

Sticky Wages

The variant of the model with sticky wages is implemented as follows. We assume
that the wage at time t is a geometric average of the steady state wage and households’ marginal rate of substitution (which is the same for all households due to our
assumption of GHH utility (32))
wt = w̄

ηw



ψNt
1−τ

1−ηw
,

where the parameter ηw ∈ [0, 1) controls the degree of wage stickiness. With flexible
1/σ
wages ηw = 0, we obtain the standard first-order condition ψNt = wt (1 − τ ).

C

Details on SCF and FoF

Our starting point is the balance sheet for U.S. households (FoF Tables B.100, and
B100e for the value of market equity). An abridged version of this table that aggregates
minor categories into major groups of assets and liabilities is reproduced in Table C.1
(columns labelled FoF).
The columns labelled SCF in Table C.1 report the corresponding magnitudes, for
each asset class, when we aggregate across all households in the SCF. The comparison
between these two data sources is, in many respects, reassuring. For example, aggregate net worth is $43B in the FoF and $49B in the SCF, and the FoF ranking (and
order of magnitude) of each of these major categories is preserved by the SCF data.52
Nevertheless, well known discrepancies exist across the two data sources.53
52

This is remarkable, since the underlying data sources are entirely different. The SCF is a household
survey. The macro-level estimates of U.S. household sector net worth in the FoF are obtained as a
residual with respect to all the other sectors of the economy, whose assets and liabilities are measured
based on administrative data derived from aggregate government reports, regulatory filings as well as
data obtained from private vendors and agencies such as the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),
the Census Bureau, and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
53
For systematic comparisons, see Antoniewicz (2000) and Henriques and Hsu (2013).

54

Assets

Liabilities

Real estate
Consumer Durables

FoF
21,000
4,100

SCF
27,700
2,700

Liquid
N
N

Deposits
Treasury Bonds
Corporate Bonds

5,800
700
900

2,800
200
500

Y
Y
Y

Corporate Equity
Equity in Noncorp. Bus.
Total

12,600
7,300
52,400

14,200
11,100
59,200

N
N

Mortgage Debt
Nonrev. Cons. Credit
Revolving Cons. Credit

FoF
7,600
1,400
800

SCF
8,500
1,200
400

Total

9,800

10,100

Table C.1: Balance sheet of US households for the year 2004.
Sources: Flow of Funds (FoF) and Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Values are in Billions of
2004 US$. Y/N stands for Yes/No in the categorization of that assetclass as liquid.

On the liabilities side, credit card debt in FoF data is roughly half as large as in
SCF data. The reason is that SCF measures outstanding consumer debt, whereas the
FoF measures consumer credit, which includes current balances, whether or not they
get paid in full. Thus, the SCF estimate seems more appropriate, given that a negative
value of b in the model means the household is a net borrower.
On the asset side, real estate wealth in the SCF is 30 pct higher than in the FoF.
The SCF collects self-reported values that reflects respondents’ subjective valuations,
whereas the FoF combines self-reported house values, from the American Housing
Survey (AHS) with national housing price index from CoreLogic and net investment
from the BEA. However, during the house-price boom, AHS owner-reported values
were deemed unreliable and a lot more weight was put on actual house price indexes,
an indication that SCF values of owner-occupied housing may be artificially inflated
by households’ optimistic expectations.
The valuation of private equity wealth is also much higher in the SCF, by a factor
exceeding 1.5. Once again, the FoF estimates appear more reliable, as it relies on
administrative intermediary sources such as SEC filings of private financial businesses
(security brokers and dealers) and IRS data on business income reported on tax returns,
whereas, as with owner-occupied housing, the SCF asks noncorporate business owners
how much they believe their business would sell for today.54
Finally, deposits and bonds are more than twice as large in the FoF.55 Antoniewicz
54

According to Henriques and Hsu (2013), another reason why the SCF data on private business
values is problematic is the combination of a very skewed distribution and the small sample size of
the survey that make the aggregate value obtained in the SCF very volatile.
55
The SCF does not contain questions on household currency holdings, but SCF data summarized
above contain an imputation for cash. See Kaplan and Violante (2014) for details.

55

Liquid
N
N
Y

2

8

0

.5

1

Density

1.5

6
4

Density

2
0

-4

-2

0

2

-5

4

0

5

5 Year Log Earnings Changes

1 Year Log Earnings Changes

Figure D.1: Growth Rate Distribution of Estimated Earnings Process
Gross labor income distribution

Income Lorenz curve

0.4

1
Model continuous
Model discretized

0.9

0.35

0.8

0.3

0.7

0.25

0.6
0.2

0.5
0.15

0.4
0.3

0.1

0.2

0.05

0.1
0

0
-2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

2

4

6

8

10

log ($ Thousands)

1

Figure D.2: Lorenz Curve and Income Distribution
(2000) and Henriques and Hsu (2013) attribute this discrepancy to the fact that the
FoF “household sector” also includes churches, charitable organizations and personal
trusts (that are more likely to hold wealth in safe instruments) and hedge-funds (that
may hold large amount of cash to timely exploit market-arbitrage opportunities).

D
D.1

Further Details on Calibration
Earnings Process

Figure D.1 reports the histogram of one- and five-year earnings innovations generated
by our estimated earnings process (30)-(31). These should be compared to Figure 1 in
Guvenen et al. (2015).
When we compute households’ consumption-saving problem (64) using a finite difference method, we discretize the estimated earnings process (30)-(31) using 33 grid
56

Liquid wealth Lorenz curve

Illiquid wealth Lorenz curve
1.2

1
Model
2004 SCF

Model
2004 SCF

1

0.8

0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
0

-0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

-0.2

1

(a) Liquid wealth distribution

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

(b) Illiquid wealth distribution

Figure D.3: Lorenz Curves in Model and Data.
points for income. Figure D.2 reports the Lorenz curve of the stationary income distribution generated by our earnings process for both the estimated continuous process
and the discretized process. The Lorenz curve generated by the discretized process is
very close to that generated by the continuous process which demonstrates that the
discrete approximation is accurate.

D.2

Adjustment Cost Function and Wealth Distribution

Figure D.3 displays the distributions of liquid and illiquid wealth in the calibrated
model and compares the implied Lorenz curves with their empirical counterpart from
the 2004 SCF. Despite only targeting a couple of moments of each distribution, the
model successfully matches the distributions of liquid wealth up to the 99th percentile
of the distributions.
The calibrated model somewhat overstates inequality in illiquid wealth.
The calibrated transaction cost function is shown in Figure D.4. Consider first
panel (a). The horizontal axis shows the quarterly transaction expressed as a fraction
of a household’s existing stock of illiquid assets, d/a. The vertical axis shows the cost
of withdrawing or depositing this amount in a single quarter expressed as a fraction of
the stock of illiquid assets, χ(d, a)/a. The red line plots the adjustment cost function
at the median wealth level (which lies below the threshold a). The light-blue histogram displays the stationary distribution of adjustments d/a. Roughly fifty percent
of households are inactive and neither deposit nor withdraw. Of the remaining fifty
percent, some deposit and some withdraw. On average, households in the stationary
distribution withdraw taking advantage of the higher return of illiquid assets. The
57

Adjustment Cost, % of Deposit/Withdrawal

Adjustment Cost, % of Stock
0.5

20

0.5

0.45

18

0.45

16

0.4

14

0.35

12

0.3

10

0.25

8

0.2

6

0.15

4

0.1

0.05

2

0.05

0

0
-5

0.4
0.35

% of Stock

1

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.5

0.15
0.1

0
-5

0

5

% of Deposit/Withdrawal

1.5

0

5

0

Quarterly Deposit/Withdrawal, % of Stock

Quarterly Deposit/Withdrawal, % of Stock

Figure D.4: Calibrated Adjustment Cost Function
blue line plots the adjustment cost function for all wealth levels above the threshold a
– from (15) for a > a, χ(d, a)/a = χ0 |d/a| + χ1 |d/a|χ2 , i.e. the adjustment cost as a
function of d/a is the same for all levels of a. For relevant transaction sizes, the cost is
at most 1.1 percent of the stock of illiquid wealth.
Panel (b) provides an alternative view of the adjustment cost function. The horizontal axis shows the quarterly transaction expressed as a fraction of illiquid assets,
d/a, as in panel (a). The vertical axis shows the cost of withdrawing or depositing expressed as a fraction of the amount being transacted, χ(d, a)/d i.e. the “fee” for each
transaction. The overlaid histogram is the same as in panel (a). The interpretation of
the blue and red lines is as before. For relevant transaction sizes, the cost is at most
18 percent of the transaction.

58

λ
γ
ϕ
ψ
ζ
ρ

Description
Preferences
Death rate
Risk aversion
Frisch elasticity
Disutility of labor
Weight on housing
Discount rate (pa)

ε
α
δ̄
δu
θ

Production
Demand elasticity
Capital share
Steady state depreciation rate (p.a.)
Elasticity of capital utilization
Price adjustment cost

10
0.33
10%
1.2
100

τ
T
ḡ

Government
Proportional labor tax
Lump sum transfer (rel GDP)
Govt debt to annual GDP

0.25
0.075
0.26

φ
rb

Monetary Policy
Taylor rule coefficient
Steady state real liquid return (pa)

1.25
2%

ω
r̃h

Housing
Fraction of illiquid assets in housing
Net housing return (pa)

0.25
1.5%

Flow of Funds 2004
Kaplan and Violante (2014)

ra

Illiquid Assets
Illiquid asset return (pa)

6.5%

Equilibrium outcome

b

Borrowing
Borrowing rate (pa)
Borrowing limit

8.4%
-0.42

Internally calibrated
1 × quarterly labor inc

χ0
χ1
χ2
a

Adjustment cost function
Linear component
Convex component
Convex component
Convex component

rborr

Value

Target / Source

1/180
1
0.5
27
0.15
4.7%

Av. lifespan 45 years
Log utility

0.075
0.526
0.736
$10,000

Av. hours worked equal to 1/3
Agg. share of housing expenditure
Internally calibrated

Profit share 10 %

Slope of phillips curve, /θ = 0.1

40% hh with net govt transfer
Govt budget constraint

Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated
Internally calibrated

Table D.1: List of Calibrated Parameter Values in the HANK Model

59

E

Additional Sensitivity Analyses

Table E reports the results of our main decomposition exercise under alternative assumptions about firm discounting (Λ).
Λ = rta
(1)

Λ=ρ
(2)

Λ = r0b
(3)

Λ = r0a
(4)

Λ = rtb
(5)

Change in rb (pp)

-0.23%

-0.23%

-0.23%

-0.23%

-0.23%

Change in Y0 (%)
Implied elasticity Y0

0.40%
-1.77

0.40%
-1.77

0.40%
-1.77

0.40%
-1.77

0.40%
-1.77

Change in C0 (%)
Implied elasticity C0

0.47%
-2.20

0.47%
-2.20

0.47%
-2.20

0.47%
-2.20

0.47%
-2.20

Component of Change
Direct effect: rb
Indirect effect: w
Indirect effect: T
Indirect effect: ra

in C due
12%
59%
33%
0%

to:
12%
59%
33%
0%

12%
59%
33%
0%

12%
59%
33%
0%

12%
59%
33%
0%

Table E.2: Alternative assumptions about firm discounting
Notes: First quarter responses of quarterly flows. Column (1) is the baseline specification as described
in main text.

60

References
Achdou, Y., J. Han, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2014): “Heterogeneous
Agent Models in Continuous Time,” Discussion paper, Princeton University.
Antoniewicz, R. L. (2000): “A Comparison of the Household Sector from the Flow of
Funds Accounts and the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Working paper, Federal Reserve
Board.
Henriques, A., and J. W. Hsu (2013): “Analysis of Wealth Using Micro and Macro Data:
A Comparison of the Survey of Consumer Finances and Flow of Funds Accounts,” Working
paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Kaplan, G., and G. L. Violante (2014): “A Model of the Consumption Response to
Fiscal Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, 82(4), 1199–1239.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.

61

