                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WINNERS AND LOSERS IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE:
                      THE EFFECTS ON U.S. PRESIDENTIAL VOTING

                                           J. Bradford Jensen
                                            Dennis P. Quinn
                                           Stephen Weymouth

                                         Working Paper 21899
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21899


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2016




Some of the analysis in the paper was conducted at the Center for Economic Studies at the U.S. Census
Bureau. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors, and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. We thank James Vandeventer for excellent research assistance and Annalisa
Quinn for editorial assistance. Kent Carlson, Brian Saba, and Jennifer Yan participated in a student
working group on economic voting in spring 2012, and we thank them as well. Alexis Antoniades,
Quynh Nguyen, and Pietra Rivoli offered helpful comments on drafts. We thank participants at the
Mortara Georgetown Political Economy series, the University of Rochester, an American Political
Science Association 2015 panel, the Center for International Studies seminar at ETH/University of
Zurich, an International Political Economy Society 2015 panel, New York University-Abu Dhabi,
Georgetown-Qatar, and a World Trade Institute (Bern) seminar for helpful comments on earlier drafts.
All remaining errors of fact and analysis are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by J. Bradford Jensen, Dennis P. Quinn, and Stephen Weymouth. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Winners and Losers in International Trade: The Effects on U.S. Presidential Voting
J. Bradford Jensen, Dennis P. Quinn, and Stephen Weymouth
NBER Working Paper No. 21899
January 2016
JEL No. F0,F5

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies how international trade influences U.S. presidential elections. We expect the positive
employment effects of expanding exports to increase support for the incumbent’s party, and job insecurity
from import competition to diminish such support. Our national-level models show for the first time
that increasing imports are associated with decreasing incumbent vote shares, and increasing exports
correlate with increasing vote shares for incumbents. These effects are large and politically consequential.
We also construct U.S. county-level measures of employment in high- and low-skill tradable activities.
We find increases in incumbent vote shares in counties with concentrations of employment in high-skilled
tradable goods and services, and decreases in counties with concentrations of employment in low-skilled
manufactured goods. Incumbent parties are particularly vulnerable to losing votes in swing states with
high concentrations of low-skilled manufacturing workers with increasing trade exposure. Thus there
is an Electoral College incentive to protect this sector.


J. Bradford Jensen                                   Stephen Weymouth
McDonough School of Business                         McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University                                Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057                                 Washington, DC 20057
and Peterson Institute for                           sw439@georgetown.edu
International Economics
and also NBER
jbj24@georgetown.edu

Dennis P. Quinn
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
quinnd@georgetown.edu
          Do the economic effects of international trade influence who wins the U.S. presidency?

National-level (“macro”) studies show that voters are more likely to reward incumbent presidents

and their parties during good economic times, and to reward the opposition when economic

conditions deteriorate.2 We propose that exposure to global economic integration has an

independent effect—separate from trade’s effects on economic performance per se—on voting in

U.S. presidential elections. Of particular interest is the U.S. economy’s growing integration into

the world economy, with the resulting direct and indirect effects on growth, employment, wages,

and job security. In the only study on the direct effect of economic integration on U.S.

presidential voting, Margalit (2011) uses county-level analyses to demonstrate that job loss from

import competition—measured as applications for Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA)—has a

negative aggregate effect on incumbent vote share.3 In this paper, we develop comprehensive

measures of trade exposure using Census data covering nearly all economic activity in the United

States. In national- and county-level analyses, we find systematic evidence that U.S. presidential

voting reflects winners and losers in international trade: rising exports and vulnerability of

employment to import competition help determine U.S. presidential elections.




2
    Initial works in the area include Fair (1978) and Tufte (1978). Other contributions include the

papers in a 2008 special issue of the Journal of International Forecasting (Campbell and Lewis-

Beck 2008). See also Fair 2009, Erikson 2009a, Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier 2000, and Lewis-

Beck and Nadeu 2011. Lewis-Beck and Tien (2008) provide a comprehensive review of the

literature. See also the April 2014 special issue of PS, “US Presidential Election Forecasting.”
3
    Antoniades and Calomiris (2014) study county-level presidential voting and find that

constrained credit conditions hurt incumbent vote shares.


                                                   2
         Along with trade’s direct effects on employment and wages, we expect worker (voters) to

respond to the increased uncertainty that they feel from the threat that trade competition will alter

the terms of their employment and wages (or lead to job losses altogether).4 Voters employed in

industries that face import competition or the prospect that their U.S. employers will relocate to

another country (i.e., those employed in low-skill, comparative disadvantage industries) are

likely to experience greater uncertainty and to respond by voting against incumbents and

incumbent parties. Conversely, employees of firms in industries that are likely to enjoy greater

opportunities from globalization (i.e., high-skill industries in which the United States has a

comparative advantage) are more likely to demonstrate their satisfaction with their economic

position by voting for incumbents.

         Since some of the uncertainty workers feel is associated with the threat that their jobs will

be lost due to international trade, measures of unemployment and economic growth alone are

unlikely to capture the full effect of trade on workers’ voting behavior. Levels of employment,

the quality and composition of employment, and wage levels will be affected in different ways

by exports and imports, and by firms’ competitive positions in the global economy. Workers will

experience their exposure to changes in import competition or export successes (i.e., the

international ‘contestability’ of their job) before these trade activities affect growth or disposable

income.




4
    Scheve and Slaughter (2004) demonstrate that wage and employment volatility from

international economic integration in the form of foreign direct investment increases workers’

economic insecurity.


                                                   3
         We expect, therefore, voting in presidential elections to reflect employment levels in

winning and losing sectors. Voters employed in firms in comparatively disadvantaged sectors

will respond to international competition by voting against incumbents and incumbent parties.

Conversely, employees in ‘winning’ (i.e., tradable, high-skill) sectors are more likely to

demonstrate their satisfaction with their economic position by voting for incumbents. Because of

differences in industry structure—and thus differences in exposure to trade—across the United

States, there will be significant variation in voters’ experiences with trade. Some will have

benefited from trade due to increasing demand, while others will have experienced rising

economic and job insecurity due to increasing import market contestability. We expect

geographic concentrations of employment in firms in comparatively advantaged (disadvantaged)

sectors to be associated with increasing (decreasing) incumbent vote shares.

         We first adapt the core models and methods of the economic voting literature to examine

these arguments at the macro (national) level.5 We add changes in the U.S. trade balance as a

variable of interest to national-level voting models. Our analysis indicates that trade contains

information that is different from measures of growth and employment.

         However, national-level analyses have limited numbers of observations and a high level

of aggregation; therefore, they are unable to identify the industrial and geographic distributional

consequences of trade. Precisely because trade creates geographically diverse winners and




5
    We do not seek to identify a single ‘right’ model of economic voting. Rather, we assume that

each of the main scholarly models of economic voting has merit, but that much can be gained

from examining the role of international trade and considering subnational variation in exposure

to trade.


                                                  4
losers, the effects of the varied distributional consequences of trade on voting cannot be studied

using national-level vote data.

          We therefore also examine our argument at the county level using U.S. census data to

measure employment in firms that stand to gain and lose from trade liberalization.6 To capture

county-level variation in trade exposure within sectors, we rely on confidential, establishment-

level data from the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which contains

information on plants and other establishments in the Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns

(CBP) program.7 The CBP program covers most of the country’s private sector economic

activity.8 The data allow us to measure the number of employees (1) engaged in tradable

activities and producing goods and services for which the United States has a comparative

advantage (e.g., high skilled, capital intensive) and (2) in positions vulnerable to import

competition, such as low-skilled manufacturing.9 We estimate how county-level variation in

employment in firms in comparatively advantaged and disadvantaged sectors affects voting in

U.S. presidential elections.




6
    Jensen (2013) is the first study in political science to examine firm-level confidential microdata

collected by the U.S. government.
7
    See Jarmin and Miranda (2002).
8
    The major exclusions are self-employed individuals, employees of private households, railroad

employees, agricultural production employees, and most government employees.
9
    We use “tradability” as defined in Jensen and Kletzer (2006) and conceptualize tradable

activities as those that are internationally “contestable” as described in Leamer (2007). See

below for a more detailed discussion.


                                                   5
          Another important virtue of the county-level data is that it allows us to disaggregate

results by state groupings.10 We compare the estimated results in swing states (in which the

outcomes of U.S. presidential elections are generally determined) to those of non-swing states

using several categorizations of swing states.

          The core findings of the paper are as follows. At the national level, rising imports and

declining trade balances (rising exports) as a percentage of GDP are associated with lower

(higher) incumbent vote shares. At the county level, a high concentration of economic activity in

comparatively disadvantaged sectors (low-skilled manufacturing) decrease incumbent vote

shares, while a high concentration of economic activity in comparatively advantaged sectors

(high-wage, tradable services) increase incumbent vote shares. Our results indicate that higher

volatility in unemployment is strongly negatively associated with incumbent vote shares. To our

knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate that increasing employment in high-skilled tradable

services affects voting and that increasing exports (imports) are associated with increases

(decreases) in the incumbent party’s presidential vote share at the national level. In another

innovation, we find that the electoral effects of low-skill manufacturing are concentrated in the

swing states, giving rise to an Electoral College incentive toward protecting low-skilled

manufacturing.




10
     An alternative to counties are commuting zone (CZ) or labor market (LM) data from either the

Department of Agriculture or the Census Bureau, respectively. We rely on county level analysis

because voting data per se are not collected for either CZs or LMs.


                                                   6
                     Presidential Voting and U.S. Trade Integration

Prior Studies

Prior studies provide overwhelming evidence that economic outcomes affect presidential voting.

Starting with the Fair (1978) and Tufte (1978) models, scholars have empirically demonstrated

that positive economic performance strongly improves either incumbent or incumbent party re-

election prospects.11 Research has focused primarily on which factors explain changes in

incumbent party vote share.

          The macro voting models used in these studies are necessarily parsimonious because of

the few degrees of freedom involved in the data.12 Invariably, macro models see certain aspects

of economic performance as the key determinants of incumbent vote shares: economic growth

(Fair 2009), disposable income, employment, job growth (Lewis-Beck and Tien 2008), and

business sentiment (Erikson 2009) are contending variables. Quinn and Woolley (2001) show

that economic volatility drives down vote shares for incumbent candidates and parties in a

comparative, cross-national setting.13 Despite the growing prominence of trade issues in political

discourse, we know relatively little about how trade affects U.S. presidential voting.




11
     See the reviews in Campbell 2008, Kayser and Leininger 2015, and Lewis-Beck and Tien

2008.
12
     Most studies date from either 1948 or 1952, owing to changes in the U.S. economy after the

Second World War. Fair (2009), discussed below, is an exception.
13
     For a contending view on the effects of economic volatility, see Hibbs (2000), who suggests

that volatility is not relevant in the U.S. setting at the macro level.


                                                   7
          We do know that globalization has had strong political effects in various other settings.

Milner (1988) and Jensen, Quinn, and Weymouth (2015) demonstrate that whether (and how)

firms are internationally engaged economically through their global supply chains and trade

patterns explains their political engagement on trade issues. Examining survey data, Scheve and

Slaughter (2004) find that inward foreign direct investment—and globalization more generally—

increases wage and employment volatility, leading workers to feel economically insecure.

Similarly, Walter (2010) finds in a study of Swiss respondents that individuals hurt by trade are

more likely to report economic insecurity. Mansfield and Mutz (2013) examine survey data to

explain the political contentiousness of offshoring. Kayser and Peress (2012) decompose

economic growth into domestic and exogenous (international shock) components, and find the

voters punish incumbents for national performance that lags international performance.14

Despite these advances, this literature has yet to examine how exposure to trade affects citizen

voting choices.

          Following Rogowski (1987, 1990), who argues that political divisions over trade reflect

factor-based distributional concerns, a number of studies link the expected winners and losers of

global trade and financial flows to U.S. international economic policymaking in Congress.

Hiscox (2002) finds that legislator support for trade between 1824 and 1994 reflects the expected

gains and losses experienced by class- and industrial-based constituencies. Other studies examine

how industry structure at the district level, which proxies for concentrations of voters with




14
     They exclude the U.S. from their analytic consideration because their modeling assumption

that international economic performance is exogenous to domestic incumbent policy choices is

unsound in the U.S. case (2012, 666, fn. 9).


                                                   8
similar economic interests, influences legislator voting on trade and other international economic

policymaking issues.15 Districts with concentrations of high-skilled voters are associated with

greater legislator support for trade (Milner and Tingley 2011), and for outlays in the form of

financial rescues (Broz 2005) and funding the International Monetary Fund (Broz and Hawes

2006). Feigenbaum and Hall (2015) study the specific effects of economic shocks from Chinese

import competition, and find that legislators from exposed districts vote in a more protectionist

manner. Rickard (2015) demonstrates the linkage between export success in a Congressional

House member’s district and his or her likelihood to support TAA, and Owen (2015) finds that

the ‘offshorability’ of jobs in a Congress member’s district decreases the likelihood of voting in

favor of a trade agreement. If trade has the distributional consequences implied by these studies

and developed in the ensuing section, voters who are harmed by (benefit from) trade will be

more likely to shift away from (toward) the incumbent or the incumbent’s party.

          Our contribution emphasizes the effects of changing exposure to international economic

competition on presidential voting. Increased trade, particularly greater exposure to import

competition, reflects changes in voter economic experiences that are not immediately captured

by changes in growth or personal income. For instance, economic growth effects will likely lag

because of government policies that intentionally slow the effects of trade adjustment, and due to

slow reactions by import competing firms that shed workers. Furthermore, wages and jobs are

sticky due to a number of factors (e.g., unemployment insurance, buyouts, and the lag between

import surges and how firms respond), which implies a delay between the immediate effects on




15
     An important assumption of this work is that the distributional consequences of policy depend

on local-level economic characteristics.


                                                  9
firms and the longer-term effects on growth. We will demonstrate empirically that the effects of

trade are not simply subsumed by growth or aggregate unemployment.

          In summary, American politics scholars have found that economic factors explain

incumbent party presidential vote shares in macro models of voting. Scholars in the international

political economy literature have shown that trade flows and employment contestability

influence both public opinion and other facets of political behavior. With the exception of

Margalit (2011), however, there is little work on the direct effects of trade on U.S. presidential

voting. Therefore we examine how trade and trade-contested employment influence voting in the

context of extant national and county-level models. We contribute to both literatures by

providing an account of how trade exposure across sectors and regions influences presidential

voting.



The Possible Effects of Trade Integration on U.S. Presidential Voting

Because the United States is a relatively high-skill-abundant country, it has a comparative

advantage in high-skill activities, and a comparative disadvantage in low-skill activities. Thus,

firms in low-skill, labor-intensive tradable goods industries tend to face greater import

competition, especially as trade agreements have brought previously trade-isolated countries,

especially China, into the global economy.16 Low-skilled workers in these U.S. firms are

threatened by rising imports from labor abundant countries, which have dramatically expanded




16
     Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006) document these patterns. One study finds that import

competition resulting from China’s integration into the world trade system explains a quarter of

the decline in U.S. manufacturing employment since 1990 (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013).


                                                 10
exports in labor-intensive industries. U.S. firms in import-competing industries that do not shift

production to low-wage countries are likely to fail or to change industries as a result of this

competition (Jensen, Quinn, and Weymouth 2015). Plant closures and/or the redeployment of

production abroad produce lower employment and slower wage growth in the United States

among these less competitive (“comparatively disadvantaged”) firms (Bernard, Jensen, and

Schott 2006).

         While manufacturing employment in the United States has contracted due in part to

import competition, previous empirical research suggests that the distributional consequences of

trade vary across industries (and across firms within industries) according to comparative

advantage. For example, Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006) find that manufacturing

establishments in industries facing higher import competition from low-wage, labor-abundant

countries experience higher exit rates and slower employment growth. In contrast, manufacturing

establishments with factor intensities that are consistent with areas of U.S. comparative

advantage (high skill- and capital-intensive industries) are less likely to exit. We expect these

uneven distributional effects of trade to shape voter attitudes toward trade and their voting in

presidential elections.

         It is conventional to distinguish between service and manufacturing sectors in terms of

employment. Previous empirical literature strongly suggests that workers with similar skills

receive higher wages in the manufacturing sector than in the service sector.17 Because workers in

the manufacturing sector earn higher wages (even after controlling for skill), and that premium is

significantly reduced if the worker leaves the manufacturing sector, we expect that these workers




17
     See, for example, Krueger and Summers (1988).


                                                 11
will be more threatened by the prospect of being displaced from their job than workers in the

service sector.

          We expect services trade contestability to also influence presidential elections. While

most empirical work in international trade focuses on the manufacturing sector, Jensen and

Kletzer (2006) and Jensen (2011) examine the extent to which service activities are tradable and

explore the exposure of U.S. service industries to international competition. They find that a

large share of service activities (particularly business service activities) is tradable. Jensen (2011)

argues that tradable business service activities are consistent with U.S. comparative advantage

(the United States runs a persistent and growing trade surplus in services), and that therefore,

workers in high-skill tradable services activities will benefit from the increased tradability of

services.

          We note here that traded services are those as defined by balance of payments accounting

conventions and by the World Trade Organization.18 Tradability differs conceptually from the

notion of ‘offshorability’. We conceptualize industries as being tradable based on the geographic

concentration of production in the United States.19 Offshorability, on the other hand, relates to




18
     The modes of service trade are described by the World Trade Organization (WTO) as being

cross-border exports (“Mode 1”); services consumption abroad (“Mode 2”); a commercial

presence abroad (“Mode 3); and foreign services contractors abroad (“Mode 4”). See

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/cbt_course_e/c1s3p1_e.htm#boxa.
19
     Geographically concentrated industries, such as apparel production or financial services, are

deemed to be tradable. Industries like concrete production and grocery stores, which exhibit


                                                  12
the ability to perform work from abroad (Blinder and Krueger 2013). While offshorability

implies that the activity is tradable, not all tradable services are offshorable.20 For instance,

tradable service industries include U.S. based tourism-related industries.

          Thus, we distinguish between and among: goods and services that are tradable vs. non-

tradable (i.e., internationally contestable or not), high- vs. low-skill work (consist with U.S.

comparative advantage), and manufacturing vs. services industries (owing to inter-industry wage

differentials). Given these distinctions, we propose that:

     Low-skill tradable manufacturing workers will experience deep exposure and vulnerability to

      international trade competition because their products are tradable and use intensively factors

      in which the U.S. lacks comparative advantage. Moreover, low-skill manufacturing workers

      receive a relatively large inter-industry wage differential compared to peers in service sector

      work.

     High-skill tradable service workers are likely to gain from increased globalization because of

      the U.S. comparative advantage in high-skilled activities consistent with U.S. factor

      abundance in educational attainment.




geographically dispersed production, are classified as non-tradable. See the empirical section for

further details.
20
     An important limitation of the classification scheme of offshorability for this study is that most

manufacturing production jobs require the worker to be physically present to complete a task.

Thus, manufacturing industries often end up being classified as ‘non-tradable’ because of non-

offshorability, against all reasonable evidence. Most manufacturing is clearly contestable by

imports. See Jensen and Kletzer (2006, 2010) for discussions.


                                                   13
   We have ambiguous expectations regarding the benefits of trade to high-skilled workers in

    tradable manufacturing. High-skilled workers have a wage premium (owing to inter-industry

    wage differentials) that contributes to the import vulnerability of the sector (i.e., wages are

    higher than skills would require). However, the United States has factor abundance in skilled

    workers, which some U.S. manufacturing firms use intensively.

   We also have ambiguous expectations regarding the benefits and costs to workers in low-

    skill tradable services. It is not clear that these workers recognize the international exposure

    of their industry. Moreover, the risks that these workers will be displaced are lower because

    their alternative employers pay similarly (that is, services have lower inter-industry wage

    differentials).



        Our theoretical framework emphasizes a spatial distribution of winners and losers from

trade reflective of the industrial composition. Because trade changes the composition of firms in

the economy, it is not just the quantity of work in the import-competing sectors that declines, but

also its quality and composition in terms of wages, benefits, and job security. Workers in

comparatively disadvantaged tradable sectors recognize that their jobs are contestable and are

thus vulnerable to increased trade competition. Trade is likely to affect workers before the effects

of either imports or exports are reflected in the unemployment rate. Even before import-

competing firms cut jobs, workers can anticipate the effects of reduced production orders (e.g.,

shorter hours, reduced wages, and eventual lay-offs). Employees of firms in the import-

competing sector might retain their jobs or find new ones, but the terms of employment are likely

to worsen in quality. Employees of firms trading in industries in which the United States has a

comparative advantage are more likely to be satisfied with U.S. integration. These heterogeneous


                                                 14
distributional consequences imply that subnational voting for incumbent parties will reflect

concentrations of employment activity in winning and losing firms.

       In summary, we expect that the varied consequences of globalization across firms will

affect voting, with the principal beneficiaries of globalization (those employed in exporting

firms, most often in sectors of U.S. comparative advantage) more likely to vote for the

incumbent. In contrast, we expect lower-skilled employees of firms conducting low-skill

activities in tradable sectors to be more likely to express their dissatisfaction by voting against

the incumbent.



Implications

We examine the empirical implications of our argument at the country and county levels.

At the national level, we expect:

   Imports (exports) will be associated with decreased (increased) support for the incumbent.

    The effects will be especially concentrated in the manufacturing sector.

At the county level, we expect:

   The concentration of employment in comparatively advantaged firms (high skill/ tradable)

    will be associated with increasing support for the incumbent.

   The concentration of employment in comparatively disadvantaged firms (low-skill/ tradable)

    will be associated with decreasing support for the incumbent.




                                                  15
                                        Empirical Analysis

Analytic Considerations


The standard approach in the national-level economic voting literature has been to estimate

ordinary least squares (OLS) time-series models of incumbent party presidential vote shares with

a necessarily parsimonious set of explanatory variables. While investigators differ in

specifications, the most commonly used approach contains measure(s) of economic performance,

voter sentiment, and prior incumbency, or vote share. We adopt that approach here, adding trade

variables to the models.

          Because the list of plausible measures of the explanatory variables of Incumbent Vote

Sharet exceeds the plausible degrees of freedom given at most 20 observations, the issue of

omitted variable bias in the estimations arises. As noted above, prior incumbent vote share

(IncVoteShare t-1) is a plausible correlate of current vote share, and is entered to attenuate this

possible bias.21 The timing of the variables is such that monthly data (when available) after the

presidential elections in November are excluded. In most of our models, the investigation starts

with the 1952 data. The variables, yearly coverage, and their sources are described in online

Appendix D.

          Additional independent variables used in prior studies include retrospective indicators of

economic performance: per capita real economic growth, changes in personal disposable income,

job growth during a presidential term (Lewis-Beck and Tien 2004), inflation during the 12

months prior to the election, and changes in unemployment. Common variables for representing

voter sentiment are perceived business confidence in quarter 15 (Erikson 2009), net candidate


21
     The absence of a cross-sectional dimension to the data precludes the use of unit fixed effects.


                                                   16
advantage (Erikson 1989), and presidential approval in the election year July Gallup poll

(Abramowitz 2008; Lewis-Beck and Tien 2004). We also examine the valence vs. partisan

effects of economic conditions, as suggested by Wright (2012). Abramowitz (1988, 2008) also

incorporates how long a party has governed in terms of the “costs of governing.” As we do not

take a stand on the ‘right’ macro model, we present many variants of the models with these

regressors.

       The variables are likely to contain overlapping information, and cannot all be entered in

any event owing to limited degrees of freedom. To explore both the identifying and common-

pool variances contained in the explanatory variables, we undertake factor analysis. Given the

need to avoid omitted variable bias while maintaining a parsimonious model, factor analysis can

help determine which measures of the baseline model provide unique identifying variances.

       The details of the factor analysis appear in Appendix A. Here we discuss the implications

of the estimates. First, it is likely that whichever of the various economic growth indicators are

used, substantively similar results will be obtained. This is likely true for the sentiment/approval

indicators as well, a supposition that is explored below.

       In contrast, the evidence suggests that ΔImports/GDP is not subsumed in the other

factors, and, as indicated by its ‘uniqueness score,’ contains useful identifying variance. The

ΔExports/GDP indicator, in contrast, is likely to overlap in information with the economic

performance and voter sentiment variables. (The ΔTrade Balance/GDP does not load on any

factor.) Hence, the trade variables partly contain independent information.




                                                 17
          The county-level factor analysis shows far less information overlap.22 The county-level

measures, however, do not include some important variables of interest, including county-level

trade balance and public opinion. We therefore propose that a joint consideration of the national-

and macro-level results is best suited for this investigation. We begin with the national-level

analysis in the next section.



National Voting


Macro Data and Models. The dependent variable is the post-war incumbent party’s share of the

two main party presidential votes (Incumbent 2-Party Vote Sharet) from 1952 to 2012. The

sample is determined by the availability of quarterly data on economic growth.23 We also

estimate a model, 1936–2012, using data from Fair (2009). The passage of the Reciprocal Trade

Agreements Act (RTAA) of 1934 repealed the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, and is widely seen as

marking the modern era of U.S. trade integration.24 In light of prior theory and statistical testing,

the base time-series macro model to be estimated is:




22
     Details available upon request.
23
     Quarterly data for the four quarters prior to the election (Q12 through Q15) are used rather

than annual growth data (Q13 through Q16). The latter indicator includes information for the 53

to 59 days of economic activity after the election (depending on the date of the election in a

particular year).
24
     See Bailey, Goldstein, and Weingast (1997) and Hiscox (1999) for discussions of the RTAA.

As Goldstein (1994) notes, U.S. trade policy post-RTAA contained important legacies of prior


                                                  18
Incumbent 2-Party Vote Sharet = ß0 + ß1(Incumbent Vote Sharet-1) + ß2(Economic Growth t-1)

                  + εt t=1952-2012 (1)

To this model will be added change in the trade indicators:

          either ß3(ΔTradeBal/GDPt-1 ) or ß3′(ΔImport/GDPt-1) and ß4′(ΔExports/GDPt-1), plus

an indicator of either Business Sentiment or July Approval: ß5(Sentiment/Approvalt-1 ).

          As an initial indicator of economic performance, we use real per capita GDP from Q12–

Q15. (The choice of the economic growth variable is not influential in the results.) To represent

voter sentiment and prospective economic activity, we alternate Business Conditions Q15

(Erikson (2009) the July Gallup (Q15) presidential approval ratings (Abramowitz 2008; Lewis-

Beck and Tien 2008). The trade variables also use data from Q12–Q15. Models with

ΔImports/GDPt-1 and ΔJobst-1 jointly and separately entered are reported.25

          To assess the statistical adequacy of the models, a number of diagnostic tests are

reported. This is especially important in the context of a small number of observations with

potentially correlated errors (see Grant and Lebo forthcoming).26



protectionist policies and programs, which attenuated slowly over time. Therefore, we expect

(and find) weaker estimated effects in earlier periods. Results are available from the authors.
25
     We also estimate a ‘least absolute deviations’ (or quartile) regression as a robustness check

alternative to the main time-series OLS models. OLS can magnify the influence of outliers, in

contrast to quartile regressions.
26
     Because the models include some form of lagged endogenous variable, the classical Durbin-

Watson statistic is replaced with a Lagrange-multiplier (LM) test for first- and second-order

residual autocorrelation—the AR 1-2 test. To account for possible error correlation and


                                                   19
       Macro Results. Table 1 reports the main results. In Model 1.1, prior incumbent vote share

and economic growth are entered. The estimation properties of the model are good, and the

results are consistent with prior findings. In all models reported, economic growth has an

estimated coefficient that is positive, significant, and substantively large. The lagged endogenous

variable has a negative and significant coefficient, which is consistent with the theories regarding

the ‘costs of governing’ and the standard findings of a decline in incumbent vote margins in

subsequent elections. Taking the mean of two party Incumbent Vote Sharet-1 (53.7% for the

1948–2008 elections), multiplying it by the parameter estimate, and adding the estimate of the

constant to its product produces an estimate of Incumbent Vote Sharet of 46.8%, or a -6.9%

change from the prior election, assuming a zero increase in economic growth. Multiplying the

estimated coefficient of growth by the sample mean (a growth rate of 2.2%) and adding it to the

above calculation produces an estimate of Incumbent Vote Sharet of 52%. A growth rate of

1.25% or lower brings the estimate of Incumbent Vote Sharet below 50%. The adjusted R-

squared is 0.61.

       In Models 1.2 and 1.3, the trade indicators are entered. Change in the trade balance

(Model 1.2) has a statistically significant positive coefficient that is substantively large and

consistent with the theory developed above. A one-unit increase (decrease) in the U.S. trade



heteroskedasticity, which can bias standard errors, Newey-West heteroskedasticity and

autocorrelation consistent standard errors are reported. A ‘normality test for residuals’ based

upon Jarque-Bera with the Doornik-Hansen small sample correction is also reported. Finally, an

ARCH test for conditional first-order heteroscedasticity is reported. Statistically significant p-

values signify assumption violations.


                                                  20
balance as a percentage of GDP is associated with a 4% estimated increase (decrease) in

incumbent vote shares.27 Change in imports (Model 1.3) has a statistically significant negative

coefficient, which is substantively large and also consistent with our theory. A one-unit increase

(decrease) in imports as a percentage of GDP is associated with a 4% decrease (increase) in

incumbent vote shares. Change in exports as a percentage of GDP has a positive and statistically

significant coefficient that is substantively large; a one-unit increase is associated with a 6%

increase in presidential vote shares. The explanatory power of the models, judged via adjusted R-

squared indicators, rises 19 points with the inclusion of the trade variables.28

          Models 1.4 and 1.5 add the indicators of Business Sentiment Q15 and July Gallup

(respectively) to the model with ΔTradeBal/GDPt-1. Both indicators have positive, statistically

significant, and substantively large estimated coefficients that are consistent with prior theory

and findings.29 The inclusion of the Business Sentiment Q15 and July Gallup variables leads to a




27
     Using a quantile estimator for Model 1.2 produces identical signs on the coefficient estimates

and similar levels of statistical significance. The coefficient estimates are modestly smaller than

the estimates using OLS time-series methods.
28
     Change in exports loads on Factor 1 (Table A3.a) along with the growth indicators. The

variable therefore contains overlapping information with the indicators of economic growth.
29
     The Business Sentiment Q15 data are available only from 1954 onward, making the 1956

election the first election in the sample. The July Gallup variable is available from the 1940s

onward. In order to compare the estimated effects of change in imports across the different

specifications, the 1956-2012 sample is used. The results for the models with July Gallup in the

1952-2012 sample are nearly identical to the models reported.


                                                  21
marked increase in the explanatory power of the models: from 0.8 with neither to 0.99 for

Business Sentiment Q15 and 0.9 for July Gallup. The estimated coefficients of

ΔTradeBal/GDPt-1 remain positive and highly statistically significant. Its coefficient estimate is

larger in the model including Business Sentiment Q15 (1.4) compared to the model with July

Gallup (1.5). Model 1.5, however, shows evidence of statistically significant heteroskedasticity

in the residuals.

         Using data as of November 2015, Model 1.4 suggests that the nominee of the Democratic

Party would comfortably win the two-party popular vote totals. The predicted outcome, however,

is fragile to relatively modest changes in economic conditions. For example, if the economic

conditions of the fall of 2000, another period in which the dollar appreciated, prevailed—growth

at 3% and an import surge of 1% of GDP linked to a sharp rise in the value of the U.S. dollar the

year before—the Democratic Party candidate is forecast to receive slightly less than 50% of the

two-party vote shares.30

         In Models 1.6 and 1.7, ΔTradeBal/GDPt-1 is replaced by ΔImport/GDPt-1 and

ΔExports/GDPt-1, and Business Sentiment Q15 and July Gallup, respectively, are included. The

models have good estimation properties and explanatory power. The estimated coefficient of

ΔImport/GDPt-1 remains negative and highly statistically significant, and the estimated

coefficient of ΔExport/GDPt-1 remains positive and statistically significant.




30
     Between November 1999 and November 2000, the trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar

increased by 9%. Between August 2014 and August 2015, it increased by 15.6%. (Source: U.S.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED), series TWEXB.)


                                                22
         As a further experiment, we extend the sample back to the 1936 election, which is post-

RTAA, using data and models from Fair (2009). Model 1.8 enters changes in the trade balance,

and Model 1.9 enters changes in imports and exports. The coefficient estimates retain similar

signs and levels of statistical significance.

         Other variables are not the main focus, but the estimated coefficient of economic growth,

while always positive and statistically significant beyond the 0.01 confidence level, is diminished

in size with the inclusion of either Business Sentiment Q15 or July Gallup. The coefficient

estimates of Business Sentiment Q15 and July Gallup are always positive, statistically

significant, and substantively important.31

         In Appendix Table A4, we use Model 1.3 as the base model and add additional indicators

proposed by other investigators. The trade results are strongly robust to including the other

regressors. In all cases, the export and import coefficient estimates retain the expected sign, and

the estimated coefficients are statistically significant at the 0.1 level or better.

         We note here several significant results from the robustness checks. First, the change in

manufacturing jobs has a highly statistically significant estimated coefficient, consistent with

Lewis-Beck and Tien (2004). Second, when we distinguish between trade in goods and trade in

services, the estimated coefficients for trade in goods are highly statistically significant and in

the expected direction. The evidence is that trade in goods is largely responsible for the national

results found here.




31
     Models that include both Business Sentiment Q15 and July Gallup leave neither with

statistically significant estimated coefficients, though the trade variable estimates are

substantively similar. Details are available upon request.


                                                   23
          Finally, in unreported models, we serially interact the independent regressors from the

main table and the Appendix table with a Democratic Party incumbent dummy variable to

explore possible partisanship effects, but find no interaction effects remotely close to statistical

significance.32



County-level Voting

County-level Data and Models. We next examine the determinants of incumbent party vote share

at the county level. The baseline OLS, year- and county-fixed effects model is:

ΔIncumbent 2-Party Vote Sharei,t = ß0 + ß1 (Unemployment Ratei,t) + ß2 (Δ Unemployment (1-

          yeari,t)) + ß3 (Unemployment Volatilityi,t) + ß4(LnAveragePayi,t ) + ß5 Δ Average Pay (1-

          year)i,t + ß6(High-Wage Tradable Manufacturing Employment i,t) + ß7(Low-Wage

          Tradable Manufacturing Employmenti,t) + ß8(High-Wage Tradable Services

          Employmenti,t) + ß9(Low-Wage Tradable Services Employmenti,t)+ φi + τt + εi,t t=1992,

          1996, 2000, 2004, 2008, 2012                                                        (2)

          The dependent variable, ΔIncumbent 2-Party Vote Sharei,t, is the change in incumbent

party vote as a share of the total Democratic and Republican votes in county i in year t. The

models begin in 1992 because the Census LBD coverage of all services industries begins in that




32
     Details available from the authors. One possibility is that the Democratic Party has only

recently emerged as the less ‘liberalizing’ party, and we therefore experiment with a Democratic

Party incumbency dummy variable from 1992 onward, but find no statistically significant

effects. We thank Larry Rothenberg for the suggestion.


                                                  24
year. We include county φi and election year τt dummies.33 Following Margalit (2011), some of

our models control for aggregate job losses due to globalization—the lagged sum of the

estimated number of workers filing for TAA as a share of the labor force.34 Following Wright

(2012), some of our models include a Democratic incumbent interaction with either

unemployment levels or changes in unemployment (e.g., Democratic Incumbent x

ΔUnemployment (1-year)i,t).

          We examine the effects of economic instability on voting using county-level data on

unemployment and wages. The variable Unemployment Volatility is the standard deviation of the

unemployment rate in county i over the 3 years prior to the election year and the election year.35

The income data are from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, conducted by the




33
     A Hausman test of random vs. fixed effects rejects the random-effects model: an χ2 test

produce a typical value of over 500. An alternative to fixed effects is to include prior incumbent

vote share as a regressor (Incumbent 2-Party Vote Shareit-1) as in Fair (2009) and Powell and

Whitten (1993). Diagnostic statistics for the county-level regressions suggest that the fixed-

effects model is preferred. At the macro level the lagged vote share is entered, which improves

the diagnostic statistics.
34
     The TAA data come from Public Citizen. http://www.citizen.org/Page.aspx?pid=4536

(accessed March 2, 2015).
35
     For example, in 1996, Employment Volatility is the standard deviation of the unemployment

rate in county i for the years 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996. The unemployment data are from the

BLS.


                                                  25
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We also enter change in unemployment from the year prior to

the election and change in income.

          We incorporate a number of different measures of voters’ exposure to trade. Our

objective is to investigate whether voting behavior is influenced by the international exposure of

local industries. Our goal is to examine the international exposure of the entire local economy—

not merely to assume, for example, that all manufacturing industries are trade exposed. For this

task, we need to classify workers according to their skill and the tradability of the goods or

services produced by their employer.

          Our measures of economic contestability capture employment in high- and low-wage

tradable services and manufacturing. We construct these measures using confidential data on the

near-universe of economic activity measured at the individual plant level by the U.S. Census

Bureau.36 We use trade cost estimates to identify all tradable industries in both manufacturing

and services. We develop measures of international exposure using confidential data from the

U.S. Census Bureau’s LBD. We classify establishments into categories based on the sector and

the tradability of the industry to construct measures of the numbers of jobs in a county that is

potentially exposed to international trade.




36
     In the Appendix, we replicate the analysis using publicly available employment location

quotients from the U.S. BLS. These data measure the concentration of employment in

manufacturing and services. For services, we are able to distinguish between tradable and non-

tradable services. Our results are consistent with those discussed in this section. See Appendix C

for further details.


                                                 26
          We identify variation in the tradability among disaggregated industries within the

manufacturing and services sectors by adapting the methodology developed in Jensen and

Kletzer (2006).37 In particular, we use the Gini coefficient of the geographic concentration of

production above what would be predicted by local demand to identify tradable industries.38 We

use the manufacturing sector, for which we feel we understand the tradability of manufactured

goods relatively well, as the basis for setting the cutoff for the geographic concentration Gini that

signifies tradability. We chose the Gini coefficient that results in 90% of manufacturing sector

employment being classified as tradable as the tradability cutoff.39 We use the same Gini

threshold as the cutoff for determining tradability in the service sector. If the Gini coefficient for

a service industry is above the threshold Gini coefficient that results in 90% of manufacturing

sector employment being classified as tradable, the service industry is classified as tradable.




37
     We classify tradability at the six-digit NAICS level.
38
     The intuition of the methodology is that, where trade costs are high (e.g., for grocery stores

and barber shops), production will be distributed with demand; for industries that have

significant concentrations of production (e.g., financial services, movie production, software

publishing), trade costs are low. We classify the manufacturing and service industries as being

tradable according to this definition using data from the Economic Census for 1992. For a more

formal development of the intuition, see Gervais and Jensen (2013).
39
     See Jensen (2011) for further discussion of choosing a tradability cutoff.


                                                   27
         We classify employment in establishments as high or low skill using the median national

household income in the relevant year as the threshold for ‘high wage.’40 Workers are classified

as high wage if the establishment in which they work has average wages above the national

median household income. Using these data, we are further able to distinguish between

employment in high-wage, highly traded industries and employment in non-traded industries.

Illustrative examples of tradable industries (with corresponding six-digit North American

Industrial Classification System (NAICS) codes) are listed below.41 We sum across

establishments to capture the number of workers in each county that are in each of the four

quadrants.



 Tradable High-wage Manufacturing                 Tradable High-wage Services
 Automobile Manufacturing (336111)                Computer System Design Services (541512)
 Breakfast Cereal Manufacturing (311230)          Investment Banking and Securities Dealing
 Light Truck Manufacturing (336112)                (523110)
                                                  Software Publishing (511210)


 Tradable Low-wage Manufacturing                  Tradable Low-wage Services
 Carpet and Rug Mills (314110)                    Amusement and Theme Parks (713110)
 Yarn Spinning Mills (313111)                     Credit Card Issuing (522210)
 any industry in 313, 314 and most in 315, 316    Limousine Services (485320)




40
     Figure C1 in Appendix C demonstrates the strong correlation between wages and skill

(education) in both the manufacturing and services sectors.
41
     Examples of non-tradable manufacturing goods include poured concrete (238110) and

corrugated and solid fiber boxes (322211); examples of non-tradable services include dentist

offices (621210) and full service restaurants (722110).


                                                 28
       We also construct measures of the number of workers in the manufacturing sector, the

number of workers at manufacturing establishments that export (derived from establishment-

level responses to the Census of Manufacturers question about whether the establishment has

direct exports), and the number of workers at establishments that export with high and low

wages. We aggregate establishment-level employment for each category to the county level. This

analysis appears in Appendix C.

       The analysis with census microdata includes 3,105 U.S. counties for which complete

economic and voting data are available for our period of study (1992–2012). Consistent with

Margalit (2011) and Wright (2012), we exclude Alaska because the voting data are reported in

districts that cannot be mapped to specific counties.

       County-level Results. The baseline results using the census microdata measures are

presented in Table 2. We find that higher: tradable/high-wage manufacturing employment,

tradable/high-wage services employment, and tradable/low-wage services employment are

associated with higher incumbent vote shares. Higher tradable/low-wage manufacturing

employment is associated with lower incumbent vote shares. Substantively, a one-standard

deviation increase in high-wage tradable manufacturing is associated with a .5% increase in

incumbent vote share. The estimates indicate substantively larger effects of low-wage

manufacturing, where a one-standard deviation change is associated with a decrease of 1.3%. For

high-wage and low-wage tradable services, a one standard deviation change increases incumbent

vote share by 1.3% and 1.5%, respectively.

       Column 2 reports the regression results without population weights. Compared to the

baseline (weighted) results, the unweighted results are qualitatively similar for our main

variables of interest, with the exception of tradable/high-wage manufacturing employment,



                                                29
which is no longer statistically significant. However, the number of workers in tradable low-

wage manufacturing is negatively associated with incumbent vote shares, and the number of

workers in tradable services (both high and low wage) is associated with increasing incumbent

vote shares.

       Column 3 reports the results for swing states. There are a few notable differences

between the results for swing states and the baseline results. The coefficient estimate for low-

wage tradable manufacturing employment is larger than the baseline (approximately double) and

statistically significant. High-wage tradable manufacturing and service employment are not

statistically significant in the swing states subsample.

       Column 4 reports the results for non-swing states. Comparing swing/non-swing states,

the coefficient estimate for tradable, low-wage manufacturing employment is about a third of the

size in non-swing states compared to swing states. In addition, the tradable, high-wage

manufacturing and service employment measures are positively and statistically significantly

associated with incumbent vote share.

       Column 5 reports the baseline specification plus county-level demographic controls for

the full sample of counties. The baseline coefficient estimates are quantitatively very similar to

the baseline estimates.

       We provide the results of a number of robustness tests designed to subject our analysis to

prior findings. To save space, these model estimates appear in Appendix B. Table B.1

demonstrates that TAA is negatively associated with incumbent votes shares, a result that

confirms Margalit’s (2011) finding from the 2004 presidential election. Our measures of

exposure to trade retain statistical significance to the inclusion of TAA, with the exception of




                                                 30
low-wage tradable manufacturing. This is not surprising, given that TAA is largely designed to

address dislocations in that sector.

       To examine partisan effects established in the literature, in Table B.2, following Wright

(2012), we account for the established argument that unemployment is a partisan issue by

including a Democratic Incumbent indicator variable interacted with unemployment (both in

levels and changes). The results strongly support Wright’s argument that higher unemployment

is associated with increasing vote shares for Democrats. Including this interaction term (and its

constitutive terms) does not affect our main results.

       Table B.3 uses a different measure of exposure to international trade, replacing the

geographic concentration-based measures with levels of employment at manufacturing

establishments that export. We find a negative relationship between employment in

manufacturing firms that export and incumbent vote shares, which appears to be driven by low-

wage employment in exporting firms. This is an area for future research.

       Our results from the county-level analysis can be summarized as follows. Employment

volatility and unemployment vary substantially across the United States, and we find strong

evidence that both outcomes significantly reduce support for the incumbent. Counties with more

workers in trade-exposed industries that are inconsistent with U.S. comparative advantage (i.e.,

tradable low-wage manufacturing) are less likely to vote for the incumbent. Counties with more

workers in tradable, high-wage manufacturing and tradable services are more likely to vote for

the incumbent. The larger coefficient estimate for tradable, low-wage manufacturing

employment and the lack of statistical significance on high-wage manufacturing and high-wage

services employment in swing states might explain the persistence of policy attention to the

manufacturing sector in spite of its declining share of the labor force.



                                                 31
                                           Conclusion

Popular accounts in the press and prior academic research indicate that globalization—

characterized by increases in financial integration, rising exports and import competition, and the

offshoring of production—shapes politics through its effects on employment, wages, and

economic insecurity. The effects of globalization on the most fundamental political activity

(voting) are not well understood, as most models of economic voting to date have ignored trade.

Our paper demonstrates that changes in trade flows and in the concentration of employment in

firms in winning and losing industries are unique contributors to explaining presidential voting.

The results demonstrate that the relative decline in the U.S. trade position in goods over the past

two decades has been harmful to incumbent presidents, and suggests that an array of related

macroeconomic conditions—currency valuation, China’s accession to the WTO, and the

increasing export competitiveness of other emerging markets—are potentially consequential for

U.S. presidential elections.

       We consider variation in the geographic distribution of industry structure in the United

States to better understand how trade affects the vote. Our argument is that increases in trade

principally benefit the employees of firms in tradable, comparatively advantaged industries and

activities, while employees of firms that compete with imports may be dissatisfied with

economic integration that increases competition from abroad. Voting will reflect the

contestability of employment produced by increasing exposure to trade.

       Unlike much of the IPE existing research, our framework does not posit stark political

divisions across factors and sectors of the economy. Instead, we expect winners and losers in

international trade to be manifested across firms. The contestability of employment depends on


                                                 32
trade exposure and the degree to which the firms’ activities align with traditional factor-based

sources of comparative advantage. Winners in international trade see expanding export

opportunities and weaker global competition; losers in international trade are exposed to imports

from more competitive global rivals.

       We examine our argument at the county level by considering the volatility of local

employment and wages, as well as the concentration of economic activity in both import-

competing and high-skill, exporting sectors. We find, for the first time, that unemployment

volatility influences U.S. presidential voting, as citizens are more likely to demonstrate their

insecurity by voting against the incumbent. We confirm the Margalit (2011) finding that

aggregate trade-related job losses decrease the incumbent vote share; and we demonstrate, as

does Wright (2012), that unemployment is a partisan issue ‘owned’ by Democrats. Controlling

for these factors along with job losses and employment volatility, we find evidence that the

concentration of economic activity in low-wage tradable manufacturing diminishes the

incumbent vote, while concentrations of employment in high-skill, exportable activities are

associated with greater satisfaction with the incumbent.

       The broader significance of our study is that it proposes and demonstrates that

international trade influences U.S. presidential politics via an economic voting channel. The

effects of rising import exposure, especially in low-skilled manufactured goods, appears to lessen

incumbent party vote shares at both the national and county levels; the benefits of rising exports,

in contrast, particularly in comparatively advantaged activities in the manufacturing and service

sectors, appear to enhance incumbent party vote shares at both levels. Yet, because many of the

swing states have high concentrations of low-skilled manufacturing, we find some evidence that

Electoral College considerations provide an incentive to protect this sector. The extent to which



                                                 33
the contestability of employment and economic insecurity from trade, rather than purely

domestic economic concerns, shapes presidential election outcomes suggests a necessary

coupling of previously isolated research streams in American politics and international political

economy.




                                                34
          TABLE 1 Base Models – Dependent Variable is National Incumbent Party (Two-Party) Vote Shares (1952–2012, 1936–2012)
                                                                                                                                        Model 8    Model 9
                                  Model 1       Model 2         Model 3           Model 4      Model 5       Model 6       Model 7      (1936-)    (1936-)
Prior Incumbent Vote t-1          -0.74***      -0.773***       -0.764***         -0.811***    -0.538***     -0.746***     -0.542***    -0.443     -0.441
                                  (0.216)       (0.155)         (0.152)           (0.06)       (0.57)        (0.122)       (0.157)      (0.255)    (0.265)
Growth Q12_15                     0.022***      0.031***        0.032***          0.018***     0.021***      0.018**       0.023***     0.018***   0.018***
                                  (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.004)    ((0.004)
ΔTradeBal Q12_15                                0.045***                          0.037***     0.032**                                  0.026**
                                                (0.012)                           (0.009)      (0.012)                                  (0.01)
ΔImportsQ12_15                                                  -0.04**                                      -0.036***     -0.028**                -0.025*
                                                                (0.013)                                      (0.011)       (0.012)                 (0.015)
ΔExportsQ12_15                                                  0.06***                                      0.038*        0.044**                 0.028*
                                                                (0.018)                                      (0.019)       (0.017)                 (0.014)
BusSentimentQ15                                                                   0.0006***                  0.001**
                                                                                  (0.0001)                   (0.0002)
July Gallup                                                                                    0.0015***                   0.0014**
                                                                                               (0.0006)                    (0.0005)
War                                                                                                                                     0.007      0.009
                                                                                                                                        (0.034)    (0.02)
Constant                          0.865***      0.869***        0.853***          0.818***     0.672***      0.817***      0.69***      0.722***   0.719***
                                  (0.113)       (0.081)         (0.081)           (0.03)       (0.079)       (0.069)       (0.095)      (0.139)    (0.144)
Obs.                              16            16              16                15           16            15            16           20         20
Adj. R2                           0.61          0.798           0.802             0.988        0.9           0.915         0.91         0.41       0.44
AR 1-2 test [p-value]             [0.87]        [0.37]          [0.94]            [0.37]       [0.94]        [0.42]        [0.92]       [0.25]     [0.28]
ARCH 1-1 test [p-value]           [0.51]        [0.85]          [0.96]            [0.93]       [0.04**]      [0.98]        [0.16]       [0.93]     [0.99]
Normality test [p-value]h         [0.85]         [0.53]         [0.85]            [0.84]        [0.87]       [0.85]        [0.88]       [0.40]     [0.38]
Notes: * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01. Data for the 1936, 1940, 1944, and 1948 elections are from Fair (2009)
and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.




                                                                             35
TABLE 2 County-level Determinants of Incumbent Two-Party Vote Shares, 1992–2012 Presidential Elections
                                                     (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)
                                                                                               Non-Swing      Additional
                                                                Unweighted    Swing States        States       Controls
       Unemployment                             -0.0014**       -0.0022***    -0.0046***      -0.0007       -0.0015**
                                                (0.0068)      (0.0037)         (0.001)       (0.0008)      (0.0007)
       Change in Unemployment (1-year)           -0.0017         0.0004       -0.0002         -0.0021       -0.0015
                                                (0.0012)      (0.0004)       (0.0011)        (0.0014)      (0.0011)
       Unemployment Volatility                  -0.0172***      -0.0072***    -0.0121***      -0.0182***    -0.0174***
                                                (0.0023)      (0.0008)         (0.002)       (0.0027)      (0.0021)
       Average Pay                                0.0137        -0.0155**     -0.0317          0.0284*       0.0190
                                                  (0.014)     (0.0062)         (0.021)       (0.0157)      (0.0144)
       Change in Avg. Pay (1-year)                0.0992***      0.0065        0.0399          0.1088***     0.0915***
                                                  (0.021)       (0.011)      (0.0352)        (0.0248)      (0.0206)
       High-wage Tradable Manufacturing Empl.     0.0014***    -0.0001        -0.0038          0.0019***     0.0012**
                                                (0.0005)      (0.0003)       (0.0009)        (0.0006)      (0.0005)
       High-wage Tradable Service Empl.           0.0049***     0.0019***      0.0019          0.0059***     0.0048***
                                                (0.0009)      (0.0005)       (0.0014)          (0.001)     (0.0009)
       Low-wage Tradable Manufacturing Empl.    -0.0058***      -0.0048***    -0.0124***      -0.0040**     -0.0062***
                                                (0.0015)      (0.0008)       (0.0032)        (0.0016)      (0.0014)
       Low-wage Tradable Service Empl.            0.0073***     0.0027***      0.0073***       0.0074***     0.0064***
                                                (0.0015)      (0.0009)       (0.0027)        (0.0018)      (0.0015)
       Retired                                                                                              -0.1513**
                                                                                                             (0.064)
       Female                                                                                                0.5222***
                                                                                                           (0.1413)
       African American                                                                                      0.0360
                                                                                                           (0.0395)
       Hispanic Latino                                                                                      -0.0182
                                                                                                           (0.0332)
       Bachelor's Degree                                                                                    -0.1156**

                                                              36
                                                                                                                                           (0.0559)
          Population                                                                                                                         0.0040
                                                                                                                                           (0.0081)
          Constant                                           -0.2482*             0.1170*             0.3090             -0.4282***        -0.5707***
                                                             (0.1387)            (0.0599)           (0.2003)            (0.1578)           (0.1635)
          Observations                                         18,623              18,623              4,282              14,341             18,623
          R-squared                                            0.550              0.436              0.554                0.556              0.552
          Counties                                              3,105               3,105                714               2,391              3,105


Note: The dependent variable is the change in the incumbent two-party vote share. All models include county and year fixed effects. The 10 swing states are

Colorado, Florida, Iowa, North Carolina, New Hampshire, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Nevada, and Wisconsin. The trade exposure measures are log (relevant

employment measure + 1) from the Census LBD. All estimates (except Column 2) are weighted by population size in 1990. The robust standard errors (reported

in parentheses) are adjusted for clustering at the county level. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01. Source: confidential plant-level

employment data from the U.S. Census Bureau.




                                                                                 37
REFERENCES



Abramowitz, Alan I. 1988. “An Improved Model for Predicting Presidential-Election

       Outcomes.” Ps-Political Science & Politics 21(4):843–7.

Abramowitz, Alan I. 2008. “It’s about Time: Forecasting the 2008 Presidential Election with the

       Time-for-Change Model.” International Journal of Forecasting 24(2):209–17.

Antoniades, Alexis, and Charles W. Calomiris. 2014. “Mortgage Market Credit Conditions and

       U.S. Presidential Elections.” Paper presented at the Mortara Political Economy Seminar

       Luncheon Series.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor

       Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review

       103(6):2121–68.

Bailey, Michael A., Judith Goldstein, and Barry R. Weingast. 1997. “The Institutional Roots of

       American Trade Policy.” World Politics 49(3):309–38.

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott. 2006. “Survival of the Best Fit:

       Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing

       Plants.” Journal of International Economics 68:219–37.

Blinder, Alan S. and Alan B. Krueger. 2013. "Alternative Measures of Offshorability: A Survey

       Approach," Journal of Labor Economics, University of Chicago Press, vol. 31(S1), pages

       S97 - S12.

Broz, J. Lawrence. 2005. “Congressional Politics of International Financial Rescues.” American

       Journal of Political Science 49(3):479–96.

Broz, J. Lawrence, and Hawes, M. B. 2006. Congressional Politics of Financing the International

       Monetary Fund. International Organization 60(2):367–99.
                                               38
Campbell, James E. 2008. “Evaluating U.S. Presidential Election Forecasts and Forecasting

       Equations.” International Journal of Forecasting 24(2):257–69.

Campbell, James E., and Michael S. Lewis-Beck. 2008. “US Presidential Election Forecasting:

       An Introduction.” International Journal of Forecasting 24(2):189–92.

Erikson, Robert S. 1989. “Economic-Conditions and the Presidential Vote.” American Political

       Science Review 83(2):567–73.

Erikson, Robert S. 2009. “The American Voter and the Economy, 2008.” Ps-Political Science &

       Politics 42(3):467–71.

Erikson, Robert S., Michael B. MacKuen, and James A. Stimson. 2002. The Macro Polity.

       New York: Cambridge University Press.

Fair, Ray C. 1978. “Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President.” Review of Economics

       and Statistics 60(2):159–73.

Fair, Ray C. 2009. “Presidential and Congressional Vote-Share Equations.” American Journal of

       Political Science 53(1):55–72.

Feigenbaum, James J. and Andrew B. Hall. 2015. “How Legislators Respond to Localized

       Economic Shocks: Evidence from Chinese Import Competition.” Journal of Politics

       77(4):1012-30.

Gervais, Antoine, and J. Bradford Jensen. 2013. “The Tradability of Services: Geographic

       Concentration and Trade Costs.” Boston: NBER Working Paper #19759.

Goldstein, Judith. 1994. Ideas, Interests, and American Trade Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell

       University Press.

Grant, Taylor, and Matthew J. Lebo. Forthcoming. “Error Correction Methods with Political

       Time Series.” Political Analysis.



                                               39
Hibbs, Douglas A., Jr. 2000. “Bread and Peace Voting in U.S. Presidential Elections.” Public

       Choice 104(1/2):149–80.

Hiscox, Michael J. 1999. “The Magic Bullet? The RTAA, Institutional Reform, and Trade

       Liberalization.” International Organization 53(4):669–98.

Hiscox, Michael J. 2002. Commerce, Coalitions, and Factor Mobility: Evidence from

       Congressional Votes on Trade Legislation. American Political Science Review

       96(3):593–608.

Jarmin, R.S., and J. Miranda. 2002. The Longitudinal Business Database,

       <http://ideas.repec.org/s/cen/wpaper.html> Working paper 02-17, Center for Economic

       Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

Jensen, J. Bradford. 2011. Global Trade in Services: Fear, Facts, and Offshoring. Washington,

       D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Jensen, J. Bradford, and Lori G. Kletzer. 2006. “Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope and

       Impact of Services Offshoring.” In Brookings Trade Forum 2005, Offshoring White-

       Collar Work, eds. Susan M. Collins and Lael Brainard. Washington, DC: Brookings

       Institution, 75–134.

Jensen, J. Bradford, and Lori G. Kletzer. 2010. “Measuring Tradable Services and the Task

       Content of Offshorable Services Jobs.” In Labor in the New Economy, eds. Katharine

       Abraham, Mike Harper and James Spletzer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jensen, J. Bradford, Dennis P. Quinn, and Stephen Weymouth. 2015. “The Influence of Firm

       Global Supply Chains and Foreign Currency Undervaluations on U.S. Trade Disputes.”

       International Organization 69(4):913–47.




                                               40
Jensen, Nathan M. 2013. Domestic Institutions and the Taxing of Multinational Corporations.

       International Studies Quarterly 57(3): 440-448.

Kayser, Mark A., and Arndt Leininger. 2015. “Vintage Errors: Do Real-Time Economic Data

       Improve Election Forecasts?” Research and Politics. DOI: 10.1177/2053168015589624.

Kim, J. O., & Mueller, C. W. 1978. Factor Analysis: Statistical Methods and Practical Issues.

       Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications

Krueger, Alan B., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry

       Wage Structure.” Econometrica 56(2):259–93.

Leamer, Edward E. 2007. “A Flat World, a Level Playing Field, a Small World After All, or

       None of the Above? A Review of Thomas L. Friedman’s The World is Flat.” Journal of

       Economic Literature 45(March):83–126.

Lewis-Beck, Michael S., and Richard Nadeau. 2011. “Economic Voting Theory: Testing New

       Dimensions.” Electoral Studies 30(2):288–94.

Lewis-Beck, Michael S., and Mary Stegmaier. 2000. “Economic Determinants of Electoral

       Outcomes.” Annual Review of Political Science 3:183–219.

Lewis-Beck, Michael S. and Charles Tien. 2004. “Jobs and the Job of the President: A Forecast

       for 2004.” PS: Political Science and Politics 37(4):753-758.

Lewis-Beck, Michael S., and Charles Tien. 2008. “Forecasting Presidential Elections: When to

       Change the Model.” International Journal of Forecasting 24(2):227–36.

Mansfield, Edward D. and Diana C. Mutz. 2013. “US versus Them: Mass Attitudes toward

       Offshore Outsourcing.” World Politics 65(4):571–608.

Margalit, Yotam. 2011. “Costly Jobs: Trade-Related Layoffs, Government Compensation, and

       Voting in U.S. Elections.” American Political Science Review 105(1):166–88.



                                              41
Milner, Helen. 1988. “Trading Places: Industries for Free Trade.” World Politics 40(3):350–76.

Milner, Helen V., and Tingley, Dustin H. 2011. “Who Supports Global Economic Engagement?

       The Sources of Preferences in American Foreign Economic Policy.” International

       Organization 65(1):37–68.

Owen, Erica. 2015. “Exposure to Offshoring and the Politics of Trade Liberalization: Debates

       and Votes on Free Trade in the 108th Congress.” Paper Presented at the 2015 American

       Political Science Association Convention, August 2015, San Francisco, CA.

Powell, G. Bingham, and Guy D. Whitten. 1993. “A Cross-National Analysis of Economic

       Voting – Taking Account of the Political Context.” American Journal of Political

       Science 37(2):391–414.

Quinn, Dennis P., and John T. Woolley. 2001. “Democracy and National Economic

       Performance: The Preference for Stability.” American Journal of Political Science

       45(July):634–57.

Rickard, Stephanie J. 2015. “Compensating the Losers: An Examination of Congressional Votes

       on Trade Adjustment Assistance.” International Interactions 41(1):46–60.

Rogowski, Ronald. 1987. Political Cleavages and Changing Exposure to Trade. American

       Political Science Review 81(December):1121–37.

Scheve, Kenneth, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2004. “Economic Insecurity and the Globalization of

       Production.” American Journal of Political Science 48(October):662–74.

Tufte, Edward R. 1978. Political Control of the Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

       Press.

Walter, Stephanie. 2010. “Globalization and the Welfare State: Testing the Microfoundations of

       the Compensation Hypothesis.” International Studies Quarterly 54(2):403–26.



                                              42
Wright, John R. 2012. “Unemployment and the Democratic Electoral Advantage.” American

      Political Science Review 106(4):685–702.




                                            43
                                            Appendix A

Correlations and Descriptive Statistics

The pairwise correlations among the dependent and independent macro variables are presented in

Appendix Tables A1. The descriptive statistics are reported in Tables A2a and A2b (macro and

county level, respectively).



Factor Analysis

Factor analysis examines the intercorrelations among the variables and assesses whether an

underlying or latent variable nests the explanatory variables.

          At the macro level, the principal factor analysis shows that three latent variables

undergird the macro data, accounting for 85% of the variance in the data. Business Sentiment

Q15, July Gallup Presidential Approval, change in unemployment, economic growth, and change

in exports all load strongly on the first factor.42 Two variables (change in consumer prices and

job growth: ΔJobs) load on multiple dimensions. Incumbent Party terms and Incumbent Prior

votes load on separate factors. Only ΔImports/GDP fails to load on a factor: it consequently has a

high uniqueness score.43



42
     As noted above, Campbell (2008) used the Gallup polls in early September of the election year

instead of the July Gallup; Abramowitz (2008) used “net candidate advantage” derived from the

June Gallup poll. Both variables load on the same first factor as July Gallup and other variables

listed above.
43
     “Uniqueness” refers to the information overlap between and among variables. In principal

component analysis, the assumption is that variables have a high ‘communality’ of information.


                                                   44
       By contrast, the intercorrelations among the county-level variables are modest. Only

underlying factor is present (which is correlated with income). All other variables have high

uniqueness scores, suggesting that the information overlap among them is very low.




Principal factor analysis, used here, tests that assumption. The higher the 0–1 ‘unique’ score, the

more the variable is measuring a phenomenon different from that measured by other variables.

Scores above 0.6 are considered to be ‘high’ and a sign that the variable is a reliably different

measure from other variables.


                                                 45
TABLE A1 Pairwise Correlations among the Dependent and Publicly Available Independent Variables (Macro Data)

                  Incumb. Growth      Bus        ΔTradeBal   ΔImports ΔExports #Incumbent ΔJobs    Gallup    ΔUnempl
                  Vote      Q12Q15    SentQ15    Q12_15      Q12_15   Q12_153 Party Terms (Q15-    (Q15)

                  Share                                                                   Q1)/Q1

 Vote Share       1

 Growth           0.58**    1

 Business Sent.   .068***   0.84***   1

 ΔTradebal        -0.02     -0.56**   -0.43      1

 ΔImports         -0.09     0.16      0.05       -0.53**     1

 ΔExports         -0.08     -0.55**   -0.59**    0.8***      0.09     1

 Inc. Terms       -0.48*    -0.02     -0.27      -0.42*      -0.16    -0.61***   1

 ΔJobs            0.16      0.18      0.3        0.12        -0.1     0.05       -0.1     1

 July_gallup      0.83***   0.42*     0.73***    0.1         -0.09    0.05       -0.46*   0.06     1

 ΔUnemployment -0.57***     -0.8***   -0.84***   0.4         -0.01    0.53**     0.14     -0.03    -0.54**   1




                                                                      46
TABLE A2a Descriptive Statistics – Macro Level

                                   Mean          Std. Deviation   N

Vote Share                         0.52          0.06             16

Growth Q12_Q15                     2.08          2.44             16

Business Sent. Q15                 103.3         37.9             15

ΔTradebal Q12_Q15                  -0.12         0.63             16

ΔImports Q12_Q15                   0.48          0.52             16

ΔExports Q12_Q15                   0.32          0.47             16

Inc. Terms                         1.81          1.28             16

ΔJobs (Q15-Q1)/Q15                 8.59          2.99             16

July_gallup Q15                    47.6          14.17            16

ΔUnemployment                      -0.28         0.81             16




                                                    47
TABLE A2b Descriptive Statistics – County Level

                                                     Std.

Variable                           Obs      Mean     Dev.     Min       Max

Δ Incumbent Two-Party Vote Share   18,678   -0.031   0.056    -0.345    0.199

Unemployment                       18,675   6.137    2.797    0.800     35.600

Change in Unemployment (1-year)    18,675   -0.068   1.211    -13.900   12.700

Unemployment Volatility            18,674   0.805    0.607    0.000     8.791

Average Pay                        18,674   9.838    0.207    8.966     11.025

Change in Avg. Pay (1-year)        18,673   0.006    0.036    -1.762    0.688

Tradable Services Concentration    18,260   0.619    0.347    0.000     6.893

Manufacturing Concentration        16,177   1.374    0.938    0.000     7.440




                                                             48
TABLE A3a Factor Analysis, Macro, National Data



                                                               Component
  VARIABLE                            1       2            3                       Uniqueness

   Bus Sentiment Q15                  0.95                                          0.06
   ΔUnemployment                      -0.89                                         0.20
   Growth Q12–Q15                     0.87                                          0.16
   July Gallup Approval               0.74                                          0.18
   ΔExports                           -0.67                                         0.46
   CPI                                -0.54    0.52        0.56                     0.13
   Incumbent Prior Votes                       0.84                                 0.15
   ΔJobs                                       0.57        0.56                     0.32
   Incumbent Party Terms                                   -0.66                    0.31
   ΔImports                                                                         0.95


  TS Squared
  Loadings                       3.89         1.88         1.32



  % of Total Variance            47           23           16

  Cumulative % of
                                 47           69           85
  Variance



Notes: Number of observations = 15. Unrotated matrix with Eigenvalues > 1.00. Principal factor analysis

is used. The factor loading scores represent the correlation between the variable and the factor. Factor

loading scores below 0.5 are considered substantively insignificant, and thus are omitted. The square of

the factor loading score is the size of the variable’s total variance represented by the factor. For example,

Business Sentiment Q15 loads roughly 90% on Factor 1.




                                                      49
TABLE A4 Alternative Measures of Trade, Incumbency, Growth, Sentiment, and Trade (Macro Models, 1952–2012)

                                                           Model 3                                            Model 7     Model 8
                                    Model 1     Model 2    Man. Jobs      Model 4     Model 5     Model 6     Goods       Services
         Prior Incumbent Vote t-1   -0.673***   -0.831**   -0.619**       -0.745***   -0.746***   -0.752***   -0.774***   -0.876***
                                    (0.15)      (0.163)    (0.15)         (0.159)     (0.169)     (0.015)     (0.15)      (0.204)
         Growth Q12_15              0.027***    0.031***   0.019***       0.029***    0.032***    0.032***    0.033***    0.024***
                                    (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.007)        (0.006)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)
         ΔImportsQ12_15             -0.039***   -0.037**   -0.037***      -0.038***   -0.038**    -0.034**    -0.045**    -0.176**
                                    (0.012)     (0.014)    (0.012)        (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.078)
         ΔExportsQ12_15             0.038*      0.053**    0.062***       0.061***    0.061***    0.064***    0.078***    0.098
                                    (0.021)     (0.019)    (0.015)        (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.021)     (0.103)
         #Incumbent Party Terms     -0.011
                                    (0.006)
         ΔJobs (Q15-Q1)/Q1                      0.003      0.008***
                                                (0.002)    (0.002)
         ΔUnemployment                                                    -0.011
                                                                          (0.014)
         Inflation (CPI)                                                              -0.001
                                                                                      (0.003)
         Time Trend                                                                               -0.002
                                                                                                  (0.002)
         Constant                   0.843***    0.868***   0.804***       0.848***    0.847***    0.486***    0.858***    0.936***
                                    (0.076)     (0.081)    (0.074)        (0.083)     (0.087)     (0.024)     (0.079)     (0.103)
         Obs.                       16          16         16             16          16          16          16          16
         Adj.   R2                  0.83        0.81       0.85           0.79        0.78        0.81        0.81        0.68

         AR 1-2 test [p-value]      [0.85]      [0.67]     [0.54]         [0.96]      [0.72]      [0.6]       [0.81]      [0.78]
         ARCH 1-1 test [p-value]
                                    [0.13]      [0.55]     [0.88]         [0.42]      [0.65]      [0.76]      [0.65]      [0.96]
         Normality test [p-value]
                                    [0.82]      [0.56]     [0.27]         [0.66]      [0.64]      [0.18]      [0.34]      [0.03]**




                                                                     50
                     Appendix B: Examining Alternative Hypotheses

Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA)

In Table B.1, we estimate models that include the numbers of workers filing for TAA, which

Margalit showed were negatively associated with changes in the incumbent’s (George W. Bush)

vote share between 2000 and 2004. TAA filings are measured as the number of workers filing

for TAA in the 4 years leading up to and including the election year (as a share of the total

workforce). Our models include all presidential elections between 1996 and 2012. The results

confirm Margalit’s finding over the longer period of our study: TAA is associated with decreases

in incumbent vote shares. In Column B.1, following Margalit, we model the change in incumbent

vote shares, and include state (rather than county) fixed effects. Model 2 includes county fixed

effects and county-level clustering, and the negative coefficient corresponding to TAA workers

remains negative and statistically significant at the 90% level. We find that aggregate job losses

associated with globalization, as captured by the TAA variable, reduce incumbent vote share,

consistent with Margalit (2011). In Column 3 of Table B1, we include all our measures of

county-level economic conditions; TAA Workers retains a negative coefficient, but is no longer

statistically significant.

        The remaining columns incorporate our measures of trade exposure from the census data.

Our results are broadly consistent with those reported in the paper. Low-wage tradable

manufacturing is strongly associated with lower vote shares in swing states, while high-wage

tradable services and manufacturing are strongly associated with increased vote shares in non-

swing states.




                                                51
TABLE B1 County-level Determinants of Incumbent Two-Party Vote Shares (1996–2012 Presidential Elections)

                                                                                    Include
                                                                                    Census
                                                                                  Contestability                   Non-Swing
                                            State FE    County FE   County FE      Measures         Swing States     States
    TAA Covered                             -0.092**    -0.074*       -0.059        -0.053          0.062           -0.088*
                                             (0.043)    (0.041)       (0.041)       (0.041)        (0.076)          (0.045)
    Unemployment                             0.001*     -0.001*       -0.000        0.000           -0.002**         0.000
                                             (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)
    Average Pay                              0.018***    0.057***      0.022        0.015          -0.063***         0.037**
                                             (0.004)    (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.015)        (0.023)          (0.017)
    Change in Unemployment (1-year)                                   -0.001        -0.001           0.003**       -0.003*
                                                                      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)
    Unemployment Volatility                                          -0.014***      -0.014***      -0.009***        -0.015***
                                                                      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.002)
    Change in Avg. Pay (1-year)                                        0.161***     0.155***        0.152***         0.154***
                                                                      (0.030)       (0.029)        (0.044)          (0.034)
    High-wage Tradable Manufacturing
    Empl.                                                                           0.003***         0.001           0.004***
                                                                                    (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)
    High-wage Tradable Service Empl.                                                0.007***        0.0004           0.009***
                                                                                    (0.001)        (0.0004)         (0.001)
    Low-wage Tradable Manufacturing Empl.                                           0.001           -0.008***        0.004*
                                                                                    (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)
    Low-wage Tradable Service Empl.                                                 0.009***         0.000          0.012***
                                                                                    (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)
    Constant                                                                        -0.291           0.711***      -0.590***
                                                                                    (0.151)         (0.218)         (0.175)

    Observations                               15,554      15,554       15,553    15,519             3,569            11,950
    R-squared                                   0.485       0.456        0.474     0.483             0.500             0.491


                                                             52
     Clusters                                                     50           3,111            3,111      3,105                 714                    2,391


Note: The dependent variable is the change in the incumbent two-party vote share. The 1992 election is not included because TAA data are not available prior to

1994. TAA workers represents the total number of workers covered by TAA over the 4-year period including the 3 years prior to the election and the election

year, as the share of total employed workers in the county in the election year. Estimates are weighted by population size in 1990. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value <

0.05; *** p-value < 0.01. Source: Margalit 2011.




                                                                                53
Partisan Employment Effects. In Table B2, following Wright (2012), we allow for unemployment to exert differential effects on

incumbent vote shares depending on the party of the incumbent. Our main results are little changed with this alternative specification;

the estimated interaction effects are consistent with Wright (2012).


Table B2 County-level Determinants of Incumbent Two-Party Vote Shares (1992–2012 Presidential Elections)

                                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                                     Interact        Interact Delta                   Non-Swing
                                                                  Unemployment      Unemployment      Swing States       States
       Unemployment                                                -0.002**           -0.002**         -0.005***      -0.001
                                                                   (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)
       Unemployment Volatility                                     -0.015***           -0.017***       -0.009***     -0.016***
                                                                   (0.002)            (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)
       Average Pay                                                   0.012              0.016         -0.036*         0.027*
                                                                   (0.014)            (0.014)         (0.021)        (0.016)
       Change in Avg. Pay (1-year)                                  0.098***           0.101***         0.038         0.108***
                                                                   (0.021)            (0.021)         (0.035)        (0.025)
       Change in Unemployment (1-year)                             -0.004***           -0.001         -0.004***      -0.004**
                                                                   (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.002)
       Democratic Incumbent x Unemployment                                              0.001*
                                                                                        (.001)
       Democratic Incumbent x Change in Unemployment (1-year)            0.005***                       0.007***        0.004**
                                                                       (0.002)                        (0.002)        (0.002)
       High-wage Tradable Manufacturing Empl.                            0.001***      0.001***        -0.004          0.002***
                                                                       (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)        (0.001)
       High-wage Tradable Service Empl.                                  0.005***      0.005***         0.002          0.006***
                                                                       (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)        (0.001)
       Low-wage Tradable Manufacturing Empl.                            -0.006***     -0.006***        -0.013***      -0.004**


                                                                   54
                                                                                 (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.003)             (0.002)
        Low-wage Tradable Service Empl.                                            0.007***            0.007***          0.008***            0.008***
                                                                                 (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.003)             (0.002)
        Constant                                                                  -0.229***          -0.266*             0.344*              -0.413***
                                                                                 (0.139)             (0.138)            (0.201)             (0.158)
        Observations                                                              18623                18623              4282               14341
        R-squared                                                                  0.551              0.5505            0.5556              0.5568
        Counties                                                                    3105                3105                714               2391




Note: We control for partisan employment effects. The dependent variable is the change in the incumbent two-party vote share. All models include county and

year fixed effects. The Democratic incumbent dummy is collinear with the year fixed effects and omitted from the model. The 10 swing states are Colorado,

Florida, Iowa, North Carolina, New Hampshire, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Nevada, and Wisconsin. The trade exposure measures are log (relevant

employment measure + 1) from the Census LBD. All estimates (except Column 2) are weighted by population size in 1990. The robust standard errors (reported

in parentheses) are adjusted for clustering at the county level. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01. Source: Wright 2012.




                                                                                55
Employment in Exporting Firms. Column 1 reports the baseline specification with total

manufacturing employment in the county and the employment at manufacturing exporters as the

measure of trade exposure. When the measure of trade exposure is total employment at

manufacturing exporters, the coefficient estimate is negative and statistically significant. In

Column 2, we separate exporter employment into high- and low-wage establishments. While the

coefficient estimate on high-wage manufacturing exporters is positive, it is not statistically

significant. The coefficient estimate for low-wage manufacturing exporters is negative and

statistically significant.

TABLE B3 County-level Determinants of Incumbent Two-Party Vote Shares (1992–2012)

                                                                   (1)       (2)
        Unemployment                                           -0.002**      -0.002**
                                                              (0.001)        (0.001)
        Change in Unemployment (1-year)                        -0.002        -0.002
                                                              (0.001)        (0.001)
        Unemployment Volatility                               -0.017***      -0.017***
                                                              (0.002)        (0.002)
        Average Pay                                             0.021        0.020
                                                              (0.014)        (0.014)
        Change in Avg. Pay (1-year)                            0.103***      0.103***
                                                              (0.021)        (0.021)
        Manufacturing Employment                               -0.002        -0.003
                                                              (0.002)        (0.002)
        Employment at Manufacturing Exporters                 -0.002***
                                                              (0.001)
        Empl. At High-wage Manufacturing Exporters                           0.000
                                                                             (0.0004)
        Empl. At Low-wage Manufacturing Exporters                            -0.001*
                                                                             (0.001)
        Constant                                               -0.215        -0.205
                                                              (0.134)        (0.135)

        Observations                                          18,623         18,623
        R-squared                                              0.546         0.546

        Counties                                              3,105        3,105
Note: Table reports alternative measures of trade exposure (employment in exporting firms)

                                                 56
 Appendix C: Replications of County-Level Results using Publicly Available

                                         Industry Data

       In this Appendix, we substitute the contestability measures derived from the confidential

Census data with publicly available data from the BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and

Wages. We capture the concentration of workers in different sectors using sectoral employment

location quotients calculated by the BLS. A location quotient is a ratio used to compare the

concentration of employment in different sectors among different counties. For instance, the

manufacturing employment location quotient is the number of workers employed in

manufacturing in county i as the share of total workers in county i, as a ratio of the share of

manufacturing workers to total workers in the United States.

       The location quotients provide crude proxies for trade contestability. For instance, the

employment location quotient of an industry in which the United States has a comparative

advantage, such as business or other tradable services, will capture the concentration of workers

that may gain from globalization in a particularly county. We are not able to precisely capture

potential winners and losers within manufacturing using the publicly available data, however,

since the manufacturing location quotients are not disaggregated below the one-digit level. (This

is one of the major advantages of the census data—the ability to capture highly disaggregated

industry variation in tradability within manufacturing and services. Taking the sector as a whole,

our expectation is that manufacturing is largely contestable and (on average) a comparatively

disadvantaged sector in the United States. We incorporate the employment location quotients of




                                                 57
manufacturing and tradable services into our models to test our hypotheses about the differential

economic voting responses of the losers and winners of globalization, respectively.44

          Table C1 reports models of changes in incumbent two-party vote shares at the county

level in presidential election years 1992 through 2012. Unless otherwise noted, all models

include year and county fixed effects, and the standard errors are clustered at the county level.

          The results in Column 1 indicate that voters respond in anticipated ways to changes in

income and employment. Employment volatility decreases incumbent vote share, while increases

in wages are associated with increasing support for the incumbent party. The coefficient estimate

corresponding to Unemployment Volatility45 implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in

unemployment volatility is associated with a 1% decrease in incumbent vote share. A one-

standard-deviation increase in unemployment is associated with a 0.44% decrease in vote shares.

An increase in average pay over the previous year (Δ Average Pay (1-year)) equal to one

standard deviation increases the incumbent vote share by 0.41%.




44
     We classify tradable services at the two-digit industry by applying a location quotient cutoff of

0.6. According to our classification, tradable services include information, finance, and business

and professional services. Nontradable services are trade, transportation and utilities, leisure and

hospitality, education and healthcare, and other services. The BLS does not distinguish among

manufacturing industries in reporting the manufacturing location quotients. See

http://www.bls.gov/cew/datatoc.htm, accessed June 21, 2015.
45
     Unemployment volatility is measured as the standard deviation of the unemployment rate over

the 4 years prior to and including the election year.


                                                   58
         Model 2 introduces the employment location quotients for manufacturing and tradable

services. The location quotients measure the concentration of workers in each sector in each

county-year.

         With regard to manufacturing, the estimated coefficient implies that higher

concentrations of manufacturing employment are associated with lower vote shares for the

incumbent, even after controlling for income, unemployment, and employment volatility. A one-

standard-deviation increase in the manufacturing location quotient is associated with a 0.89%

decrease in the incumbent vote share.

         In contrast, services employment—particularly high concentrations of employment in

tradable services—are associated with increases in incumbent vote shares. A one-standard-

deviation increase in the concentration of employment in tradable services is associated with a

0.33% increase in the incumbent vote share. We include the unweighted model estimates in

Column 3. We note that the magnitude of the manufacturing coefficient increases over three

times. Tradable services is not statistically differentiable from zero in the unweighted model.

         The degree to which our framework can help explain the outcome of national-level

presidential contests largely depends on whether our indicators of economic insecurity explain

variation in incumbent vote shares in counties in the swing states. In Columns 3 and 4 of Table

C1, we report coefficient estimates among the sample of swing and non-swing states,

respectively.46 The results indicate that Unemployment Volatility is associated with lower




46
     To repeat, these are Colorado, Florida, Iowa, North Carolina, New Hampshire, Ohio,

Pennsylvania, Virginia, Nevada, and Wisconsin (“The 10 Closet States in Election 2012,”

Washington Post, November 8, 2012.).


                                                 59
incumbent vote shares in both swing and non-swing states, but the estimated coefficient is larger

in the latter sample. Manufacturing Concentration is strongly negatively associated with changes

in incumbent vote share in swing states. The estimated coefficient corresponding to

Manufacturing Concentration is over three times as large in the swing states as compared to our

previous estimates using the full sample of counties (Model 2): a one-standard-deviation increase

in manufacturing concentration is associated with a 2.5% decline in incumbent vote share in

swing states. We find that higher levels of concentration of tradable services and higher levels of

average income are associated with greater support for the incumbent in non-swing states.47 The

estimated effect of a one-standard-deviation increase in tradable services is nearly 1.5 times as

large in non-swing states compared to the full sample; in swing states, the coefficient is not

statistically different from zero. These results, which we display graphically in Figure C2, are

broadly consistent with those reported in the main text.

          In Column 6 of Table C1, we include county-level demographic characteristics in our

county fixed-effects model using the full sample, and the results are little changed.




47
     The results are consistent when we analyze a smaller swing state sample, dropping Nevada and

Wisconsin.


                                                 60
61
FIGURE C.2 Marginal Effects (Based on Estimates in Table A1)



                   Unemployment


  Unemployment (one-year change)


          Unemployment Volatility


                  Average Income


 Average Income (one-year change)


   Tradable Services Concentration


      Manufacturing Concentration

                                     -.03          -.02           -.01        0          .01

                                            Full Sample        Swing States   Non-Swing States



Note: The figure shows the estimated effect of a one-standard-deviation change in the

explanatory variables on the incumbent vote share. The results are based on Models 2, 4, and 5

of Table A1, with regressors standardized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.




                                                          62
TABLE C1 County-level Determinants of Incumbent Two-Party Vote Shares (1992–2012 Presidential Elections)

                                      (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                                           Swing    Non-swing   Additional
                                                           Unweighted      States      States    Controls
 Unemployment                       -0.001**    -0.002**    -0.002***   -0.005***      -0.001    -0.002**
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
 Change in Unemployment (1-year)     -0.002       -0.002       0.001      -0.000       -0.002      -0.001
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.000)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
 Unemployment Volatility           -0.017***   -0.017***    -0.007***   -0.011***   -0.018***   -0.017***
                                     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.002)
 Average Pay                          0.019        0.020     -0.018**     -0.029      0.034**     0.029**
                                     (0.014)     (0.014)      (0.008)     (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.015)
 Change in Avg. Pay (1-year)        0.101***    0.104***      0.021*       0.052     0.114***    0.091***
                                     (0.021)     (0.022)      (0.011)     (0.037)     (0.026)     (0.021)
 Tradable Services Concentration                 0.010**      -0.001      -0.002     0.014***     0.010**
                                                 (0.004)      (0.002)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.004)
 Manufacturing Concentration                   -0.010***    -0.012***   -0.027***     -0.004*   -0.010***
                                                 (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.002)
 Retired                                                                                        -0.180***
                                                                                                  (0.069)
 Female                                                                                          0.598***
                                                                                                  (0.152)
 African American                                                                                   0.030
                                                                                                  (0.039)
 Hispanic Latino                                                                                   -0.046
                                                                                                  (0.034)
 Bachelor's Degree                                                                              -0.177***
                                                                                                  (0.057)
 Population                                                                                         0.011
                                                                                                  (0.008)

                                                           63
  Constant                                -0.230*       -0.240*       0.145**        0.287       -0.395**      -0.727***
                                          (0.135)       (0.139)       (0.072)       (0.189)       (0.158)        (0.167)
  Observations                             18,663        16,135        16,135        3,947        12,188         16,135
  R-squared                                 0.546         0.551         0.459        0.558         0.557          0.555
  Counties                                  3,111         2,896         2,896         695          2,201          2,896


Note: The dependent variable is the change in the incumbent two-party vote share. Democratic Party incumbent election years are

1996, 2008, and 2012; Republican Party incumbent election years are 1992, 2004, and 2008. All models include county and year fixed

effects. Unemployment volatility is the standard deviation of the county-level unemployment rate calculated over the 4-year period

including the 3 years prior to the election and the election year. All other regressors are also measured at the county level, and

correspond to the election year. Average pay and the concentration measures enter as natural logs. The concentration measures are

employment location quotients from the U.S. Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages and computed by the BLS. Tradable

services include information, finance, and business and professional services. All estimates, except those appearing in Column 3, are

weighted by population size in 1990. The robust standard errors (reported in parentheses) are adjusted for clustering at the county

level. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value < 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01.




                                                                    64
        In this section, we further examine variation in the manufacturing sectors in swing and

non-swing states. In particular, we are interested in uncovering potential sources of the large

increase in the estimated coefficient corresponding to low-skilled manufacturing in swing states.

We want to know if there are systematic differences in employment characteristics between

swing and non-swing states. To conduct the analysis, we use the publicly available employment

data from the BLS. We calculated the share of employment in manufacturing in swing and non-

swing states between 1992 and 2012 to see if manufacturing makes up a larger, and thus

potentially more politically salient, share of employment in swing states. Averaging over the

period, we find that 12.9% of employment in swing states is in manufacturing, compared with

11.6% in the non-swing sample, a difference that is not statistically significant (t = -0.74). When

we divide states according to the median manufacturing share of employment over the period,

we find that 6 of the 10 swing states have manufacturing employment shares greater than the

median (PA, OH, IA, NH, NC, WI).

        The large magnitude of the low-skilled manufacturing coefficient in swing states appears

to be driven by this sample of high-manufacturing swing states. The share of employment in

manufacturing in these six manufacturing swing states is 16.9%, compared with the 6.8%

average manufacturing employment share in the other swing states (CO, FL, NV, VA).

Appendix Table C2 reports estimates on subsamples using the publicly available BLS data on

sectoral employment concentration in manufacturing and tradable services. When we constrain

the sample to these six high-manufacturing swing states and estimate the model, we find a large

and statistically significant coefficient estimate equal to -0.028; in the four non-manufacturing

swing states, the coefficient estimate falls to -0.005 and is not statistically significant. In

additional analyses reported in Table C2, the manufacturing concentration becomes statistically



                                                   65
significant when we constrain the sample to high-manufacturing states (both swing and non-

swing), but not for low-manufacturing states. We conclude that the apparent salience of

manufacturing concentration in swing states is driven by the importance of manufacturing in the

Northern swing states that have historically large manufacturing bases.



TABLE C2 County-level Determinants of Incumbent Two-Party Vote Shares (1992–2012

Presidential Elections)

                                          (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
                                      High-MNF       Low-MNF
                                         Swing          Swing    High-MNF    Low-MNF
                                         States         States      States      States
  Unemployment                        -0.004***      -0.004***   -0.005***      -0.001
                                        (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
  Change in Unemployment (1-year)        0.001          0.002      0.002**     -0.003*
                                        (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)
  Unemployment Volatility             -0.014***       -0.008**   -0.009***   -0.022***
                                        (0.003)        (0.004)     (0.001)     (0.003)
  Average Pay                          -0.061**        -0.010      -0.026*    0.068***
                                        (0.024)        (0.024)     (0.014)     (0.019)
  Change in Avg. Pay (1-year)            0.070         -0.032     0.101***     0.076**
                                        (0.054)        (0.048)     (0.032)     (0.032)
  Tradable Services Concentration       -0.003         -0.006        0.007       0.010
                                        (0.008)        (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.008)
  Manufacturing Concentration         -0.028***        -0.005    -0.016***      -0.001
                                        (0.004)        (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.006)
  Constant                             0.614***         0.046       0.239*   -0.718***
                                        (0.235)        (0.232)     (0.135)     (0.193)
  Observations                           2,567          1,380        9,998       6,137
  R-squared                              0.498          0.704        0.516       0.599
  Counties                                434            261         1,751       1,145


Note: The dependent variable is the change in the incumbent two-party vote share. All models

include county and year fixed effects. Unemployment volatility is the standard deviation of the

county-level unemployment rate calculated over the 4-year period including the 3 years prior to

                                                66
the election and the election year. All other regressors are also measured at the county level, and

correspond to the election year. Average pay and the concentration measures enter as natural

logs. The concentration measures are employment location quotients from the U.S. Quarterly

Census of Employment and Wages and computed by the BLS. Tradable services include

information, finance, and business and professional services. All estimates, except those

appearing in Column 3, are weighted by population size in 1990. The robust standard errors

(reported in parentheses) are adjusted for clustering at the county level. States are grouped as

being high- and low- concentration manufacturing states according to the median share of

employment in manufacturing averaged over the period 1992–2012. * p-value < 0.1; ** p-value

< 0.05; *** p-value < 0.01.




                                                 67
             Appendix D: Measures and Data Sources in National Models


Economic Growth. Multiple measures of economic growth are used. Quarterly per capita real GDP

growth is taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Survey of Current Business. The growth

rate from Q12 through Q15 is used, as is the growth rate in Q14 (following Abramowitz 2008). The

results are not sensitive to the indicator of growth or its timing. Quarterly growth is available only from

1952 onward.

Exports and Imports. Exports and imports are measured as a percentage of GDP, Q12–Q15, both in

levels and changes. The data come from the BEA, Survey of Current Business. The data prior to 1952 are

also from the BEA, but are annual changes.

Consumer Sentiment and Business Conditions. The data from both series are taken from the University

of Michigan/Reuters series. Historical data on consumer sentiment is also available from the St. Louis

Federal Reserve (UMCSENT1 series) from late 1952 on. The Business Conditions series (used in Erikson

2009) is available from 1954 onward.48 The indicator on the closest date prior to the presidential election

is used.

Inflation, Jobs, and Unemployment. The unemployment series is the unemployment rate of

economically active individuals from the BEA website; the CPI is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

‘Jobs’ is the percentage change in numbers employed during a presidential term measured from January

in Q1 to June of the election years, and is from Lewis-Beck and Tien (2004), with an update by the

authors.



48
     In the University of Michigan survey, respondents are asked, “And how about a year from

now, do you expect that in the country as a whole business conditions will be better, or worse

than they are at present, or just about the same.” The ‘relative’ score is used, which is (better-

worse) + 100.


                                                     68
July Gallup Poll and Net Candidate Advantage. July Gallup Poll is the presidential popularity in the first

Gallup Poll in July of an election year, and is from Lewis-Beck and Tien (2008) (with an update by the

authors). An alternative used in Abramowitz 2008 is to take the difference between the incumbent’s

favorable and unfavorable ratings. The empirical results are almost identical. Net Candidate Advantage is

the incumbent candidate (or party) advantage from the American National Election Survey: items

VCF0403, VCF0407, and VCF0409.

Number of Incumbent Terms. This indicator is the number of consecutive terms an incumbent party has

controlled the presidency. The variable is suggested by Abramowitz (1988, 2008) and is also known as

the Time for Change variable.



Data Used in County-Level Models


Incumbent vote shares. We construct the change in the two-party vote share of the incumbent party.

Incumbent vote shares are incumbent party votes as a share of total Democratic and Republican votes.

Source: Dave Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections http://uselectionatlas.org/

Sectoral Employment Concentration. Location quotients compare the industrial activity levels among

different counties. These are used in the analysis reported in Appendix C. Location quotients are ratios

that compare the concentration of employment in a defined area (in this case, the county) to that of the

entire country. We use the share of employment in the industry in county i relative to the industry share of

employment in the United States. Source: http://www.bls.gov/cew/datatoc.htm

Unemployment. County-level unemployment rate corresponds to the election year. Source: BLS

http://www.bls.gov/lau/#tables

Unemployment Volatility. The standard deviation of unemployment, measured over the 4-year period

prior to and including the election year. Source: BLS http://www.bls.gov/lau/#tables

Average Pay. The log of average pay of all workers during the election year. Source: BLS Quarterly

Census of Employment and Wages http://www.bls.gov/cew/datatoc.htm


                                                    69
Change in Average Pay. One-year change in the log of average pay between election year and the year

prior to the election. Source: http://www.bls.gov/cew/datatoc.htm

Trade Exposure Measures. The number of workers employed in each of the four categories: high-wage

tradable manufacturing, low-wage tradable manufacturing, high-wage tradable services, and low-wage

tradable services. To categorize industries as tradable, we construct Gini coefficients of the geographic

concentration of production for all U.S. industries in scope for the Economic Census for 1992. We

classify industries as tradable if the Gini coefficient for the industry is above the threshold Gini

coefficient that results in 90% of manufacturing sector employment being classified as tradable. We

classify establishments as high-wage or low-wage using the median household income in the relevant

year as the threshold for ‘high wage.’ Here, workers are classified as high-wage if the establishment in

which they work has average wages above the median household income. We sum across establishments

to construct the number of workers in each county that are in tradable industries with above-median

income in the manufacturing sector, the number of workers in tradable industries with below-median

income in the manufacturing sector, the number of workers in tradable industries with above-median

income wages in the service sector, and the number of workers in tradable industries with below-median

income wages in the service sector. The trade exposure measures are log (relevant employment measure +

1). Source: Census LBD. https://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/datasets/lbd.html

Demographic Data. The demographic data and other county-level controls are from the Decennial

Census and American Community Survey. Election data are linked to the most proximate prior decennial

census. Source: National Historical Geographic Information System (Minnesota Population Center at the

University of Minnesota) https://www.nhgis.org/




                                                      70
