                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PARETO EFFICIENT AND
                  OPTIMAL TAXATION AND THE
                  NEW NEW WELFARE ECONOMICS




                     Joseph E. Stiglitz




                   Working Paper No. 2189




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2189
                                         March 1987




             Pareto Efficient and Optimal Taxation
               and the New New Welfare Economics



                           ABSTRACT




     This paper surveys recent developments in the theory of
pareto efficient taxation.     This  literature  attempts to
characterize those tax structures which, given the limitations on
the government's information and other limitations       on the
government's ability to impose taxes, maximize the welfare of one
individual (group of individuals) subject to the government
obtaining a given revenue and subject to other (groups of)
individuals attaining certain specified  levels of utility.
Utilitarian (or other) social welfare functions can then be used
to select among these pareto efficient tax structures. While the
original goal of this line of research, which was to provide a
 'scientific" basis for arguing for a progressive tax structure,
has not been achieved——and does not seem achievable——important
insights have been gleaned, which should enable governments to
make better choices of tax policies in the future. On the other
hand, this research has cast serious doubt on the relevance of
many long standing results, including those of Ramsey concerning
the structure of commodity taxes.




                                        Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                        Princeton University
                                        Princeton, NJ 08544
REVISED 1-30-87

                                 Table of Contents

1.   Introduction

Part I: One Commodity Neo-classical models

2. The Basic Model: Two groups

     2.1 Optimal lump sum taxation

     2.2 Imperfect information

     2.3 Implementing the optimal allocation with taxes

     2.4 The optimal tax structure with upper self-selection

constraint binding

     2.5 The optimal tax structure with lower self-selection

constraint binding

     2.6 Equity-efficiency tradeoffs

3. Extension: Continuum of individuals

4. Some mathematical problems

5. Generalizations: Random taxation

6. Limitations: Restricted Taxation--linear tax schedules

7.   Limitations: The Push-Pin Poetry Controversy




                                        1
8.   Limitations: General Equilibrium effects

9. Other Limitations on the General Model

10. Some numerical results



Part II. Pareto Efficient Taxation with Many Commodities and   Many

Periods

11. The Basic Results

     11.1 Formal Analysis

     11.2 Ramsey vs Atkinson Stiglitz

     11.3 Commodity Taxation with a linear income tax

     11.4 Other restrictions: Limited profits tax

12. Implications for the Taxation of Capital

13. Imperfect Capital Markets

14. Commitment

Part III. Concluding Remarks

15. Non-Neoclassical Economies

16. Concluding Observations




                                      2
                      Pareto Efficient and Optimal Taxation

                        and the New New Welfare Economics'



                               Joseph E. Stiglitz



     For more than a hundred years, economists have attempted to show that

progressive taxation can be justified on more fundamental principles. Among the

earliest of such attempts was that of Edgeworth [1868, 1897], who tried to show

that utilitarianism (combined with two other assumptions) implied progress-

ivity. His argument was simple: he postulated that all individuals had the

same utility of income function, and that they exhibited diminishing marginal

utility. Since social welfare was simply the sum of the utility functions of

all individuals, it immediately followed that the decrease in social welfare

from taking a dollar (or a pound) away from a rich person was less than the



      1
          Paper prepared for the Handbook on Public Economics, A. Auerbach and
M. Feldstein, eds. The author is indebted to A. Auerbach for comments on a
previous draft.
        Although this paper is primarily a survey of existing literature, several
sections are based on until now unpublished work, and several sections contain
new proofs of previously published results. New results are reported in
section 8, on optimal taxation where those who are more productive in more
"outside't employment are also more productive in activities at home; section
13.1, on the taxation of capital income in imperfect capital markets; section
14, on altruism and inheritance taxation and section 15, on commitment. New
proofs are contained in section 5, on random taxation; in section 3, on partial
pooling; in section 9, on Pareto efficient taxation with general equilibrium
effects; and in section 2, on characterizing the pareto efficient tax
structure.
     All workers in this area owe an intellectual debt to James Nirrlees. I
should like to acknowledge this debt as well as my indebtedness to my several
collaborators who have greatly influenced the formulation of my ideas: Partha
Dasgupta, Richard Arnott, Raaj Sah, Bob Britto, Steve Slutsky, John Hamilton,
and especially A. B. Atkinson. I am also indebted to Alan Auerbach, Yungoll
Yun and B. Salanie who provided comments on an earlier draft.
     Financial support from the National Science Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged.

                                      3
  decrease in social welfare from taking a dollar away from a poor person.

       With the advent of the New Welfare Economics in the 1930's, interest in

  optimal taxation waned: interpersonal utility comparisons of the kind employed

  in utilitarianism were viewed to be inadmissible. Whether taxes should be

  progressive might be an appropriate question for a moral philosopher, but not

  for an economist. Economists, in their role as economists, should limit

  themselves to identifying Pareto efficient allocations, and to finding Pareto

  inefficiencies and showing how these could be eliminated.

       Many policy economists found this a too circumscribed view of their role.

  In almost all of the choices which they faced, some individuals were better

  off, others worse off. If they could not make some interpersonal comparisons,

  they would not be in a position to contribute much to policy debates.

       This provided the setting for the re-examination of the design of tax

  structures in the 1970's, at first making use of utilitarian social welfare

  functions, but then broadening the analysis to investigate the consequences of

  a wider class of social welfare functions. The major advance over Edgeworth's

  earlier work (due to Mirrlees [1971]) was the recognition of the incentive

  effects associated with taxation2; there was a trade-off between equity and

  efficiency considerations, a trade-off which Edgeworth had ignored. Mirrlees'

  calculations (though only an example) provided less support, however, for the

  advocates of progress ivity than they had hoped. With what seemed reasonable

  hypotheses concerning individual utility functions, the optimal tax schedule

  looked close to linear.

       Those brought up within the doctrines of the New Welfare felt distinctly


     2The presence of trade-of fs between equity and efficiency
considerations had, of course, long been recognized, and there
had even been some formal modelling (See Fair [1971]).

                                        4
uneasy about these developments; the analysis seemed so dependent on the

implicit or explicit interpersonal utility comparisons.

       This paper is concerned with what the New New Welfare Economics has to say

about the design of tax structures. The New New Welfare Economics is

distinguished by two features: First, unlike much of the "old" New Welfare

Economics and unlike the earlier Utilitarian analysis, it does not assume that

the government has at its disposal the information required to make lump sum

redistributions; it identifies who is able to pay higher taxes at least partly

by using endogenous variables, like income or consumption.3 It is this

limitation on the information of the government which results in taxation being

distortionary, and which gives rise to the trade-off between equity and ef-

ficiency.

       Granted    that the government has imperfect information, on the basis of
which it     can redistribute        income, what is the best that can       be   done? The New
New Welfare economics attempts to answer this question and to describe the

Pareto efficient tax structures, i.e. the tax structures which get the economy

to the utilities possibilities schedule, given the limitations on the

government's information and other limitations on the government's ability to

impose taxes.

      Just as the earlier New Welfare Economics argued that it is essential

first to identify the set of Pareto efficient allocations, so that one could

separate out efficiency considerations from the value judgments associated with

choices among Pareto efficient points, so too does the New New Welfare

Economics. There are some properties that all Pareto efficient tax structures

have, whereas other properties may be specific to particular Pareto efficient


   31t may, of course, also use exogenous variables, like age.

                                                     5
tax structures, e.g. those which would be chosen with a utilitarian social

welfare function.     Economists may make an important contribution by

identifying Pareto efficient tax structures, but it still remains the case that

many of the critical choices necessitate interpersonal trade-of fs, choices

among alternative Pareto-efficient allocations. The use of Social Welfare

Functions can provide a useful way of thinking systematically about these

trade-offs; one of the objectives of this paper is to show how this has been

done, and some of the dangers and pitfalls that arise in doing so.

     The topics which are the subject of this chapter include some of the areas

in which there has been the most active research during the past fifteen

years. We cannot and do not provide a complete survey; what we attempt to do

is to put this literature in perspective, to provide some of the key parts of

the analysis, and to refer the reader to more detailed surveys or articles

dealing with particular topics.

     The paper is divided into three parts. Part I discusses Pareto efficient

taxation in a one commodity world. The central question is, how progressive

should the tax structure be? Part II is concerned with the circumstances under

which it is desirable to impose commodity taxation (at different rates on

different commodities and to tax the return to capital.) We conclude in Part

III with some general observations concerning extensions and interpretations of

the general theory.




                                       6
                      Part I. One Commodity Neo-Classical Models



  2.1                               The Basic Model

         The basic issues can be illustrated by a simple model of an economy in

  which there are two types of individuals and a single produced commodity; we

  shall assume that type 2 individuals are more productive than type 1

  individuals, i.e. their output per unit of time spent working is larger.

  Assume that all individuals have the same utility function

                                              U(C1 ,L1),

  where C is the consumption of an individual of type i (this may be a whole

  vector of consumption goods, possibly dated), and L is his labor supply.4 An

  individual of type i has a productivity (output per hour) of w. Thus, in the

  absence of taxation, the individual's budget constraint would simply be

  (1)                              C =Y        =

  where Y is the individual's income.

  By imposing lump sum taxes (or subsidies), M, on individuals of type i (so the

  individual's budget constraint is now

  (1')                         C = Y —M =       wL    —


  so that the revenues raised by taxes on one group are redistributed as lump sum

  payments to the other group:

  (2)                             M1N1+M2N2=O,
 where N is the number of individuals of type 1,

 we can trace out the whole utilities possibilities schedule. (See figure 1)

  2.1 Optimal Lump Sum Taxes


     4Throughout, we assume that utility functions are "well
behaved."


                                          7
        The optimal redistributive tax   depends   on the social welfare function.

Two social welfare functions which have been extensively employed are the

utilitarian

(3a)                                  W = ZNU1
                                              i


and the Rawisian

(3b)                                W mm [U),
where U is the utility of the ith type of individual.

The former is maximized at the point on the utilities possibilities schedule

where the slope is -1; the latter by the intersection of the utilities

possibilities schedule with a 450 line (See Figure 2).

        Analytically, the utilitarian solution with lump sum taxation is

characterized by the equality of the marginal utility of consumption:5

(4)                                           aU1/aC1
                                                        =

while   the marginal rate of substitution between goods and leisure is equal to

the individualts marginal product (wage):

(5)                                       w3U/aC + u1/aL=o
This,   in turn, means that so lone as leisure is a normal good. the more able

individual is actually worse of f.6 This can be seen most easily in the case of

a separable utility function


     5Assume output Q = F(N1L, N2L2) a function of the imputs of the two
types of labor. We form the Lagrangian.

           £ = N1U1 + N2U+ p[F(N1L1, N2L2) - C1N1           -
                                                                C2N2]

(4) and (5) follow from the first order conditions.

     6This assumes, of course, that we can make interpersonal comparisons. The
utilitarian solution has the property that the high ability individuals would
prefer the {C,L} allocation of the low ability individual.


                                          8
   (6)                          Ui = u(C1)   -
                                                 v(L).
   For then, (4) ensures that all individuals, regardless of their ability,

   receive the same level of consumption; but then the efficiency condition (5)

   implies that those with a higher productivity have a higher marginal disutility

   of work, i.e. that they provide a greater labor supply (see figure 3). (This

   seems in accord with the Marxian dictum, Hf       each according to his abilities,

   to each according to his needst'.) Notice that the more able individuals are

   actually better off in the Rawlsian solution than they are under utilitar-

   ianism.




  2.2 Imperfect information. The previous analysis assumed that the government

  had perfect information about who was of type 2, and who was of type 1.

  Clearly, if the government couldn't tell, the more able individuals would

  (under the utilitarian solution) have no incentive to come forward to claim

  their greater ability; they would know that, if they were to do so, they would

  actually be worse off. The government, in its choice of tax structures, must

  recognize these limitations on its information. In our example with only two

  groups, the government has a choice of two kinds of tax structures: (a) those

  in which the government is unable to distinguish (ex post or ex ante) among

  individuals; this is called a cooling eguilibrium7 (b) those in which the

  more able and the less able can (ex post) be identified as a result of the

  actions undertaken by the different groups; this is called a self-selection




     7This vocabulary was first introduced, in the context of the
analysis of how competitive markets distinguish among individuals
with different characteristics, by Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976).

                                       9
  equilibrium.8    To attain a self-selection equilibrium, the two groups have to

  be given choices, such that the first group prefers one choice, the second

  group the other choice. (These are called the self-selection constraints.)9

       We assume, however, that the individual's labor input is not observable,

  just as his productivity is not observable; his before tax income,

                                     Y wL
  is, however, observable. (Obviously, if both before tax income is observable,

  and labor input were observable, then one could immediately infer the

  ind±vidualts productivity, w,; more generally, even if hours on the job is

  observable, effort is not.° ) Thus, it may be possible to differentiate among

  individuals on the basis of their choices of the observable variables {C,YJ. We

  seek to characterize the Pareto efficient pairs of (Ci, Y}. To do this, we


     81t is also referred to as a separatin2 equilibrium, because
the observed actions of the individuals separate them according
to types; or as a revealin2 equilibrium, because their actions
reveal who they are.

     9Since, in self-selection equilibria, individuals' types can
be identified, one could, alternatively, have asked the individu-
al what type he was, with the understanding that the consequences
for the individual are precisely those associated with the self- -
selection equilibrium. Similarly, in the pooling equilibrium, if
the individual were told that nothing would depend on what
statement he made concerning his abilities, he would have no
incentive to lie. Thus, the set of possible equilibria cor-
respond to those which could be attained if individuals are
simply asked what their ability is, and are provided with
incentives not to lie. This (loosely speaking) is referred to as
the revelation principle. See R. Myerson (1983).
       The self-selection constraints are sometimes referred to
as the incentive compatibility constraints.

     10 In jobs where individuals punch time clocks, presumably
hours worked is observable. But note that were the government to
base its tax on the individual's wage rate, firms would have an
incentive to collude with the workers in "cheating't on the
official hours worked. Such practices are already common in
circumstances where bureacratic regulations impose a maximum on
compensation per hour.

                                       10
 rewrite the ith individual's utility function in terms of the observable

 variables (C ,Y }:

 (7)                  V(C,Y)                        =   U(C,Y/w).
        It is useful to note three properties of this derived utility function.

First, increases in Y (income) decrease utility (keeping C, consumption,

fixed), because to attain the increases in income, more labor must be expended.

Second, the more productive individual has a flatter indifference curve. This

follows from observing that the marginal rate of substitution,

       (aC/aY ) = —E aviay ]/[ aV/ac] = —[ (3U/L )/w         lIE   au/aC]
If leisure is a normal good, then at any given set of values of {C,Y), labor

will be lower for the more productive individual, and hence the marginal rate

of substitution between consumption and labor will be lower, i.e.

       (ac/aL)—= —[aU/aL]/[au/aC]
is smaller. Higher ability individuals have flatter indifference curves (in

[C,Y}. (See Figure 4.)

       Finally, we note that when individuals maximize their utility in the

absence of taxation, they set their marginal rate of substitution between

consumption and labor equal to the wage, i.e.

       (aC/aL) =    [au/LJ/[aui/aci]        = WI,

from   which it immediately follows that in the absence of taxation

       (aC/aY) = —[av/aY]/[av/ac1J
           = -[(aU1/aL1)/w1/[aU/aC.] = 1;

the slope of the indifference curve in {C,Y1 space is unity.



       The first basic result on Dareto efficient tax structures is this: with

two groups, Pareto efficiency requires a self-selection equilibrium; the


                                       11
  government will, in fact, wish to differentiate among individuals on the basis

  of their observed incomes. (Stiglitz [manuscript]).11 This result is not gen-

  eral: with many groups, although a complete pooling equilibrium is not

  consistent with Pareto efficiency, a partial pooling equilibrium (one in which

  several different types take the same action) may be.'2

            The set of Pareto efficient self-selection equilibria is easy to

  characterize: although the government in general sets a whole tax function

  (which in turn determines the relationship between after tax and before tax

  income), when there are only two groups, only two points on this schedule will

  be chosen. We simply need to characterize those two points, or equivalently,

  to characterize the {consumption, incomel decisions of the two groups (figure

  5).

            Formally, then, the set of Pareto efficient self-selection allocations is

  described by the solution to




        '    This result is easy to see. Assume there were a pooling
equilibrium, E, as depicted in figure 4. Any point lying between
the two indifference curves will, together with E, separate. For
instance, if the government were to offer H and E, the more able
would choose H and the less able E. Assume that the slope of the
more able indifference curve through E is less than 1. Then
there exist points (such as H) slightly above the more able
individual's indifference curve, which will be chosen only by the
more able, and which increase government revenue (since
consumption increases less than income.) The pair IH,E} pareto
dominates E. (If the slope of the more able indifference curve
through E is greater than 1, then there exists a point below E,
in the shaded area, which will separate and which will generate
more government revenue.)

     12The essential assumption for this result is that the
indifference curve between consumption and pre-tax income is
unambiguously steeper for the less able.


                                           12
                        max       V(C2,Y2)                                     (8)

                   {C1 ,C2 ,Y1 ,Y2 I


                  s.t. V1(C1,Y1) ?:       U2*,                                 (9)
                  V2(C2,Y2)       V2(C1,Yi)l                                   (10)
                                                 J   the self-selection
                  V1 (C1 ,Y1)      V(C2,Y2)            constraints             (11)


                  R = (Y1-C1)N1+(Y2-C2)N2 > R*                   the revenue    (12)
                                                                constraint

  (where R is government revenue, R* is the revenue requirement)13


       The Lagrangian for this maximization problem may be written

       £V2(C2,Y2)+MV1(C1,Y1)+X2(V2(C2,Y2)_V2(C1,Y1))                                   (13)

         + X1(Vl(C1,Y1)-Vl(C2,Y2))+Z[(Y1_C1)N1+(Y2_C2)N2_R*.


  The first-order conditions for this problem are straightforward:


             =   J.1      - A2   I1. +   A1          - TN1 = 0,                (14a)
       ac1

       -=              .3L X2 j1. + A1 . + TN1 = 0,                            (14b)
                                              aY1




      13Notice that this problem is just the dual to the standard
problem of a monopolist attempting to differentiate among his
customers [Stiglitz (1977) and (forthcoming).] There, the
problem was to maximize profits (corresponding to R here),
subject to utility constraints on each of the two types of
individuals (that he be willing to purchase the good, referred to
as the reservation utility or individual rationality constraint)
and subject to the self-selection constraints. The Lagrangian
which we form to analyze the two problems is identical.
     Here the constraint on the individual's utility arises
because we wish to ensure him a certain level of utility; in the
standard monopoly problem, the constraint arises because the
transaction is voluntary, and if the monopolist does not offer
him the level of utility that he could have obtained without
trading with the monopolist, he will choose not to deal with him.

                                                           13
       af. =

       ac2     ac2
                     + j.    3c2
                                    -
                                         X, IY! - N2
                                             ac2
                                                           = 0,       (l4c)


             = — + '2               -        3+ 2N2 = 0,              (14d)
       aY2     aY2                           ay2




       It is easy to see that, under our assumptions concerning the relative

 slopes of the indifference curves, there are three possible regimes:

       (i) A, = 0,      '2   =0         [fig 6(a)].

       (ii) A, =     0, A2 >       0 [fig.6(b)].


       (iii)A2       0, A, > 0 [fig.6(c)].

 That is, at most one of the two self-selection constraints is binding.

 Moreover, it is also easy to show that J>O, i.e. the constraint on the utility

  level of the low ability individuals is binding.

      The case where A, =               A2    0 is illustrated in fig. 6(a). With first-best

 taxation, the equilibrium is fully revealing. This is always the case at the

  competitive equilibrium. Hence, if the social welfare function chooses the

 competitive allocation (C in figure 1) or a point near it, neither

 self-selection constraint will be binding.'4

      The ttnormaltt case, on which most of the literature has focused, is that

 where A, = 0 and A2 > 0. This arises whenever the government wishes to improve

 the welfare of the poor significantly relative to what they would have obtained

 at the competitive allocation (with uniform lump sum tax to raise the requisite

 revenue). With a utilitarian objective function (.i               = 1)   (or indeed any concave

 social welfare function) and separable utility functions it can be shown that



     14The same result obviously holds if a uniform lump sum tax
is imposed. (See Figure 7)

                                                      14
this is the only possibility.15               But more generally, the possibility that X1>O

and A20 cannot be ruled out. The case with [X1>O and X2=O1 has the property

that if lump-sum taxation were feasible, the lump-sum tax imposed on the low

ability individual would exceed that on the high ability (Figure 6c).

2.3 Implementing the optimal allocations by means of a tax structure.

          In the preceding subsection, we described the Pareto efficient resource

allocation.          We posed the problem as if the government confronted the

individual with a choice of two "bundles". These allocations can easily be

implemented by means of a tax schedule, as illustrated in Figure 8. The tax

schedule must pass through the points (C,Y} , 1=1,2; and elsewhere must lie

below the indifference curves through (C,YJ. Given such a tax schedule,

individual I will clearly choose the point (CL,YL}.

         If the tax schedule were differentiable,

                            T = T(Y)

                 -
since C = Y          T(Y),       the individual's first order condition would be

     -
         3U/8L   =   W(l     —   T')                                         (15)
         au/c
or
     —   pyi/py = (1    —    T')
         av/ac


The left hand side is the individualts marginal rate of substitution; the right

hand side is the after tax marginal return to working an extra hour.



     15 The issue of which of the self-selection constraints is binding has
played a major role in the debate over the relevance of the theory of implicit
contracts with asymmetric information; with separable utility functions and
risk neutral firms, one obtains over-employment (all firms wish to pretend to
be in the good state.) See Azariadis and Stiglitz (1983); Stiglitz (1986);
and Hart (1983). The analysis is exactly parallel to that presented here.

                                                 15
        It is clear from figure 8 that the implementing tax schedules will not,

  in general, be differentiable. Still we shall refer to

       1 +       aV'/aY1 =       1    + 1     au/aL.            (16)
                 av/ac                        au/ac

  as the marginal tax rate.6

  2.4 The optimal tax structure with X2>O. X1 = 0.

       Dividing (14d) by (14c) we immediately see that
             -   aV2   ia2 = - 8U2 /aL2       .   .j. =     1
                 aviac2              au/ac2       w2            (l7a)


  the marginal tax rate faced by the more able individual is zero (although the

  average tax rate is positive). [This corresponds to the result noted earlier by

  Sadka (1976) and Phelps (1973)]. The argument for this can be easily seen

  diagrammatically. Assume that the government offered a pair of separating

  contracts, {E1,E2}, as in figure 9, but in which the slope of the more ablets

  indifference curve (in terms of {C,Y1) at (E2} differed from unity. Then,

 keeping {E1} fixed, and moving along the more able's indifference curve, one

 obtains alternative pairs of separating contracts; if the slope at {E2} was

  less than one, by increasing Y2, one increases 2's consumption by less than

  income, and hence government revenue is increased; the original allocation

 could not have been Pareto efficient; similarly if the slope at E2J is greater

 than unity, one can increase government revenue by reducing Y2.

      Dividing (14b) by (14a),



    16There exist optimal tax structures for which

        j... au/aL1      +   1
        w au/ac
is the left-handed derivative of the tax function at Y =

                                                       16
        - av11ay1 =       .j.    aU1/aL1 =       _____ +    < 1   (17b)
           v1/ac1 1 au/ac1                     x2av/ac1 +

 To see this, define

            =       — ayi/aY
                      8VI /8C1

  and

          =    x2   y2/Ci >       0




  Then (17b) can be rewritten as

        a1 =    1+va2 =          a2   +   1-   a2
                    1+v                   1+v

 Since, by assumption, a1>a2, it therefore follows that

        a2 <a1 <1.

        We immediately see that the mar2inal tax rate faced by the less able

 individual will be positive.17

 2.5 The optimal tax structure with A1 > 0. A2 = 0.

        Exactly the same kinds of arguments as used in the previous section can be

 employed to establish that if A1 > 0 and A2 = 0, the mar2inal tax rate faced by

 the more able individual is negative; self-selection requires that they work

 more than they would in a non-distortionary situation. For the rest of this

 paper, we focus our attention on the tnormaltl case with A1 = 0 and A2 >   0.

        Our analysis has thus revealed a second property of pareto efficient tax

 structures: at least one of the groups must face no distortionary taxation.

 This result holds regardless of the number of groups in the population.




     'This corresponds to the result noted earlier by Mirrlees
for the case of a continuum of types.

                                                     17
     We can again characterize the utilities possibilities schedule, this time

under the constraint that lump sum taxes are not feasible. The new utilities

possibilities schedule coincides with the old over a range, but elsewhere is

interior. The range over which the two coincide corresponds to the situations

where X1 =    = 0.   (See Figure 1)

2.6 Equity-efficiency trade-of fs. This analysis makes clear the nature of the

equity-efficiency trade-of fs that are inherent in redistributive tax policies.

There is a "distortion" associated with redistributing any significant amount

of resources from the more able to the less able. The distortion arises from

the self-selection constraint. The magnitude of the distortion depends in part

on the amount of revenue that the government is attempting to raise for public

goods. Note that one feasible policy, a uniform lump sum tax on all

individuals, is among the set of Pareto efficient tax structures. It is,

however, one which does not seem acceptable to most modern governments. (It is

sometimes assumed that lump sum taxes are not feasible. Uniform lump sum taxes

are clearly feasible (provided they are not too large). What j not feasible

are lump sum taxes at different rates for individuals of different abilities;

This is not feasible because the government does not have the requisite

information to implement such a tax.)



3.   Continuum of individuals.

     Though most of the central insights in the theory of Pareto efficient (and

optimal) taxation can be gleaned from the simple model presented above, the

earliest analyses of optimal income tax structures employed a model in which

there was a continuum of individuals. (Mirrlees, 1971). A rigorous analysis

of that problem entails a large number of mathematical niceties, which are


                                        18
discussed by Mirrlees (1976, 1985). Here, we ignore these and follow the

approach of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) using Pontryagin's technique.

     It is assumed that the distribution of individuals by ability is given by

F(w). The problem of the government is to maximize

                                  JU(C(w) ,Y(w)/w)dF(w)                      (18)

subject to the national income constraint

                       R* +   J[C(w)   -
                                           Y(w)]dF(w) = 0                    (19)

and subject to the self-selection constraints, which here take on the simple

form that utility must increase with w which we write (making use of the first

order condition for utility maximization)

                              dU/dw - UY/w2                           (20)

Here, we follow Atkinson and Stiglitz [1980] in analyzing a slightly more

general form of the problem, employing a social welfare function

                         W =    JG(U) dF(w).                          (21)

Utilitarianism involves the special case of G                1. The Rawlsian social welfare

function is W = Umjn•     Egalitarian social welfare functions entail G"                   0, the

social marginal utility of income is non-increasing in utility.

Form the Hamiltonian,

                           H [G(U) -        T(C-Y)]     -
                                                            XdU/dw,                 (22)
                                                   dw


and let U be our "state variable" (like capital in an intertemporal problem),

and L(w) be the control variable (like investment in the typical optimal

accumulation problem )--knowing L and U determines Y(w) = wL(w) and C(w) (from

the equation U(w)= U(C(w), L(w)). Now take the derivative of H with respect to

L:

           =   w   -
                       (dC/dL)1   }f -     A(L. (4JL'\ = 0
                                            8L dwJ)
                                                                             (23)


                                              19
where f = dF/dw, the density function, and where             =   -
                                                        kdL)U        U0.

Rearranging, we obtain (using (16))

        T' NTR= X (i(L
                           f         dw
where T' is the marginal tax rate (MTR).

With seperate utility functions


                      = -U,    L -
        Li_ dw)                w w

so we can write

     MTR =          U, (1 +
                 Zf w
                                *)                                     (23')

where

           =
                L!L,   the elasticity of marginal (dis)utility of labor.




Again making use of the individual's first order condition, we can rewrite

(23') as

            -
                T')    =   U   X(w)(1 + *)/fw                         (25)

     Thus (25) implies that the marginal tax rate depends on four factors:

(a) the marginal tax rate is lower, the larger the fraction of the population

f at the particular income level that pays that marginal tax rate; one doesn't

want to impose large distortions where there are many people;

(b) the marginal tax rate is lower, the smaller is X(w), the shadow price on

the self-selection constraint. Analyzing X(w) is a rather complicated matter.

For the Rawlsian social welfare function, it is monotonically decreasing. For

the utilitarian social welfare function, it increases and then decreases. The

                                            20
one general result that holds (for ability distributions with a finite range)

iS18 that at the extreme, the marginal tax rate on the highest income (ability)

individual should be zero. This result corresponds to the result noted earlier

in the two group model. It is often cited as one of the few general,

qualitative propositions to arise from the theory of optimal taxation, but in

fact, as we shall see, it is not a very general result. The intuition behind

the result is simple: one of the advantages of increasing the marginal tax

rate at a particular income level is that the average tax rate of those at

higher income levels is increased (keeping their marginal tax rates

unchanged). The distortion (dead weight loss) arising from any tax is

associated with the marginal tax rate; thus increasing the average tax rate on

an individual while keeping the marginal tax rate the same increases revenues

without increasing the deadweight loss.

(c) the marginal tax rate is lower (other things being equal) the higher the

productivity of the group; that is, the loss in output from distortionary

taxation is more important from groups whose output per unit of labor is

higher.


     18Note that the derivative of the Hamiltonian with respect to the state
value is equal to minus the derivative of the associated shadow price with
respect to the running variable:

  -       =        = (G'-
                               aU))
                                   f +     X   L.U
                                               W
                                                        (\
For simplicity, we assume a separable utility function. This enables us to
integrate to obtain
                            in a
          -X(w)/   =        J 1(l/IJ   -
                                           (G'/T)l      dF,
                        w
using the fact that at w wm&z, X(w) = 0.

     For a general discussion of the conditions under which this limiting
result obtains, see E. Sadka [1976] and J. K. Seade [1977].

                                                   21
  (d) the marginal tax rate is lower the higher is the labor supply response.

  To see this, we consider the special case of a separable utility function (so

  UCL 0). In that case, it is easy to show that the compensated elasticity of

  labor supply (in the absence of taxation) is just c*.



  4.        Some mathematical problems. The maximization problems with which we have

  been concerned here are not well behaved. Even though the individual utility

  functions are, the self-selection constraints are not (in general.) This has

  several consequences. First, of course, there may be allocations which satisfy

  the Pontryagin first order conditions but are not the global optimum (and

  indeed may be a local minimum.)

            Secondly, if the government can implement random tax policies, it may wish

  to do so (see below). But even if the government cannot, or does not, wish to

  implement random tax policies, it must be concerned lest individuals randomize,

  unless, of course, the government can prohibit such gambling (which seems

  unlikely, since that would require that it differentiate between "naturally"

  occurring risks and artificially created risks19 ).     Recall   our earlier result

  that the marginal tax rate on the highest income individual is zero. This,

  combined with the fact that his average tax rate is positive, and, if the tax

  system is at all redistributive, the fact that the average tax rate on poor

  individuals must be negative implies that there must be a region in which the

  function giving after tax income as a function of before tax income must be

 convex (see figure 10). If individuals are not too risk averse, they will,

 accordingly, attempt to randomize; indeed an employer who offered any


       19Even if it could prohibit artificially created gambles,
it would simply encourage individuals to undertake naturally
occurring gambles, even if they were not quite actuarially fair.

                                           22
individual whose before tax income was in the convex region a random pay could

increase his profits. Unfortunately, there does not exist a correct analysis

of Pareto efficient (or optimal) tax structure taking into account this class

of responses to the tax structure. Note that this problem does not arise in

the analysis of linear tax structures.

     Non-differentiability In the analysis of a continuum of types we have

implicitly assumed that the optimal tax function will be differentiable. It

may well not be. There is an interesting interpretation to these points of

non-differentiability. Note in figure 11 that if the consumption function is

not differentiable, there will be a range of types of individuals who will not

be distinguishable, i.e., who will choose precisely the same point (have the

same income). Thus, it may be optimal to have a partially pooling equilibrium,

and this corresponds precisely to the circumstances under which the tax

function is not differentiable.

     To see why with three or more groups partial pooling may be desirable,

turn to figure 12, where there are just three groups. Assume we fix the

utility of the high ability (type 2) and the low ability (type 0). As we raise

U, the revenue we obtain from that group decreases (since we are moving along

U2's indifference curve, and below E2, its slope is less than unity.) But the

revenue we raise from group 0 may be increased if the slope of U is less than

unity at E0. Clearly, if there are relatively few type l's, Pareto efficiency

requires a pooling equilibrium in which types 0 and 1 cannot be differentiated.



     We can use Pontryagin's technique to analyze Pareto efficient tax




                                     23
  structures with non-differentiabilities, and derive conditions under which

  partial pooling is desirable. 20

  Discontinuities. Even if we preclude randomization (gambling), since the tax

  function is at least partially convex, and the indifference curves are convex,

  it is possible that there be multiple tangencies between the indifference curve

  and the function relating after tax to before tax income. Under these

  circumstances, small changes in the tax (consumption) function could cause

  seemingly large changes in revenues. However, if we assume a continuum of

  individuals, and if we give the government the right to assign a given

  proportion of any group which is indifferent between two allocations to each of

  the allocations, then it is clear that this presents no serious problem to the

  analysis.2'



      Generalizations: Random taxation.22   This   chapter is concerned with the

  analysis of Pareto efficient tax structures. Whether a given tax structure can

  or cannot be improved upon depends crucially on the set of admissable tax

  structures. Indeed, this is perhaps one of the central lessons to emerge from

  the literature during the past two decades. (See also Dasgupta-Stiglitz

  [1971].)

       Unfortunately, there is no agreement about how to define the set of

  admissible tax structures. Presumably, this should be related to the


     20 See Stiglitz (1977) for an analysis in the context of
the monopoly insurance problem.

     21 See Mirrlees (1976,1985) for a detailed discussion of
the mathematical problems posed by the optimal tax problem.

   • 22This section draws heavily upon Arnott and Stiglitz (1986)
and Stiglitz (1982).


                                      24
  technology of tax collection; to the costs to the government of monitoring, or

  to the private sector of compliance (or of non-compliance); and to the accuracy

  with which it can monitor the relevant variables. And these costs are likely

  to differ across countries, and to change over time. Most of the analyses,

  however, simply begin by postulating the admissible tax structure.

       There are those who contend that the tax structures analyzed so far are

  overly restrictive, and those who contend that they are not restrictive enough.

  We take up each of these allegations in the next two sections.

       Those who contend that we have been overly restrictive in our analysis

  point out that we should at least consider the possibility of random taxes.23

        It turns out, in fact, that under a variety of situations, random

  taxation is desirable. This can take on two forms. In ex ante randomization

  the government randomly assigns individuals to one of two tax schedules; if the

  tax is purely redistributive the net revenue raised by one is equal to the net

  loss of the other. The desirability of this can be seen most simply in the

  case where the government maximizes a utilitarian social welfare function. We

  can then plot average social welfare as a function of the revenue raised, R; if

  there is a convex region, then for some values of R (in the diagram between R1

  and R2) then ex ante randomization is desirable. Arnott and Stiglitz derive

  conditions under which this can occur. More generally, if the government raises

  revenues (for expenditures other than redistribution) and if welfare is a

  nonconcave function of revenue raised, ex ante randomization may be desirable.

  (See Figure 13.)



     23Other more general tax structures include those which make
taxes a function of wages. If wages are a function of effort one
could not obtain a first best outcome even were wages observable.
See also part II below.

                                       25
         In ex post randomization, the individual is not told what his tax schedule

is until after he has announced his ability type. This kind of randomization

may be a way of loosening the self-selection constraints. If, for instance,

the more able individuals were much more risk averse than the less able, by

randomizing the taxes paid by the less able, the government makes it less

attractive for the more able to attempt to pretend to be less able. This in

turn implies that the distortionary tax imposed on the poor may be reduced.

This can be seen most simply by considering figure 14 where we choose two

points on the poor individual's indifference curve yielding the same average

government revenue as the original point E1. This randomization has no effect

on the poor or on government revenue. But as risk aversion increases, the

utility of the rich approaches the utility associated with the worst of the

outcomes (from his perspective); hence we can effect a Pareto improvement.24

         What are we to make of these results? Though they might indeed provide a

rationale for the seeming capriciousness with which taxes are sometimes

imposed, we doubt whether such a policy would ever be openly argued- -and voted

for- -   in    a democratic society. Our results show that the principle of

horizontal equity - -         that   otherwise identical individuals should be treated the

same - may not only not be derivable from a utilitarian social welfare

function, but that that principle may in fact be inconsistent with the

principle of Pareto efficiency (at least on an ex ante expected utility basis.)



         I suspect that it is because of the possibilities of abuse- -the belief

that a random tax would not in fact be random, that the die would be loaded in




    24     I   am indebted to Steve Slutsky for this argument.

                                                     26
favor of those in political power- -that a proposal for tax randomization would

meet such opposition.25

     Still, the analysis of random taxation is of interest for several reasons:

First, it serves to remind us of the difficulties of defining the set of

admissable taxes, and that our models may be - indeed probably are -   leaving
out some important considerations in determining tax structures.

     Secondly, some of the properties of optimal tax structures may reflect an

attempt to introduce randomization surreptitiously. Assume, for instance, that

there were two types of labor, denoted M and W, which in all production and

consumption characteristics were identical. In those circumstances in which ex

ante randomization is desirable, the optimal tax will "tell" us to impose

different tax structures on the two groups. Most of us would say that that

should not be allowed. But what if the two groups are slightly different? How

different should they be to make differential taxation admissible. The theory

gives us no guidance on this issue.

     This issue arises even more forcefully in Part II where we consider

commodity taxation. Consider two groups of individuals who are identical

except that one prefers chocolate ice cream, the other vanilla ice cream. In

those cases where tax randomization is desirable, we will be told to tax

vanilla and chocolate at different rates. But is this any more acceptable than

randomizing   taxes?'


                        6. Limitations: Restricted Taxation


     250ne important exception to the general presumption against randomization
is in law enforcement. It is often argued that efficient law enforcement
entails large fines imposed rarely. Another exception is provided by the draft
lottery.

                                      27
        So far, we have assumed that there are no restrictions on the type of

   consumption (wage) tax which the government can impose. The tax schedules may

   be highly non-linear, with marginal tax rates increasing over some intervals

   and decreasing over others. The tax schedules which typically emerge from

   these analyses are far more complex than those currently employed in the U.S.

  Curiously enough, a major focus of tax reform discussions in the United States

  has been simplifying the tax structure, by having a single marginal rate (the

  flat tax, or linear income tax). Non-linear tax structures present problems

  with income averaging. The unit of taxation becomes important--under the

  current U.S. tax system there are strong incentives for income shifting.

  Moreover, decreasing marginal rates26 provide incentives for gambling (for

  firms to pay random wages).27 Non-linear tax schedules open up large

  opportunities for tax arbitrage and its inequities and inefficiencies. One of

  the major advantages of a flat rate tax is that it enables income to be taxed

  at source, thus reducing considerably the administrative and compliance costs

  of the income tax.28

       We noted earlier that the underlying problem in the analysis of income

  taxation is an information problem: if the government could perfectly tell who

  is of what ability, it could impose lump sum redistributive taxes. But the

  government can only make inferences about who is of what ability by the income

  they receive. The problems we have just been discussing can also be viewed as


     26Recall the standard result that the marginal rate for the
highest income individual should be zero; hence, the optimal tax
schedule (as usually defined) entails decreasing marginal rates
over at least some interval.

    27See the discussion above, section 4.

     28For an excellent discussion of the advantages of a flat
tax, see Hall and Rabushka.

                                      28
  information problems. The government cannot perfectly and costlessly observe

  the income or consumption of each individual; if it could, there would be no

  compliance or administrative costs associated with running a non-linear tax

  system.

       Opposing these objections to a highly non-linear tax are the possible

  increases in social welfare from the greater redistribution that can be

  achieved through a non-linear tax. If there were no administrative costs,

  etc., it is easy to show that a non-linear tax Pareto dominates a linear tax.

  But there is a growing consensus in the United States that the problems as-

  sociated with very non-linear tax schedules outweigh these gains in

  redistribution.29 Whether there would be significant gains in going from a

  flat rate tax, to a two or three tier schedule, remains a question of on-going

  research.

       A number of economists have analyzed the optimal linear tax.3° This

 problem is a fairly simple one: a tax schedule is described by an equation of

  the form

       C =    I   + (1-t)Y,                                      (26)

 where I is the lump sum payment to each individual, and t is the marginal tax

 rate. We express individual utilities in terms of the indirect utility

 function,    giving utility as a function of the after tax wage        and   lump sum

 transfer,    v*(w(I    -
                            t),I).   The government looks for that feasible tax   structure

 which maximizes social welfare,          that is, it solves


     29These views are reinforced by Mirrlees' calculations
(1971) suggesting that the optimal tax structure is close to
linear.

      30See, in particular, A. K. Dixit and A. Sandmo, [1977] and J. E.
 Stiglitz [1976b1. The discussion here follows closely along the lines of the
 last of these papers.

                                               29
          max JG(U(C(w),L(w)))dF(w) =        JG(v*(w(l           -
                                                                     t),I))dF(w)   (27)
       (t,I}


  subject to

           R + J [C(w)- L(w)w}dF(w) =       R   +    I   -   t   J L(w)wdF(w) O,(28)

  where R is the revenue which the government is required to raise for financing

  public goods (may be zero). The condition simply says that the aggregate value

  of expenditures on public goods plus private consumption equals the aggregate

  value of output. Note that the objective function is the same as that employed

  in our earlier analysis; the only difference is that while before, any tax

  function was admissible, now we are restricted to linear tax functions.

          Three general results can be obtained:

  (a) If R     0, then the optimal linear tax entails I > 0.                       The marginal

  deadweight loss from a very small tax is negligible, but the gain in

  redistribution is positive;

  (b) If R is large enough, then I < 0; indeed, since in general an increase in

  a proportional tax beyond a certain point will actually decrease revenues, if R

  exceeds the maximal revenue that can be raised through a proportional tax, the

  government will have to supplement it with a uniform lump sum levy. More

  generally, the greater is R, the smaller is I.

  (c) The optimal tax         formula   can be written in a remarkably simple form:

                               t/(l-t) =   - coy     [b, Y]/ J Y        t dF,             (29)

  where

      b= G'cx/     +   t   w (aL/al), the net social marginal valuation of income,31


     31The first term is the direct effect of giving an extra
dollar to an individual (normalized by the value of a dollar to
the government), while the second term is the change in revenue
to the government resulting from the fact that the individual
will alter his labor supply as a result.

                                                    30
      a = au/ac,    the      marginal utility of income,

        = the marginal value of a dollar to the government (the

Lagrange multiplier associated with the revenue constraint)

      coy (b,Y) =       E(b-Eb)(Y-EY), the covariance between b (defined
above) and Y, and c = compensated elasticity of labor supply.32
       The covariance may be seen as a marginal measure of inequality. Consider,

in particular, the case of a small tax, so b G'a/Z, with R = 0                              If we gave a

lump sum payment to everyone, financed by a tax at rate t, I = tEY, where EY is

mean income. The increment in social welfare is thus                      J       t   G'a (EY - Y)dF =

-tZ   coy (b,Y).


      32To obtain this result, we form the Lagrangian

                             £=JG+(twL-I-R)]dF                           (30)
and differentiate with respect to I and t to obtain

                        J[G'u +      (tw (L/3I) - 1)]dF = 0              (31)

and

          J[G'(aU/at) + (wL + tw(aL/at)] dF = 0.                     (32)

The first condition can be written simply as

                                             Eb = 1.
(29) follows from (32), making use of the Slutsky relation,

              aiat -w(aL/aw) - wL           (aL/al),

the fact that

                        au/at   = -awL,

and the definition of L[w(l-t)/L](aL/aw) ,                 to   obtain
                                                       U
          J   wL(G'a     -
                             Z[l   -tw(aL/aw) /L -     tw(aL/aI)})dF =        0

or, dividing through by             and using the fact that Eb = 1,

          J   Y(b   -   Eb   + tLL/(1t)) dF = 0.

                                               31
     Thus, our basic formula says that the tax rate should be greater, the

greater this measure of marginal inequality, and the smaller the (weighted

average) compensated elasticity of labor supply. The marginal measure of

inequality will be greater, the more egalitarian the social welfare function,

i.e. the larger -G"U/G'.

7.   Limitations: The Push-Pin versus Poetry Controversy. While the New

Welfare Economics emphasized the impossibility of interpersonal utility

comparisons, much of the recent work in optimal tax theory has simply ignored

these concerns. By positing that all individuals have the same indifference

curves between leisure and consumption, they could simply assert that all had

the same utility function; there seemed a "natural" way of making interpersonal

utility comparisons. Three problems were thus ignored.

     First, there are many alternative ways of representing the same family of

indifference maps. Each representation would yield a different optimal income

tax. The literature has developed no persuasive way for choosing among these

alternative representations.

     Secondly, when indifference curves cross, as in figure 15, then one must

decide which of 2's indifference curves corresponds to the indifference curve

of individual 1 that we have labeled a. This choice too will have a critical

effect on the desired income tax rate.

     Thirdly, conventional models have assumed that individuals who are more

productive in the work place have the same capacity for enjoyment of goods.

The relationship between these two capacities troubled the early utilitarians,

The fact that there was no resolution of the ensuing controversy does not mean

that the issues should be ignored. In particular, the consequences can be seen

most forcefully within the strand of modern economic theory which has


                                     32
emphasized the role of home production. Assume that individuals do not consume

the goods they produce directly, but rather transform purchased goods into true

consumption goods. Thus, for simplicity, assume that there is a single ultimate

good which the consumer is consuming (e.g., book reading), with U = U(Q). The

output of this good, Q, is a function of the input of time (leisure) and of

goods (C): the functional relationship will differ from individual to indivi-

dual, depending on the abilities of individuals in household production, h,.

     Such a model has important- -and probably not completely

acceptable- -implications within a utilitarian framework. Assume that Q is

Cobb-Douglas and normalize the available time for market plus home production

at unity,

            Q = Ca(l —   L)1h   = wahL(l —

Then, in a free market economy, all individuals will supply labor equal to



            L=a

The marginal utility of income of an individual of market productivity w and

home productivity h is equal to

     MU = aU' (Q)Ca_l(l_L)l_&h = aa(i — a)1_aU'(Q)hwa_1

Letting home productivity depend on market productivity,

     h1 = h(w), dln h/din w = x

and differentiating, we obtain

     dlnMU=(a-l)+h.!.w+U"Q[a+k!.J<O
                                 >
     dlnw                  h      U'         h

as    R> p+x-l
       < a+x
where R is the elasticity of marginal utility.


                                       33
Assume, for instance, that h is proportional to w, so x = 1.

Then so long as    R <    a     ,   there   should be redistribution
                         a+ 1
towards individuals with higher wages. Although h is in principle observable

(by detailed observation of the individual within the home), there is, in this

example, no way we can infer from observing individualts behavior in the market

place (i.e., his labor supply) his home productivity. It would appear then,

that one cannot derive, on the basis of the utilitarian ethic, a general case

in favor of redistribution from those who have high wages in the market to

those with low wages. Such an argument requires specific assumptions

concerning the rate at which marginal utility diminishes, the relationship

between home and market productivity, and characteristics of the home

production process. Yet, there is more widespread agreement that there ought

to be redistribution from the more able to the less able than this utilitarian

analysis would suggest. These considerations--as well as the practical

considerations entailed in deciding upon the appropriate cardinalization within

the utilitarian framework--make the utilitarian approach questionable as a

guide to policy.



8.   Limitations: General Equilibrium Effects of Taxation.

     Traditional tax theory has been much concerned with the incidence of

taxation, with the extent to which taxes are shifted. There has been concern,

for instance, that taxes on doctors and lawyers simply result in higher fees.

This central issue of the incidence of taxation was completely ignored in the

early analyses of optimal income taxation; it was simply assumed that the

before tax wage of an individual would be unaffected by the imposition of a

tax. Several recent papers have called attention to the potentially important

                                        34
  consequences of these general equilibrium effects.33 Consider, for instance, a

  modified version of the two group model presented in the first section. There,

  we assumed that the productivity (output per man hour) of each group was

  fixed. Now, assume that the two groups provide different kinds of labor

  services (skilled versus unskilled labor). The relative wage will then depend

  on the relative supplies of the two types of labor. If the labor supply of the

  skilled is relatively elastic, and of the unskilled relatively inelastic, then

  a uniform marginal tax rate on both might increase the before tax relative wage

  of the skilled; to offset this, one might wish to have a lower marginal tax

  rate on the skilled.

       Indeed, Stiglitz (1982) has shown that (in the standard case where it is

  the high ability self-selection constraint which is binding) Pareto efficient

  taxation requires that the marginal tax rate on the most able individual should

  be ne2ative. except in the limitin2 case where the two types of labor are

  perfect substitutes. in which case it is zero.

       The intuition behind this result is simple. Since there is a deadweight

  loss from redistributing income, it is always desirable to incur some small

  deadweight loss to change the before tax distribution of income in a desirable

  manner.

       Stiglitz also shows that while the marginal tax rate on the less able is

  always positive. its magnitude denends on the elasticity of substitution: the

  smaller the elasticity of substitution, the larger the marginal tax rate. The

  government increasin2lv relies on the general equilibrium incidence of the tax,

 the change in the before tax relative wages. to redistribute income.



     33See F. Allen(l982), N. Stern (1982), M. Feldstein (1973),
and J. E. Stiglitz (1982, 1985).

                                       35
*Formal proof. These results can be seen more formally as follows.

       Assume that output is a function of the supply of hours by each of the two

types:

       Q = F(N1L1,N2L2) = L1N1f (N2L2\
                                                     N1LJ                                   (33)
where F exhibits constant returns to scale. If each factor

receives its marginal product,

   =         aF         =    f'(n);        w1 =          F    =    f(n)-nf'(n)   = g(n)   (34)
           a(N2L2)                                  a(N1L1)

where n = N2L2/N1L1                    =
                                           N2Y2w1/N1Y1w2


We can now write the Lagrangian

    £ =     V2 + iV1


      + (F(N1Y1/w1, N2Y2/w2) - C1N1 - C2N2 - R*)                                 resource
constraint

      + X2(V2(C2,Y2; w2) -                     V2(C,Y1;       w2)        self-selection
constraint

           + (w1 -       g(n))                                                              (35)


where we have expressed the resource constraint making use of the aggregate

production function: we have appended the constraint on the value of w1; and we

focus on the case where the upper self-selection constraint is binding. Then

straightforward differentiation yields

             =           +   XV -            ZN2
                                                   = 0
       C2         ac2            ac2                                                (36a)
            =   3a      + X28V2 + N2               - g'n/Y2        = 0
       aY2 a;                    a;                                                 (36b)

Dividing (36h) by (36a) gives
       -
           ay2,ay2 =         1    -    g'n                                          (37)
           av2/ac2                     N2Y2



                                                              36
   that is, unless f" 0, that is, unless the elasticity of substitution is

   infinity, the more productive individual should work beyond the point where the

  slope of his indifference curve (in C,Y space) is unity, that is, he should

  face a negative marginal tax rate.34



  9.     Other Limitations on the General Model

         Two   other   limitations on the general model should be noted. First, we

  have assumed that income is a non-stochastic function of effort. Views about

  the desirability of progressive taxation are often related to views concerning

  the extent to which differences in income are due to differences in effort, to

  differences in ability, or to differences in luck.35

        Secondly, we have assumed that income is monitored perfectly. In fact,

  measured income can be viewed as a noisy signal of true income. Using the

  techniques developed by Radner and        Stiglitz,36   it should be possible to show

  that if it is a noisy enough signal, then it will not be desirable to

  differentiate among individuals on that basis (using, say, a utilitarian social

  welfare function.) The gains in redistribution will be more than offset by the

  costs.37 (See also Stern [1982].)




      34The proof presented here is rather different from that presented in
 Stiglitz (1982), which re-expressed the problem in terms of the control
 variables L and C,. The proof here uses the fact that • > 0, i.e. welfare
 would be raised if unskilled workers were paid a wage in excess of their
 marginal product.

     35For a brief discussion on optimal taxation with stochastic
income, see Stiglitz (1982).

       36See R. Radner and    J:   E. Stiglitz (1984)

     37Another line of research is concerned with ascertaining
conditions for the optimal allocation of resources to monitoring.

                                              37
  10. Numerical Calculations. We have seen that only limited qualitative

  results concerning the nature of the optimal tax schedule have been derived.

  Several economists have attempted to calculate the optimal tax schedule, making

  particular assumptions concerning the distribution of abilities, the social

  welfare function, and individuals' utility functions. Not surprisingly, the

  results seem to vary greatly with the particular assumptions employed. The

  elasticity of labor supply is obviously critical in determining the extent of

  our concern with incentive effects, and unfortunately, there is no agreement

  among economists about the magnitude of this. The more egalitarian the social

  welfare function, the larger the role to be played by redistributive taxation.

  As an example, Mirrlees calculated the optimal income tax for a utilitarian

  social welfare function, assuming the special utility function

       U =   log   C +   log (1 - L)

  and a lognormal distribution for w. The schedule he obtained was remarkably

  close to linear. (See Table 1). By contrast, Atkinson analyzed the optimal

  tax schedule for the same problem, assuming a Rawlsian social welfare function.

 He obtained increasing average but decreasing marginal tax rates.38



                             Welfare Gains

      One of the major thrusts of the recent research in optimal taxation has

 been its concern with the incentive effects of redistributive taxation. Given

  an equalitarian social welfare function, there are gains from a more equal

 distribution of income, but there are losses from the distortions associated


     38See A. B. Atkinson, "Maxi-min and Optimal Income Taxa-
tion", paper presented at the Budapest meeting of the Econometric
Society, 1972. For other numerical calculations, see N. H.
Stern, "On the Specification of Models of Optimum Income Taxa-
tion", Journal of Public Economics, 1976, 6, 123-162.

                                         38
with the income tax. The question is, how significant are the gains relative

to the costs? The answer clearly depends on at least three critical

assumptions: how elastic the (compensated) labor supply is; how averse to

inequality society is; and how large a share in national income government

expenditure is.           For a utilitarian social welfare function, with "reasonable"

estimates of the compensated labor supply function, Stiglitz [1976b] suggested

that the welfare gains to be achieved by the optimal linear income tax were

minimal, without counting the administrative costs associated with the tax.



                   II. Pareto Efficient Taxation With Many Commodities

                                         and Many   Periods
11. Alternative Tax Bases
        So far, we have focused our attention on the analysis of an optimal wage
tax.     Other   tax   and expenditure   policies have often been employed as
redistributive devices.        Most governments impose taxes on such luxuries as

perfumes, and many governments provide subsidies for such necessities as food.



        There was a widespread feeling (perhaps best articulated by M. Friedman)

that the government should concentrate its redistributive policies within the

income tax. Using excise taxes to redistribute simply added additional

distortions. Clearly, if labor were inelastically supplied, then an optimally

designed wage tax would be all that is required. But labor is not inelas-
tically supplied, and, as Ramsey (1927) forcefully established more than fifty
years   ago, counting the number of distortions is no way to do welfare

analysis. If we have an optimally designed income tax, should we supplement it




                                              39
with excise taxes? The heuristic argument, that by doing so, we impose less of

a burden on the income tax, seems persuasive, but unfortunately is incorrect.

     The answer turns out to depend simply on whether the utility function is

separable between the vector of consumption goods and work, i.e. on how changes

in leisure affect individual marginal rates of substitution between different

consumption goods. If the utility function is separable between consumption

and leisure C U = u(C)          -   v   (L). where C is a vector) then all Pareto efficient

tax structures entail no taxation of commodities.



11.1 Formal Analysis

     The result can be seen most simply in the context of our two group model.

If we now interpret C as a vector, the Lagrangian for this problem is identical

to that formulated earlier (section 2.2), except the government budget

constraint is now written



     R* N1Y1-fN2Y2-E(C1N1+C2N2)                                               (38)
                       3



     If we now differentiate the Lagrangian with respect to C, we obtain [see

the analogous equations (12) and (14)]

                                         A1    av1        -ZN1 = 0,   (39a)


     a. =av2 +x2 av2
                                ac1
                                        -      ac1
                                                         -N2 = 0,

                                              j
                                                                      (39b)
     ac2     ac2            ac2                ac2
     af. =-x2y÷
             ay  ay1                          aY1
                                                     +        = 0,    (39c)


           = 3a + A2            -        IV! +       ZN2 = 0          (39d)
     ay2    a;             a;            a;


                                                         40
       We again focus on the case where A1 = 0 and A2 > 0: only

 the second self-selection constraint is binding. From (39a)-

 (39d) we obtain

       ______     = 1,   —
                             av2iac2 = 1,                    (40a)
       av2/ac2k              av2/9y2

       av1iac1 =   + X2av2iac1                               (40b)
       aV1/aClk N1 + A2av/c1

Eq. (40a) yields the familiar result that there should be no

distortionary taxation on the individual with the highest

ability. The interpretation of (40b) is however somewhat more

subtle. Consider first the case where individuals have separable

utility functions between leisure and        goods,   i.e.


         a2ui     = 0,   all i,j.
       3C,, aL


Since we assume that individuals have the same indifference

curves (in{C,L} space),

       avIac = aV1/C1         ,                              (42a)
       aV2/aClk =   aV'/aClk,                                (42b)



and   (eg.   (40b)) becomes

       av1/ac,    = 1.                                       (43)
       avi /Clk


We have thus established our basic result that: If leisure and goods are

separable, there should be no commodity taxation It should be noted that in

this analysis we allow tax functions which are not only non-linear functions of

consumption, but are also not separable, i.e. the marginal rate imposed on the


                                            41
consumption of commodity j may depend not only on the consumption of commodity

j but on other commodities as well.

     If the utility function is not separable, we obtain


             -            =     x2       (i1 -                                 (44)
       ac         aclk)

or

     av'tac1 — 1 =        av/aclk f av2iac1                      —    1.


     v1/aclk              av/c,      av2,ac1
                   = A2 ayiac
                                          (   av2iac1
                                                             —
                                                                     aviac1
                       p V'/8C . aV2/C1                              av/aclk

                   + A ( av1Iac1                i\       av,aclk
                       \, aV'/aC                     J       av,ac1
                                                         —
                   A2 8V2/aClk (          aviac1  av1iac1
                   p aV'/aC1              8V/C1, av,aclk

                              1 —   -2
                                     l   av/ac1


     Thus, whether commodity j should be taxed or subsidized relative to k

depends on whether the more able individuals's marginal rate of substitution of

j for k exceeds that of the low ability person, or conversely.

     In the case we have focused on, where the low ability and high ability

individuals have the same utility function, the relative values of the marginal

rate of substitution depend simply on how the amount of leisure affects the

marginal rate of substitution. The critical parameter that has to be

estimated, then, for determing the structure of commodity taxes is

          din UkLLj.
          din L
     The result that, with separability, only an income tax is needed, which

seemed so surprising at first becomes entirely understandable within this

                                               42
   framework; if the two groups of individuals have the same indifference curves

   (locally) between two commodities we cannot use the differential taxation as a

  basis of separation; if they differ, we can. By taxing the commodity which the

  more able individual values more highly in the lower ability individual's

  package, we make the lower ability individual's "package" less attractive to

  him.    (Since in this model both groups have identical utility functions, the

  only difference in the evaluation of a given consumption bundle arises from the

  differences in leisure which they enjoy at any given level of income.) We thus

  can tax the higher ability individual more heavily without having him trying to

  "disguise" himself as a low ability person.



  11.2 Ramsey vs. Atkinson-Sti2litz Pareto Efficient Taxation.

         The results we have just obtained stand in marked contrast to standard

  results on the design of commodity tax structures.39 In the simple form (where

  the compensated demand for each commodity depends only on its own price, and

  where producer prices are fixed) optimal taxation entails tax rates which are

  inversely proportional to the elasticity of demand; in the more general case,

  optimal taxation calls for an equal percentage reduction of consumption (again

  along the compensated demand curves) for all commodities.4° The factors which

  are relevant for optimal Atkinson-Stiglitz pricing are completely different;


     39The list of contributors to this literature is enormous.
For a comprehensive survey, see the chapter by A. Auerbach, this
volume. Besides the classic papers by Ramsey [1927), and Boiteux
[1956], important contributions by Diamond and Mirrlees [1971],
Baumol and Bradford [1970], Dasgupta and Stiglitz [1971],
Atkinson and Stiglitz [1972, 1976], Diamond [1975], Meade [1955],
Corlett and Hague [1953] may be noted.

     40Both results assume all individuals are identical, so that
distributional considerations can be ignored. See below.


                                        43
there, all that is relevant is how the marginal rate of substitution between

two commodities changes as the amount of leisure changes.

       This poses a problem: which theory provides the appropriate bases for the

design of tax policy? How can these alternative approaches be reconciled?

       Ramsey's analysis (and much of the subsequent work which developed from

it) was based on an artificial problem: he assumed that all individuals were

identical, but that the government could riot impose a lump sum tax. As we

noted earlier, there is really no reason the government cannot impose a uniform

lump sum tax; what the government cannot do is levy lump sum taxes which vary

according to the individual's ability to pay. But if all individuals are

identical, then a uniform lump sum tax is the optimal tax. Our analysis has

assumed not only that the government can impose a uniform lump sum tax, but

that it can impose a non-linear consumption (wage) tax. Giving the government

this   additional instrument is what changes the nature of the optimal commodity
tax structure.
       Virtually   all developed countries impose some income tax, which makes

Ramsey's analysis inapplicable to those countries. On the other hand, for a

variety of reasons, many less developed countries do not impose a very

effective income tax. For these, Ramsey's analysis might seem appropriate; but

Ramsey (and the subsequent work cited in footnote 38) assumed a neoclassical

model of the economy, a model which is particularly ill suited for less

developed countries. In a later section, we describe briefly recent work

attempting to extend this kind of analysis to less developed countries.




                                        44
12.3 Redistributive commodity taxes with optimal linear income taxes.

        In the previous section, we noted the limited role to be played by

redistributive commodity taxation when there is an optimal consumption tax. Is

that still true if there is an optimal linear consumption (or income) tax?

     The answer is provided by the generalized Ramsey Rule (Atkinson Stiglitz

[1976]):

           Z E t Shik/HCk = ek,                               (45)
           ih
where

     S',k is the hth household's compensated price derivative of the ith

commodity with respect to the kth price;

     ek =    S     (Ckhbb)/ HCkEb                             (46)

the normalized covariance between C'k and b'. (Generally, goods which are

consumed by the rich will have a high absolute value of ek. It is a measure of

the extent to which the good is consumed by those with low values of social

marginal utility of income);

     H is the total number of households;

     HCk is the aggregate consumption of commodity k (Ck is the average

consumption); and b is the net marginal social utility of income, as defined

earlier.

     (45) says that the percentage reduction in consumption of each commodity

(along the compensated demand curve) should be proportional to its

distributional characteristic ek. This stands in contrast to the standard




                                       45
Ramsey result that the percentage reduction should be the same for all

commodities 41

        Another special case is that originally investigated by Ramsey, where

there is constant marginal utility of income and separable demand functions.

When wage differences are the only sources of inequality, this implies that we

can write the demand curves as

                                         C = C1(q/wh)
where w' is the wage of the hth individual. Moreover,

                                             bhi =


where, it will be recalled,         is the marginal utility of income to the

government. Now, the optimality condition (45) becomes
                                                                —
                        tk E (C'k/w') = Z (b's -     Eb)(C'k        Ck)              (48)
                                               h       h

Let Vh = l/w'. Taking a Taylor series approximation of the right hand side, we

obtain (setting, without loss of generality, Ev = 1, and expressing all

aggregate results in per capita terms)42

                                             t kvk /
while   taking a Taylor series approximation to the left hand side yields

                                                        -
                 tk E(Ch/wb)            tkC'k{l +           m,ck/2}   icc2,
                    h
where

                        = -   C"q/C',   the elasticity of demand, and


     411n fact, both results are special cases of the more general result of
Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976).

     Z E tiShik/HCk = Eb8k - (1          -
                                             Eb).                             (47)

With an optimal linear income tax Eb = 1.            If all individuals are identical (as
in Ramsey's original analysis) 6k =

    42Recall that        Eb = 1.

                                                46
                                      mk = Cttlq/Ctt.
Thus
                          tk/Qk —   2/[1 +        - mkh/2lc1V}.
Notice      that for the quadratic utility function, £k   =   m,
                                                                   = 0, so uniform

taxation      is again optimal. More generally, even to a first order

approximation, the relative tax rates will depend not only on the elasticity of

demand, but also on mk, a parameter which is hard to estimate. Assuming that

the demand curves exhibit constant elasticity has, in particular, strong

implications for the structure of optimal commodity taxes. Finally, note that

tk   does   not vary inversely with the elasticity of demand, even for constant

elasticity demand functions.

       In short, if there is an income tax, the role for indirect taxation is

greatly changed, and if commodity taxes are imposed, the optimal structure of

these taxes may depend on parameters other than those that it depended on in

the absence of an income tax, parameters for which it seems intrinsically hard

to obtain reliable estimates; and even in those special cases where the only

demand parameter on which the structure of taxes depends is the elasticity of

demand, it does not vary simply inversely with the demand elasticity.

12.4 Other Forms of Restricted Taxation. In the previous subsection, we noted

the important consequences of restrictions on taxation: the optimal commodity

tax structure depended critically on whether there was or was not an income

tax, and whether, if there was an income tax, it was restricted to being

linear. With linear demand curves derived from a utility function of the form

              Eb(Q - Qr)2 - aL,
it is so easy to show that (45) implies that there should be no commodity

taxation (Atkinson-Stiglitz (1976, 1980)). Deaton (1979) has shown that this


                                         47
  holds for more general classes of utility functions, including the frequently

  estimated linear expenditure system.

       Another important example where restrictions on taxation have an important

  implication for tax structure arises when the government cannot impose 100%

  profits taxes. No government does this, perhaps because of the difficulty of

  differentiating between true profits (in the sense that economists use that

  term) and return to capital or to entrepreneurship. With 100% profits taxes,

  the commodity tax structure depends simply on properties of the demand curves,

  and there should be no taxation of producers (which would interfere with the

  production efficiency of the economy).4' The former result conflicts with

  Ramsey's original prescription, where optimal tax rates depended on both the

  demand and supply elasticities. The reconciliation was provided by Stiglitz

  and Dasgupta [1971], who showed that if there were not 100% profits taxes,

  producer taxation may be desirable, and optimal commodity taxes would depend on

  supply elasticities. Ramsey had implicitly assumed no profits taxes.



  13. Implications for Capital Taxation.

       Consumption at different dates is, of course like consumption of different

  commodities. Thus, the Atkinson-Stiglitz results provide the suggestion of an

  answer to the long standing controversy on whether interest income should be

  taxed. Early advocates of a consumption tax (taxing consumption is equivalent

  to exempting interest) emphasized that it was both equitable (individuals

  should be taxed on what they take out of society- -their consumption- -and not




     43This result was first established by Diamond and Mirrlees [1971].
For a simple interpretation of that result see Stiglitz and
Dasgupta [1971].

                                         48
what they contribute- -their income44 ) and more efficient (since it did not

introduce the additional intertemporal distortion.)45 Ramsey's analysis of

optimal taxation should have made the latter argument suspect even before

Kaldor put it forward: fewer distortions are not necessarily better than more.

Indeed, Ramsey's analysis suggested that whether consumption at later dates

should be taxed at a higher or lower rate should depend on the elasticity of

demand for consumption at later dates relative to the elasticity at earlier

dates.

      The Atkinson-Stiglitz analysis provided a framework within which both the

equity and efficiency issues could be addressed. They showed that if there was

separability between consumption (at all dates) and work. then a consumption

tax was Pareto efficient.

       Still, that did not close the matter, for theirs was a partial equilibrium

model. We noted earlier (section 8) that general equilibrium effects of tax

policy must be taken into account when tax policy can affect factor prices.

Partial equilibrium models cannot address the effects of taxation on savings

and investment, and hence on the intertemporal distribution of income. These

questions have been addressed by two sets of models.

        Overlapping Generations Models. Stiglitz (1985) has extended the

Atkinson-Stiglitz analysis using an overlapping generations. He asked, what

can we say in that context about the set of Pareto efficient tax structures.

Three results stand out:

1.    If relative wages between the skilled and unskilled workers is fixed

(independent of the capital stock), then the partial equilibrium results remain


       This is the position most associated with Irving Fisher.

     45See for instance Kaldor

                                      49
valid: provided there is separability in the utility functions, Pareto

efficiency requires that there be a consumption tax.46

2.   If relative wages between the skilled and unskilled workers changes with

the level of capital accumulation, the government will, in general, wish either

to have an interest income tax or subsidy. The intuitive reason is analogous

to that presented earlier concerning why, when there are these general

equilibrium effects, it would be desirable for the government to impose a

negative marginal tax rate on the more productive individuals. Here, if

increasing the level of capital increases the income of the more able relative

to the less able (for instance, if unskilled labor and capital are substitutes,



        46The Lagrangian for this problem can be written

     £ =              +    X2(U2(C2,L2) — U2(C1,    L*2))

                           K   +       + EC._16 —
            +
                                   i
                       —

                                        i
where   Q F(K,E) is the aggregate production function, E is the number of
efficiency units of labor (E = vN1L1 ÷ N2L2 , where v is the ratio of the
productivity of the two types of laborers), where     is the Lagrange
multiplier for the resource constraint at time t; where C6 is the
consumption of the ith type in the tth generation the first year of its life,
         is its consumption in the second year of its life; and as in the
standard over lapping generations model, we assume individuals live for only
two periods, working only in the first.       tCitc
   Note that we have written the self-selection constraint in a slightly
different form than in our earlier analysis. We define L2* as the labor that
the more able would have to supply, in order to immitate the less able (recall
that we are focusing on the case when it is the more able's self selection
constraint that is binding). Clearly, L*26 = vL1.
    We obtain from the first order conditions for C and         that
                            =
            aVti/aCitt,1
i.e.the marginal rate of substitution must equal the ratio of the shadow prices
of resources; but differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to K, we obtain

                   + F(K,1,E1)) =
from which the indicated result immediately follows.

                                         50
while skilled labor and capital are complements) then the government may wish

to discourage capital accumulation, and it will use tax policy to do this.

3.   If the government cannot completely control the level of capital stock,

through debt or social security policy 48, as seems to be the case, then the

government will, in general, wish to use tax policy, e.g. interest income

subsidies, if it wishes to encourage savings, taxes if it wishes to discourage

accumulation.



Infinitely lived individuals. The other model which has been intensively

investigated is that of infinitely lived individuals (Judd, Chamley, Stiglitz

1985). The first two of these studies are extension, to this context, of the

standard Ramsey analysis, and the same criticisms can be raised: since they

assume identical individuals, there is no reason not simply to impose a uniform

lump sum tax. Still, their result that asymptotically there should be no tax

on capital income, is of interest.49 But as in the Atkinson Stiglitz analysis,


         The analysis follows by writing the constant returns to scale
production function
Q F(K, E1,E2) where E =         with the two types of laborers being imperfect
substitutes. With this modification, the Lagrangian remains the same as that
presented in the previous footnote, except that now, we note that v, relative
wages, are a function of K. This means that the first order condition for K
now becomes

T,1(l +F) =       +       aU2                               iL
                                                            aK

The other first order conditions remain unchanged. It immediately follows that
the marignal rate of substitution is no not equal to the marginal rate of transformation.

     48See Atkinson -Stiglitz (1980) for a discussion of how this can be done.

     49The result is in one sense stronger than the earlier results for the
overlapping generation model, and in one sense weaker. It is stronger, in that
it does not require separability; it is weaker in that it is only valid
asymptotically. (The earlier results characterized all Pareto efficient tax
structures, and held at each moment of time.)

                                     51
 as soon as there are general equilibrium effects of taxation, this result no

 longer holds; that is, if there are two types of individuals, and the

government cannot offset the changes in relative wages induced by tax policy,

then it will wish to take these into consideration; even asymptotically, an

interest income tax or subsidy will, in general, be desirable.5°


      The simplest way to see these results is to write the Lagrangian

       = E(U52 +                     -
                                         5(1 + r)U.1J (f.o.c.)
       + [F(K,L) - (C +                           K)
                                                  -        -
                                                               R]J   resource constraint

     + [w0L0 -             + E(wL -          EC)/rr(l      + re)] budget constraInt


where we have embedded the individual's first order condition for allocating
income among different periods; and where   is the Lagrange multiplier
associated with the individual's resource constraint and where S is the pure
rate of time preference. The first order conditions are thus


      aC
           =           —        +             -
                                                  8(l      + r)U+1 -
                                                                            n(1 + r)
                                                                                       = 0



                   = (1 + FR) -              t-1 0.
In steady state,

      5(1 + r) = 1, U =                               =
so

               =   1        =            1

                                    l+F,
The consumer rate of interest converges to the producer rate of interest (the
marginal rate of transformation): there is no interest income taxation.

     5°ThIs result is, in some sense, more surprising than the earlier result,
because it implies that, viewed as of time 0, the ratio of consumer and
producer prices approaches (asymptotically) either zero or infinity, although
each price itself is also approaching zero.
    To derive this result, we assume the government must impose uniform
taxation on wages and interest. This imposes two additional sets of
constraints

               1 + r1 = 1 + r2

                                                      52
13.1.     Imperfect capital markets

      Throughout this discussion (as in most of the rest of the literature) we

have assumed a perfect capital market, i.e. that all investors obtain the same

return. There is considerable evidence that this is not true. The reasons for

this are not hard to find: there is imperfect information concerning who are

good investors.

      In an imperfect capital market, then, individuals will be characterized not

only by their labor productivity, but also by their capital productivity.5' We

then will wish to use self-selection mechanisms not only to determine who among

the population are more productive laborers but also who are more productive

investors. Assume, for simplicity, that individuals differed only in their

investment productivity.            The results (Stiglitz 1986) are parallel to those

obtained earlier: the government will wish to impose an interest income tax on

the less able investors, but no interest income tax on the more able.




and
                  = 1L2 =      v(K,E1/E2)
            w1       FL,

     We reformulate the Lagrangean, appending these two additional constraints.
Letting m and ji be the Lagrange multipliers associated with the two
constraints, now, the derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to K is

                 +   F)    =   + 4 v,

and it immediately follows that the government will wish to take into account
the effect of a change in capital accumulation on the distribution of before
tax income. If capital and unskilled labor are substitutes, then the
government will wish to discourage the accumulation of capital, and will thus
impose an interest income tax.

     5Un a perfect capital market, the most productive investors will invest
all of socieity's resources, and thus the return to capital will be the same
for all.

                                             53
14. Altruism and inheritance taxation

    In the life cycle model, it is assumed that individuals do not care at all

for their children. One interpretation of the model with infinitely lived

individuals is that there is a dynastic utility function:     the parent cares

about his child, the child about his child, and so on.

    In the simplest form, we can assume that the utility of the tth generation

is just

                 =   U(C,L)   +

where     is the weight assigned to the utility of the children.

Then, successive substitution yields the utility function facing the current

generation

            U = ZaTU(CT,          Lt+T)
                     T

In this interpretation, the only savings are bequests, and hence a tax   on
savings is equivalent to a tax on bequests.

     The analysis of Pareto efficient taxation is little affected by the

introduction of these interdependencies in utilities: we are assumed to keep

the utility levels of all but one type of individual fixed. Thus, if we fix

the utility of all future generations, then maximizing the utility of the

current generation is equivalent to maximizing the utility he derives from his

direct consumption, which is precisely the problem we have previously solved.

   To answer, however, the question about whether we wish to impose an

inheritance tax, however, we must first answer some difficult questions

concerning the formulation of the social welfare function. If each

generation's utility--including their valuation of future generation's utility-

-enters the social welfare function, we obtain

           W =           = Z at((6/a)t -1I U(C, L)

                                          54
                t       t   6/a -l

where we have weighted future generation's total utility by a factor 6. Notice

now that there is a discrepancy between the way the government values future

utility and how inciividuals do. Since 2ivin increases the utility both of the

giver and the receiver. it is doubly blessed in our social welfare function.

and the government will seek to encourage it. through a bequest subsidy.



15. Commitment. In the intertemporal problems we have analyzed so far, we

have assumed that the government can commit itself to a tax structure. The

government will, however, in general be able to identify who the more able are

from actions that they take early in life. Thus, if it were not committed to a

given tax structure, the government would use this information to impose a lump

sum tax on such individuals later on in their life. Recently, Britto,

Hamilton, Slutsky, and Stiglitz have investigated the consequences of assuming

that the government cannot commit itself. Then individuals know that if they

reveal who they are early in the life, they will be confronted with a lump sum

tax. The   government must take this into account in designing its tax
structure. They show that in general, the tax structure    is characterized by

three  phases: in the first, there is a pooling equilibrium, i.e. all
individuals are treated identically; then there is a period in which

separation   occurs, i.e. there is distortionary taxation; after that, the

government imposes a lump sum tax. Because individuals know that there will be

a lump sum tax later, it is harder to induce the more able to reveal (through

their actions) who they are; the effective distortion in the one period in

which the identification occurs is greater. Indeed, in some cases, where




                                      55
  discount rates are low enough, with an infinitely lived individuals, the only

  feasible equilibria may entail pooling.




                           Part III. Concluding Comments

  15.              Optimal Taxation in Non-neoclassical Economies

         The analysis of optimal tax structures prior to 1980 focused on models

  of competitive (neoclassical) economies. Pigou had earlier emphasized the use

  of taxation to correct market distortions (such as externalities). The optimal

  tax structure thus might be markedly different in an economy with monopolies,

  externalities, and other imperfections. One of the important lessons to emerge

  from the literature on optimal taxation was the important consequences of

  interdependencies in demand; corrective taxation needs to take these

  interdependencies into account as well. Arnott and Stiglitz [19831 provide an

  example of how this may be done; economies in which there are moral hazard

  problems, i.e. in which the provision of insurance affects the probability of

  the occurrence of the insured-against event, are almost always constrained

  Pareto inefficient;52 there always exist a set of taxes and subsidies which can

  make everyone better off. They analyze the structure of the optimal set of

  corrective taxes.

        Similarly, when there are monopolies, expressions for the optimal tax can

 be derived which can be thought of as consisting of two parts; in addition to

 the standard terms, there are those correcting the monopoly distortions.


     52The result on the constrained Pareto inefficiency of the
economy with imperfect information and incomplete risk markets is
in fact more general. See Greenwald and Stiglitz [19861.

                                       56
     Less Developed Economies. We have also emphasized throughout our analysis

the importance of identifying the set of admissible tax instruments. This is

likely to depend on the structure of the economy; it is much easier to monitor

many transactions in developed economies than in less developed countries.

Thus, few l.d.c's have an effective income tax, and the taxation of wage income

in the rural sector appears to be a virtual impossibility. Thus, the analysis

of the design of tax structures in l.d.c.ts differs in two important respects

from the analysis we have presented earlier: (a) the set of tax instruments is

different; and (b) there may be important distortions in the economy,

e.g. wages may be set at above market clearing levels in the urban sector.53

In a series of papers, Braverman, Sah, and Stiglitz    have investigated the

structure of optimal taxes and prices under a variety of assumptions concerning

the structure of the l.d.c. economy. In their analysis, they have attempted to

characterize Pareto improvements, policies which would make everyone better

off, as well as policies which would increase social welfare, under weak

assumptions concerning the structure of the social welfare function.



               16.            Concludin& Remarks

     The literature which we have surveyed in this paper has, I believe, cast

problems of the design of tax structure into a new perspective. It has


     53This may not, however, be simply because of unions or other
institutional considerations. It may be because the productivity of workers
depends on the wage they receive, and thus firms find it profit maximizing to
set wages at above market clearing levels.  (See Stiglitz [1974,1982,1986a].)

     54See in particular, Braverman, Sah, and Stiglitz [1982); Sah and Stiglitz
[1982,1983,1984]: and Braverman, Aim and Hammer [1983]. The latter study
entails an empirical investigation of the consequences of different tax
structures for the Korean economy. Other studies investigating the
consequences of different tax structures for other countries, using the same
basic framework, are presently underway at the World Bank.

                                     57
 emphasized the informational limitations on the government. And it has

 attempted to ascertain what economic theory can say about the design of tax

 structures without imposing welfare judgments, i.e. to identify Pareto

 efficient tax structures.    As in so many other areas of economic analysis,

there are perhaps more negative results than positive ones. What taxes are

not admissible has been shown to be a crucial determinant of the rates at which

the remaining, feasible taxes should be set. Thus, a critical difference

between Ramsey's earlier analysis and more recent analyses, such as that of

Diamond and Nirrlees, is that Ramsey assumed that there were no profits taxes,

Diamond and Mirrlees assumed that there were no profits (or equivalently,

profits were taxed at 100%). Neither is a good assumption for most countries.

And both analyses assumed the absence of an income tax.

      Though traditional arguments against commodity and interest income

taxation, based on counting the number of distortions, are not persuasive, the

theory of self-selection shows that the nature of commodity taxation should

depend simply on how the marginal rate of substitution between two commodities

is affected by the amount of leisure; in the central case of separability, no

commodity taxes should be imposed.

     Although this analysis has shown that the widely held view that in the

second best world nothing can be said is incorrect- -we have obtained some quite

general qualitative propositions - -we have also shown that those qualitative

results are, in turn, quite dependent on the precise assumptions concerning the

set of admissable taxes. The theory itself has, however, had little to say

about the determinants of the set of admissable taxes.

    Though optimal consumption tax structures are, in general, non-linear, the

presence of non-linearities increases the administrative problems associated


                                     58
with the tax system. Whether the gains are worth the cost remains unproven.

The suggestion contained in some of the numerical calculations that the overall

welfare gains from optimal taxation (using a utilitarian welfare criterion) are

small and that the optimal tax structure may be close to linear indicates that

it may not be unreasonable to focus attention on linear tax structures.

Moreover Pareto efficient non-linear structures have some properties that may

make them politically unacceptable: the marginal tax rate on the highest

income individuals is negative, except in the limiting case where the

elasticity of substitution between laborers of different skills is infinite, in

which case, the marginal tax rate on the highest income individual should be

-zero.

         The focus on the incentive effects of taxation has, however, provided key

insights: it has enabled us to identify the parameters which determine the

magnitude of the deadweight losses associated with any tax system. The trade-

offs on which this literature has focused in the design of the tax structure

are at the core of many of the recent policy debates. Negative income tax

proposals typically increase marginal tax rates for some individuals while

reducing it for others, and an assessment of these proposals requires a

balancing of the efficiency and equity effects on these different groups.

         On the other hand, many of the central policy issues transcend these

models, and the disparity between these may provide suggestions for future

directions for research. We have already referred to one set of such issues:

those related to administrative problems. The information problems associated

with monitoring and assessing income to capital may be no less important than

those with which we have been concerned here. The view that by encouraging

savings and investment, growth will be enhanced and thus all individuals;


                                 59
  including the poor, will be better off is partly reflected in our analysis of

  the general equilibrium effects of taxation, but only partly so. In particu-

  lar, we have paid little attention to R and D, to entrepreneurship and risk

  taking, or to the consequences of imperfect capital markets.

        Though the work discussed here suggests that there are distinct

  advantages to imposing differential tax rates on different groups, whose labor

  supply characteristics differ (and that ex ante expected welfare may even be

  increased by imposing differential tax rates on groups whose characteristics do

  not differ), popular views of fairness seem inconsistent with these results

  produced by the utilitarian calculus.55

       Though utilitarianism has often been thought to provide a basis of

  choosing among alternative Pareto efficient tax structures, to do so requires

  choosing a particular cardinalization, and no persuasive basis for choosing

  among alternative cardinalizations has been provided.56 Moreover, most

  analyses, while assuming that individuals differ in their productivity in the




     55We have, moreover, consistently ignored any political
economy considerations. These might suggest that constitutional
restrictions on the set of admissable taxes may be welfare
enhancing, for instance when the rates and terms at which those
taxes are imposed are determined by majority voting.

      56 We have also not entered into the debate concerning the
 appropriateness of the utilitarian approach on more fundamental philosophical
 grounds. We have noted Rawls' views suggesting that utilitarianism is
 insufficiently equalitarian. Brian Berry, while disagreeing with much of
 Rawis' work, remarks, ". . .Rawls, in taking utiltarianism as the main rival to
 his own account, is flogging an almost dead stalking-horse." (The Liberal
 Theory of Justice, Oxford, 1973)
      One can perhaps best view the utilitarian calculus as simply providing a
 convenient way of summarizing the effects of a policy change. (See Stiglitz
 (l986a).
      Notice that our results on Pareto efficient tax structures are not liable
 to most of the criticisms leveled against the utilitarian approach.


                              60
market place, ignore differences in home-productivity. When these are taken

into account, the case for redistributive taxation becomes even weaker.

     Thus, while the original goal of this line of research, which was to

provide a "scientific" basis for arguing for a progressive tax structure and

for analyzing the design of tax systems, has not been achieved--and does not

seem achievable- - important insights have been gleaned, which should enable

governments to make better choices of tax policies in the future.




                             61
                                  References



Allen, F.[l982], "Optimal Linear Income Taxation with General Equilibrium
Effects on Wages, Journal of Public Economics, 17, 1982, 135-143.

Arnott, R. and J. E. Stiglitz [1985], "Randomization With Asymmetric
Information: A Simplified Exposition", Institute for Economics Research
Discussion Paper No. 594, Queen's University, April 1985.

Arnott, R. and J. E. Stiglitz [1986], "Moral Hazard and Optimal Commodity
Taxation", Journal of Public Economics, 1986.

Atkinson, A. [1972], "Maxi nun and Optimal Income Taxation", paper presented at
the Budapest Meeting of the Econometric Society.

Atkinson, A. [1973], "How Progressive Should Income Tax Be?" in Essays in
Modern Economics, M. Parkin and A. R. Nobay (eds.), Longman, London.


Atkinson, A. [19771, "Optimal Taxation and the Direct Versus Indirect Tax
Controversy", Canadian Journal of Economics, 10, 590-606.

Atkinson, A. and A. Sandmo [1977], "The Welfare Implications of Personal Income
and Consumption Taxes", The Economic Journal.

Atkinson, A. and J. E. Stiglitz [1972], "The Structure of Indirect Taxation and
Economic Efficiency", Journal of Public Economics, 1, 97-119.

Atkinson, A. and J. E. Stiglitz [1976], "The Design of Tax Structure: Direct
Versus Indirect Taxation", Journal of Public Economics, July-August, Vol.6,
55-75.

Atkinson, A. and J. E. Stiglitz [1980], Lectures in Public Economics, New York
and London: McGraw-Hill Book Company.

Azariadis, C. and J. E. Stiglitsz [1983] "Implicit Contracts and Fixed Price
Equilibria", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Supplement 1983, 1-22.

Baumol, W. J. and D. F. Bradford [1970], "Optimal Departures from Marginal Cost
Pricing", American Economic Review, 60, 265-283.

Blum, W. and H. Kalven [1963], The Uneasy Case for Progressive Taxatation,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Boiteux, H. [1956] "On the Management of Public Monopolies Subject to Budgetary
Constraints", Journal of Economics Theory, 3, 219-240.

Boskin, M. and E. Sheshinski [1978], "Optimal Income Redistribution When
Individual Welfare Depends on Relative Income," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
92, pp. 589-602.

                             62
Braverman, A., C. Y. Ahn and J. S. Hammer [1983J, "Government Deficit Reduction
and Alternative Agricultural Pricing Policies in Korea", unprocessed mimeo, The
World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Braverman, A., R. Sah and J. E. Stiglitz [1982], "The Town-Versus-Country
Problem: Optimal Pricing in an Agrarian Economy", presented to a conference at
the World Bank, June.

Britto, D., J. Hamilton, S. Slutsky and J. E. Stiglitz [1986], "Information and
Multi-Period Optimal Taxation With Self-Selection:, mimeo, Princeton
University.

Chamley, Christophe [19801, "Optimal Intertemporal Taxation and The Public
Debt", Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 554.

Cooter, R. and E. Helpman [1974], "Optimal Income Taxation for Transfer
Payments Under Different Social Welfare Criteria," quarterly Journal of
Economics, 88, pp. 656-670.

Corlett, W. J. and D. C. Hague [1953], "Complementarity and the Excess Burden
of Taxation", Review of Economics Studies, 10, pp. 295-336.


Dasgupta, P. and J. E. Stiglitz [1971], "Differential Taxation, Public Goods,
and Economics Efficiency't, Review of Economic Studies, 1971, 38, 151-197.

Dasgupta, P. and J. E. Stiglitz [1974], "Benefit-Cost Analysis and Trade
Policies", Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 82, January-February 1974, 1-33.

Deaton, A. S. [1979], "Optimal Taxes and the Structure of Preferences",
Economic Letters.

Diamond, P. A. [l957b], "A Many-Person Ransey Tax Rule", Journal of Public
Economics, 4, 283-299.

Diamond, P. A. and J. A. Mirrlees [1971], "Optimal Taxation and Public
Production I-Il", American Economics Review, 61:8-27, pp. 261-278.

Diamond, P., L. Helms and J. Mirrlees [1980], "Optimal Taxation in a Stochastic
Economy: A Cobb-Douglas Example," Journal of Public Economics, 14, pp. 1-29.

Dixit, A.K. and A. Sandmo [1977], "Some Simpliefied Formulae for Optimal Income
Taxation", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 79, 417-423.

Eaton, J. and H. Rosen [1980], "Labor Supply, Uncertainty, and Efficient
Taxation", Journal of Public Economics, 14, p. 365-374.

Edgeworth, F. Y. [1887], "The Pure Theory of Taxation", Economic Journal, 7,
46-70, 226-238 and 550-571 (reprinted in Edgeworth, 1925).

Edgeworth, F. Y. [18681, "Mathematical Psychics.

                             63
Fair, R. [1971], "The Optimal Distribution of Income," Ouarterly Journal of
Economics, 85, *=pp. 551-579.

Feldstein, N. S. [1973], "On the Optimal Progressivity of the Income Tax",
Journal of Public Economics, 2, 357-376.

Fisher, I. [1937] "Income in Theory and Income Taxation in Practice",
Econometrica, 5, 1-55.

Greenwald, Bruce and J. E. Stiglitz [1986], "Externalities in Economies with
Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
May 1986, pp. 229-264.

Guesnerie, R. [1975], "Production of the Public Sector and Taxation in a Simple
Second Best Model", Journal of Economic Theory, 10: 127-156.

Hall, Robert E., and Alvin Rabushka [1983], Low Tax. Simple Tax. Flat Tax. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1983.

Helpman, E. and E. Sadka [1978], "The Optimal Income Tax: Some Comparative
Statics Results," Journal of Public Economics, 9, pp. 383-394.

Judd, Kenneth L. [1985], "Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight
Model", Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 28, No. 1, (October 1985), 59-83.

Kaldor, N. [1955], The Expenditure Tax, London: Allan and Unwin.

Lerner, A.P. [1944], The Economics of Control, Macmillan, New York.

Meade, J. E. [1951], Balance of Payments, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Hirrlees, J.[197l], "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation",
Review of Economics Studies, 38, 1971, 175-208.

Mirrlees, J. [1976], "Optimal Tax Theory: A Synthesis", Journal of Public
Economics, 6:327-358.

Mirrlees, J. [1985], "The Theory of Optimal Taxation", Handbook of Mathematical
Economics, Vol. III, ed. K. J. Arrow and M. D. Intriligator (Elsevier Science
Publishers B.V.).

Myerson, R.B. [1983], "Incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem",
Econometrica, Vol. 47, pp. 175-208.

Ordover, J. and E. Phelps [1979], "The Concept of Optimal Taxation in an
Overlapping Generations Model of Capital and Wealth," Journal of Public
Economics, 12, pp. 1-26.

Phelps, E.S. [1973], "The Taxation of Wage Income for Economic Justice",
narterlv Journal of Economics, 87, 1973, 331-354.


                            64
Pigou, A. C. [1947], A Study in Public Finance (3rd edn.), Macmillan, London.

Radner, R and J. E. Stiglitz [1984], "A Nonconcavity in the Value of
Information", Chapter 5 in Bayesian Models in Economic Theory, Marcel Boyer and
Richard Khilstrom eds., Elsevier Science Publications, 1984.

Ramsey, F. P. [1927], "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation", Economic
Journal, 37, 47-61.

Rawls, J. [1971], A Theory of Justice, Harvard Unversity Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

Rawis, J.[l974J, "Concepts of Distributional Equity: Some Reasons for the
Maximum Criterion," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 64, pp.
141-146.

Rothschild, K. and J.E. Stiglitz [1976], "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
Markets", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 629-650.

Sadka, E. [1976], "On Income Distribution, Incentive Effects and Optimal Income
Taxation", Review of Economic Studies, 43, 1976, 261-268.

Sah, R. and J. E. Stiglitz, [1984] "The Economics of Price Scissors", American
Economic Review, Vol. 74, No.1, March 1984, 125-138.

5th, R. and J. E. Stiglitz, [1987] "Price Scissors and the Structure of the
Economy", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1987.

Sah, R. and J. E. Stiglitz [1987] "Taxation and Pricing of Agricultural and
Industrial Goods in Devioping Economies" forthcoming in Modern Tax Theory for
Deve1oing Countries, D. Newbery and N. Stern (eds.)

Seade, J. K. [1977], "On the Shape of Optimal Tax Schedules", Journal of public
Economics, 7, 203-236.

Sheshiuski, E. [1972], "On the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation", flIER
Discussion Paper No. 172.

Slemrod, J., and S. Yitzhaki [1983], "On Choosing a Flat-Rate Income Tax
System," National Tax Journal, 36, pp. 31-44.

Stern, N. [1976], "On the Specification of Models of Optimum Income Taxation",
Journal of Public Economics, 6, 123-162.

Stern, N. [19821, "Optimum Taxation With Errors in Administration", Journal of
Public Economics, 1982, 181-211.

Blwn, W. and H. Kalven [1963], The Uneasy Case for Progressive Taxatation,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Boskin, M. and E. Sheshinski [1978], "Optimal Income Redistribution When


                             65
Individual Welfare Depends on Relative Income," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
92, pp. 589-602.

Cooter, R. and E. Helpman [1974], t?Optimal Income Taxation for Transfer
Payments Under Different Social Welfare Criteria," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 88, pp. 656-670.

Diamond, P., L. Helms and J. Mirrlees [1980], "Optimal Taxation in a Stochastic
Economy: A Cobb-Douglas Example," Journal of Public Economics, 14, pp. 1-29.

Fair, R. [1971], "The Optimal Distribution of Income," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 85, *pp. 551-579.

Helpman, E. and E. Sadka [1978], "The Optimal Income Tax: Some Comparative
Statics Results," Journal of Public Economics, 9, pp. 383-394.

Ordover, J. and E. Phelps [1979], "The Concept of Optimal Taxation in an
Overlapping Generations Model of Capital and Wealth," Journal of Public
Economics, 12, pp. 1-26.

Rawis, J.[l974], "Concepts of Distributional Equity: Some Reasons for the
Maximum Criterion," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 64, pp.
141-146.

Slemrod, J., and S. Yitzhaki [1983], "On Choosing a Flat-Rate Income Tax
System," National Tax Journal, 36, pp. 31-44.
Stiglitz, J. E. [1975], "Information and Economic Analysis", in Current
Economic Problems, Parkin and Nobay, eds., (Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press, 1975), pp. 27-52.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1974], "Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and
Unemployment in L.D.C.'s: The Labor Turnover Model", Ouarterlv Journal of
Economics, Vol. LXXXVII, May, pp. 194-227.

Stiglitz, J. E.[l976J, "Prices and Queues as Screening Devices in Competitive
Markets", IMSSS Technical Report, No. 212, Stanford University, August 1976.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1976], "Simple Formulae for the Measurement of Inequality and
the Optimal Linear Income Tax", IMSSS Technical Report No. 215, Stanford
University, August 1976.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1977], "Monopoly, Non-Linear Pricing and Imperfect
Information: The Insurance Market", Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 44,
October 1977, pp. 407-430.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1982], "Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and
Unemployment: The Efficiency Wage Model", in The Theory and Experience of
Economic Development: Essays in Honor of Sir Arthur W. Lewis, ed. M.
Gersovitz, C.F. Diaz-Alejandro, G. Ranis and M. Rosenzweig (London, George
Allen & Unwin), pp. 78-106.



                            66
Stiglitz, J. E. [19821, "Self-Selection and Pareto Efficient Taxation", Journal
of Public Economics, Vol. 17, 1982, PP. 213-240.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1982], "Utilitarianism and Horizontal Equity: The Case for
Random Taxation", Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 18, 1982, 1-33.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1983], "Some Aspects of the Taxation of Capital Gains??,
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 21, July 1983, 257-294.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1985], "The General Theory of Tax Avoidance", in National Tax
Journal, September 1985, Vol. XXXVIII, No.3, 325-338.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1985], "Inequality and Capital Taxation", IMSSS Technical
Report #457, Stanford University, July 1985.

Stiglitz, J. E. [l986a], "Theories of Wage Rigidities" in Keynes' Economic
Legacy: Contemporary Economic Theories.   ed. by J. L. Butkiewicz, K. J.
Koford, and J. B. Miller, New York: Preager Publishers, PP. 153-206.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1986b], Economics of the Public Sector, New York: LW. Norton.

Stiglitz, J. E. [1987], "The Wage-Productivity Hypothesis: Its Economic
Consequences and Policy Implications", paper presented to the American Economic
Association, December 1982 and forthcoming in Essays in Honor of A. Harberger,
H. Boskin, ed.

Varian, H. [1980], "Redistributive Taxation as Social Insurance", Journal of
Public Economics, 14, p.49.




                            67
