                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             WHAT WE LEARN FROM CHINA'S RISING SHADOW BANKING:
                EXPLORING THE NEXUS OF MONETARY TIGHTENING
                   AND BANKS' ROLE IN ENTRUSTED LENDING

                                              Kaiji Chen
                                               Jue Ren
                                               Tao Zha

                                        Working Paper 21890
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21890


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




This research is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NNSFC) Grant
Numbers 71473168 and 71473169. We thank Marty Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, Richard Rogerson,
and Zheng (Michael) Song for helpful discussions. We are grateful to Karen Zhong for her outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Kaiji Chen, Jue Ren, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What We Learn from China's Rising Shadow Banking: Exploring the Nexus of Monetary
Tightening and Banks' Role in Entrusted Lending
Kaiji Chen, Jue Ren, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 21890
January 2016
JEL No. E02,E5,G11,G12,G28

                                            ABSTRACT

We argue that China's rising shadow banking was inextricably linked to potential balance-sheet risks
in the banking system. We substantiate this argument with three didactic findings: (1) commercial
banks in general were prone to engage in channeling risky entrusted loans; (2) shadow banking through
entrusted lending masked small banks' exposure to balance-sheet risks; and (3) two well-intended
regulations and institutional asymmetry between large and small banks combined to give small banks
an incentive to exploit regulatory arbitrage by bringing off-balance-sheet risks into the balance sheet.
We reveal these findings by constructing a comprehensive transaction-based loan dataset, providing
robust empirical evidence, and developing a theoretical framework to explain the linkages between
monetary policy, shadow banking, and traditional banking (the banking system) in China.


Kaiji Chen                                         Tao Zha
Department of Economics                            Emory University
Emory University                                   1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322                                  Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
chen.kaiji@gmail.com                               and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
                                                   and also NBER
Jue Ren                                            tzha@emory.edu
Emory University
Department of Economics
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
jue.ren@emory.edu
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                   1

         Definition of “regulatory arbitrage:” a practice whereby firms capitalize on
         loopholes in regulatory systems in order to circumvent unfavorable regula-
         tion[s]. Investopedia

         Shadow banking is defined as “credit intermediation involving entities and
         activities outside the regular [traditional] banking system or nonbank credit
         intermediation in short.” Financial Stability Board (2013).

         The size and rapid growth of shadow banking in China warrants particular
         attention. Financial Stability Board (2014)



                                           I. Introduction

  In the aftermath of the unprecedented stimulus of four trillion RMBs injected by the
Chinese government to combat the 2008 financial crisis, the People’s Bank of China (PBC)
pursued contractionary monetary policy by tightening money supply between 2010 and 2013.
The persistent policy of monetary tightening resulted in a simultaneous fall of bank loans and
deposits and at the same time a rapid rise of shadow banking (Figures 1 and 2). A principal
component of China’s shadow banking consists of entrusted loans, a lending activity between
nonfinancial firms with commercial banks or nonbank financial companies acting as trustees
or middlemen (Figure 3). In particular, the bottom panel of Figure 2 shows that while the
total amount of entrusted loans increased during the monetary tightening period of 2010-
2013, its share in the sum of entrusted lending and bank lending more than tripled from
6.6% in 2010 to 22% in 2013.
  This conspicuous phenomenon has caused concerns of both policymakers and researchers
about how the rapid rise of off-balance-sheet entrusted lending would bode ill for China’s
banking system. By law, commercial banks cannot undertake credit risks associated with
entrusted lending.1 But the law enacted in May 2000 by the PBC was too general at that
time to be implemented in practice until mid-2014. Prior to 2014 the PBC, in a series of
“Financial Stability Reports,” expressed concerns of spillover risks to the banking system
from shadow lending and pointed to a possibility of regulatory arbitrage exploited by banks


  1The   concept of “entrusted loans” was officially discussed by the PBC’s “General Rules on Loans” issued
in 1996. A subsequent law, enacted in May 2000, explicitly states that commercial banks as trustees in
entrusted loans can only receive commission fees and cannot undertake credit risks.
                                 WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                     2

                            35
                                                                                   M2
                            30                                                     Bank loans
          Growth rate (%)
                            25

                            20

                            15

                            10
                             2000               2005                2010                        2015



                            30
                                                                                     M2
                            25                                                       Deposits
          Growth rate (%)




                            20

                            15

                            10

                            5
                            2000                2005                2010                        2015

          Figure 1. Growth rates (year over year) of monetary aggregates, bank loans,
          and bank deposits. Data sources: PBC and CEIC (the database provided
          by China Economic Information Center, now belonging to the Euromoney
          Institutional Investor Company).

to take on such risks.2 The report, however, did not identify which specific regulations
gave banks an incentive to exploit regulatory arbitrage. And there has been little academic
research that addresses this broad and important issue.
  This paper is to fill this vacuum in the literature and study related issues on the linkages
between monetary policy, shadow banking, and traditional banking. To identify banking
regulatory loopholes and which types of banks that exploited these loopholes and to assess
what kind of consequences such an exploitation brought into the banking system, we take
  2See,   for example, page 174 in the PBC’s 2013 Financial Stability Report. Similar concerns about regula-
tory arbitrage were expressed by the Chinese Banking Regulatory Commission in its 9 May 2011 regulation
and the State Council in its 10 December 2013 notice.
                                              WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                                   3

                                      30
                                                  M2
                                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                    Shadow banking
                                                  Shadow banking
       M2 growth (%)
                                      20




                                      10                                                                        0
                                       2006     2007       2008       2009   2010   2011     2012     2013   2014


                                      30
                                                  M2




                                                                                                                    Entrusted lending
                                                  Entrusted lending
       M2 growth (%)




                                                                                                               2

                                      20




                                      10                                                                        0
                                       2002        2004            2006      2008     2010          2012     2014
       Share of entrusted loans (%)




                                      30                                                                       3

                                      25          Share                                                        2.5




                                                                                                                                 Entrusted lending
                                                  Amount
                                      20                                                                       2

                                      15                                                                       1.5

                                      10                                                                       1

                                       5                                                                       0.5

                                      0                                                                         0
                                      2002         2004            2006      2008     2010          2012     2014

       Figure 2. M2 growth and the rise of shadow banking and entrusted lending
       (in trillion RMB). Entrusted lending is one principal component of shadow
       banking. Both shadow banking and entrusted lending are newly originated
       loans. The share of entrusted loans is the share of the entrusted-lending
       amount in the sum of entrusted lending and bank lending, where bank lending
       is measured by newly originated bank loans as well. Data sources: PBC and
       CEIC.

as given the macroeconomic trends of monetary aggregates and entrusted loans displayed by
Figures 1 and 2 and focus on two distinct but related questions: (a) were Chinese banks prone
to engage in channeling risky entrusted loans in response to monetary policy changes and
(b) if so, how did the risk of shadow loans spill over into the banking system’s balance sheet?
                   WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                     4


                    Lenders (Firm A)     Trustees       Borrowers (firm B)

       Figure 3. A basic structure of entrusted loans as commonly understood.
       Trustees include banks and nonbank financial companies that facilitate en-
       trusted loans.




To frame an answer to these two questions in a coherent way, we provide both empirical
and theoretical analyses. The empirical analysis is based on the transaction-based loan data
constructed by us and the theoretical framework is grounded in China’s unique institutional
characteristics.
  We complete these analyses with four distinct but related contributions. First, we man-
ually collect and construct a comprehensive micro transaction-based dataset on entrusted
loans by merging entrusted-loan announcements (the most important source), nonfinancial
firms’ annual reports, and banks’ annual reports, all downloaded from the WIND database
(the data information system created by the Shanghai-based company called WIND Co.
Ltd., the Chinese version of Bloomberg). We verify our dataset with various Financial Sta-
bility Reports published by the PBC. The Bankscope database (a comprehensive, global
database of banks financial statements, ratings, and intelligence, provided by Bureau Van
Dijk) is also used for obtaining other balance-sheet information such as capital adequacy
ratio. We read through more than a thousand relevant announcements line by line and
cross-check the data from different sources to decipher the reporting nuances in the Chinese
language, eliminate redundant and duplicated observations, and obtain accurate and com-
prehensive data for entrusted lending facilitated by banks and nonbank trustees. During
this construction process that has taken us several years to complete and is still continuing
to refine the dataset, we identify lending firms, borrowing firms, and, most important of
all, trustees that facilitated entrusted lending between nonfinancial firms. Our subsequent
empirical and theoretical work shows how and why, among different types of trustees, banks
behaved differently from nonbank trustees and how and why, among banks, small banks
behaved differently from large banks. Our data sample begins in 2007 and ends in 2013 with
over 750 unique observations. China’s shadow banking began in 2007, accelerated during the
period of monetary tightening after the government’s 2008-2009 economic stimulus, and was
then heavily regulated from mid-2014 forward. Throughout 2014-2015, the Chinese Banking
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                 5

Regulatory Commission (CBRC) first issued and then implemented new regulations specif-
ically prohibiting banks from taking on credit risks through entrusted lending. Thus, the
period of 2007-2013 is a critical period for us to understand the issues raised above.
  With the constructed micro data, we establish, as a second contribution, empirical evidence
of whether banks are prone to engage in risky entrusted lending. The task is challenging
because one must identify banks’ risk-taking behavior from the data. We address this iden-
tification issue by using two instruments. One is to use the transaction-based observations
on nonbank trustees to distinguish banks’ behavior in our difference-in-difference approach.
Since monetary and banking regulations apply to the banking system only, this instrument
allows us to isolate the effect of monetary tightening on banks’ willingness to facilitate en-
trusted lending. We show that without this instrument the regressions would underestimate
such an effect.
  The other instrument relates to different types (qualities) of loans: one type is risky and
the other one is not. We use the loan data on the risky type as an instrument. By controlling
for the time effect and the industry-fixed effect, we estimate a large number of regressions
with double or triple interactions to determine different roles played by banks in channeling
entrusted loans to the risky industry. By the risky industry we mean a combination of the
real estate industry and 18 overcapacity industries identified by China’s Ministry of Indus-
try and Information Technology. We find that during the period of monetary tightening,
banks facilitated more entrusted loans than nonbank trustees. Among banks, small banks
tended to funnel more entrusted loans to the risky industry than large banks in response to
monetary contractions.3 By contrast, the estimation shows that monetary tightening has an
inconsequential effect on nonbank trustees’ willingness to facilitating risky entrusted loans.
  Third, we provide a detailed discussion of China’s unique institutional characteristics
that underlay banks’ incentives to channel entrusted loans, especially risky ones, during
the period of monetary tightening. One unique feature of monetary policy in China is to
use monetary aggregates as a major target to stabilize macroeconomic fluctuations. Interest

  3Large   banks, controlled and protected by the state, are the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China,
the Bank of China, the Construction Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China, and the Bank of
Communications. The Bank of Communications, initially listed in the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, has
officially become the fifth largest state-owned bank since May 16, 2006. The other commercial banks are
small relative to these large five banks, including among others China CITIC Bank, China Everbright Bank,
China Merchants Bank, Shanghai Pudong Development Bank, the Industrial Bank of China, and the Bank
of Beijing.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                    6

rates were not a major macroeconomic stabilizer until 2014 at the earliest. The main purpose
of monetary policy in China has been to control credits and deposits in the banking system.
Monetary aggregates such as M2 are a primary target to accomplish this task. As is evident
in Figure 1, growth in money supply moved in tandem with growth in bank credits and
deposits. In addition to monetary policy, there were two unique regulatory restrictions
specific to China’s banking system: the legal ceiling on the ratio of loans to deposits (LDR)
imposed by the PBC on each commercial bank, which we call the “LDR regulation,” and the
regulation prohibiting commercial banks from expanding bank loans to the risky industry,
which we call the “safe-loan regulation.”
  Monetary tightening gave banks a stronger incentive to circumvent these regulations. As
the PBC tightened money supply, bank deposits fell. The pressure built up on deposit short-
ages, which exposed banks to the risk of violating the LDR regulation.4 Chinese small banks
incurred higher costs, implicit or explicit, than large banks to acquire additional deposits
when facing random deposit shortfalls. As a result, the LDR and safe-loan regulations,
together with institutional asymmetry between large and small banks in coping with un-
expected deposit shortfalls, gave small banks an incentive to take advantage of regulatory
arbitrage. One effective way for regulatory arbitrage is to increase nonloan investment that
was not subject to the LDR and safe-loan regulations and at the same time reduce bank
loans that were subject to these two regulations. More important is the fact that such
nonloan investment is on the asset side of bank balance sheet. One principal component of
nonloan investment was in the form of the beneficiary rights of entrusted loans funneled by
the banks, which we call “entrusted rights” for short. As we show in Section V, nonloan
investment was significantly correlated with entrusted lending for small banks, but not for
large banks, during the period of a simultaneous fall in monetary aggregates and a rapid
rise in entrusted lending (Figure 2). What was supposed to be the risk outside the banking
system showed up on small banks’ balance sheet. Consequently, shadow banking was used
by small banks to mask credit risks in the banking system by cleverly circumventing the
regulatory restrictions.
  To place our empirical findings and China’s institutional features in a coherent conceptual
framework, we develop a theory of banks’ optimal portfolio choice subject to China’s unique
LDR and safe-loan regulations. The theoretical model, constituting a fourth contribution of

  4For   detailed discussions of this regulation risk, see Sections V and VI.5 as well as various “Financial
Stability Reports” published by the PBC.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                           7

the paper, is designed to be tractable for obtaining intuitive results. We show that when
the deposit withdrawal risk increases as a result of monetary tightening, the small bank will
optimally increase investment in risky assets that are not counted as part of bank loans
and thus not subject to the LDR and safe-loan regulations. An increase in nonloan risky
investment effectively offsets the extra costs of meeting deposit shortfalls faced by the small
bank to satisfy the LDR regulation. The small bank, therefore, kills two birds with one stone.
The stone is an increase of nonloan risky investment, one bird is the safe-loan regulation,
and the other bird is the LDR regulation. Our theoretical predictions are consistent with our
empirical findings. A novel feature of our theory is that the small bank exploits regulatory
arbitrage by trading off the regulation risk of bank loans with the default risk of shadow
loans, a unique Chinese institutional characteristic.
  All four elements—micro data, empirical evidence, institutional characteristics, and theory—
are woven together as a composite framework for understanding banks’ risk-taking incentive
that underlay banks’ active participation in shadow banking and the resultant financial risk
that may have endangered the health of China’s banking system. Our empirical and the-
oretical findings offer one of the didactic lessons: how well-intended banking regulations
can generate a perverse incentive for banks to take advantage of regulatory arbitrage. The
well-intended regulations were designed to prohibit banks from directly engaging in risky
bank loans on the one hand restrict the amount of bank loans by the LDR ceiling on the
other hand. Our study demonstrates that these well-intended regulations had an unintended
consequence: they encouraged Chinese small banks to bring supposed off-balance-sheet risks
into on-balance-sheet risks during the period of monetary tightening through the means of
risky entrusted lending.
  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the literature comple-
mentary to our paper. Section III details how our transaction-based data are constructed.
Section IV provides robust empirical evidence on banks’ risk-taking behavior in channel-
ing entrusted loans. Section V presents the institutional details relevant to our empirical
and theoretical analyses. Section VI develops our theory and offers its implications and
predictions. Section VII concludes the paper.


                                  II. Literature review

  There are several strands of literature that are relevant to our paper. One strand of lit-
erature is theoretical, represented by Bianchi and Bigio (2014) who develop a theoretical
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                   8

framework for evaluating the tradeoff faced by the ex-ante homogeneous bank between prof-
iting from more loans on the one hand incurring the liquidity risk exposure associated with
a potential reserve shortfall on the other hand.5 Our theoretical work builds on Bianchi and
Bigio (2014) but with unique Chinese institutional characteristics. In particular, bank loans
are subject not to reserve shortfalls but to deposit shortfalls during the period of monetary
tightening. The problem facing Chinese banks, especially small banks, is not a reserve re-
quirement, but the LDR ceiling constraint and the safe-loan regulation imposed by the PBC.
Another new feature of our theoretical model is that Chinese banks face a tradeoff between
the regulation risk associated with bank loans and the default risk associated with shadow
loans through risky nonloan investment.
  Another strand of literature is empirical, represented by Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and
Saurina (2014) who utilize the Spanish loan data to study the effect of monetary policy
expansion on the supply of traditional bank loans to risky firms. They introduce triple
interactions among monetary policy, bank characteristics, and borrower characteristics into
regressions of the credit supply. Our paper, by contrast, studies the bank’s risk-taking behav-
ior in facilitating shadow loans during the period of monetary tightening. More important
are our results suggesting that the reason for the risk-taking behavior of banks in China is
sharply different from that in the developed countries because China’s unique institutional
background plays a critical role in the close relationships between monetary tightening, bank
loans, and shadow loans.
  Both our empirical and theoretical findings contribute to the growing literature on China’s
shadow banking. First, some of our findings are complementary to Hachem and Song (2015).
Both our work and their paper highlight China’s regulations on banks’ LDRs as a key to
understanding the rapid growth of China’s shadow banking activity. Hachem and Song
(2015) focus on the effect of the LDR constraint on the liabilities of banks’ balance sheet, via
banks’ issuance of so-called “wealth management products” (WMPs) as an alternative to
deposits to circumvent such a regulation. Accordingly, the shadow-banking risk in Hachem
and Song (2015) is a maturity mismatch as short-maturity WMPs are used to finance long-
term loans. By contrast, our study on entrusted lending and its linkage to risky nonloan
assets on banks’ balance sheet shed light on the impact of China’s rising shadow banking
  5In   other banking works such as Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Christiano and Ikeda (2013), shocks
to the bank equity, coupled with the credit constraint, affect the supply of bank loans, as these shocks
exacerbate the incentive problem of banks. Accordingly, the focus of those papers is to explain the effects
of policies to recapitalize the banks.
                 WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                      9

from the viewpoint of the asset side of banks’ balance sheet. Our empirical findings point to
the default risk of such shadow loans that banks may choose to bear as a tradeoff against
the regulation risk stemming from both the LDR ceiling and the safe-loan law.
  Several recent empirical papers explore the micro-level entrusted loan data from a per-
spective of firms. For example, He, Lu, and Ongena (2015) investigate the reaction of stock
prices of both issuing and receiving firms to an entrusted-loan announcement. Allen, Qian,
Tu, and Yu (2015) explore which types of lending firms tend to make entrusted loans and
their motives in making affiliated and non-affiliated entrusted loans. Qian and Li (2013)
provide an analysis of entrusted lending as an alternative way of external funding to bank
loans when the borrower and the lender have an affiliation relationship. None of these pa-
pers, however, study the role of banks in facilitating entrusted loans and the importance of
the unique institutional background behind banks’ ultimate incentive for partaking in such
shadow lending.6
  Our paper also contributes to the literature on monetary transmission mechanism. Prior
to Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014), Kashyap and Stein (2000) are the first to
use the bank-level data to identify the effect of monetary policy on credit supply via banks’
liquidity position. Subsequently, Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) use the syndicated-loan
data to understand the effect of the 2008 financial crisis on the supply of bank credit to
corporations with different exposures to drawdown risks of credit lines. Like Ivashina and
Scharfstein (2010), monetary tightening also has two effects in our paper: a direct effect on
reduction of deposits committed by firms and households and an indirect effect on the rise
of deposit withdrawal risk. Various government and financial reports document both effects
during the period of monetary tightening in 2010-2013. Unlike Ivashina and Scharfstein
(2010), bank loans in China were relatively safe as the government either implicitly guaran-
teed these loans or explicitly prohibited risk-taking loans through its strict regulations. A
more serious problem lay in shadow loans that were not subject to strict regulations until
2014. Our paper takes a first step in identifying and quantifying the effect of monetary
policy contractions on banks’ roles in risky entrusted lending during the period of monetary
contractions between 2010 to 2013.
  6Various   non-academic policy articles argue that the development of shadow banking in China might
bear risks to China’s financial system. See, for example, Adrian, Ashcraft, and Cetorelli (2013), Elliott and
Yu (2015), the 2011 “Global Research Report” of the HSBC, the 2013 Nomura Global Report on “China:
Rising Risks of Financial Crisis,” the 2014 “Half-Yearly Monetary and Financial Stability Report” of the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA), and various PBC reports.
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                          10

  More generally, our paper identifies the institutional asymmetry between large and small
banks in costs of acquiring additional deposits in the event of unexpected deposit short-
falls. The institutional asymmetry, together with the LDR and safe-loan regulations, gave a
perverse incentive for small banks to exploit regulatory arbitrage by bringing risky shadow
loans into the balance sheet under a different asset category that was not subject to the
LDR and safe-loan regulations. Furthermore, our paper identifies a mechanism in which
small banks brought off-balance-sheet risks into the balance sheet. These analyses shed light
on the importance of designing a comprehensive package of regulations that would lead to
right incentives for banks to make loans or invest in risky assets.

                        III. Data construction and description

  The micro loan data used in this paper consist of transactions of entrusted loans between
Chinese firms, facilitated by trustees as middlemen. The sample is from 2007 to 2013.
We read various data sources line by line and combine them to ensure the accuracy of
our manually constructed dataset. In this section, we first describe how we construct our
transaction-based dataset and then provide relevant descriptive statistics.

III.1. Data construction. We first collect all the pdf files of raw entrusted-loan announce-
ments made by listed firms in China. Listed firms are those that issue A-share stocks to the
public and thus are listed in China’s stock exchanges. Chinese law requires listed lending
firms to make public announcements about each entrusted-loan transaction. Listed borrow-
ing firms could choose to make announcements but are not required by law. In 2005 China
Securities Law Article 67 also requires all listed firms to announce major events which may
have influenced their stock prices.7 In 2011, according to Article 2 of the CSRC’s “Rules for
Information Disclosure by Companies Offering Securities to the Public,” listed firms have
responsibility to disclose all entrusted-loan transactions. Moreover, according to two disclo-
sure memoranda provided by the Shenzhen Stock Exchange in 2011, a listed company must
disclose information of entrusted loans as long as its subsidiary firm is a lender of entrusted
loans, even if the company itself is not a direct lender.
  A raw announcement made for each transaction concerns either a newly originated loan
or a repaid loan. Information in each raw announcement contains the names of both lender
and borrower, the amount transacted, and relevant financial information if applicable. For
  7The   Chinese Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) publishes such documents at http://www.
sac.net.cn/flgz/flfg/201501/t20150107_115050.html.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                         11

each year between 2010 and 2013 , we verify the number of our collected raw announcements
against the number published by the PBC’s 2011-2014 Financial Stability Reports (the re-
ports publish the numbers in the previous years). Figure 4 plots the numbers of transactions.
One can see from the figure that the discrepancy between our data and the numbers pub-
lished by the Financial Stability Reports is of little importance. Although both our data
source and the PBC’s data source are from WIND, at the time when the PBC reported the
number of announcements, some companies had not yet made announcements until a later
year. Some of these delayed announcements are included in our data collection, which may
explain part of this inconsequential discrepancy.
                                              450
                                                    Our data
                                                    PBC
                                              400


                                              350
                Number of raw announcements




                                              300


                                              250


                                              200


                                              150


                                              100


                                               50


                                                0
                                                    2010       2011   2012   2013


       Figure 4. Number of raw announcements we collect versus number published
       by the PBC’s Financial Stability Reports. Data source: WIND

  One main reason we must read raw announcements and other relevant documents line
by line is that there were often multiple announcements made by an individual lender for
the same transaction. In such cases, we manually combine these raw announcements into
one announcement. Some announcements were for repayment of entrusted loans. To avoid
double counting, we drop those announcements if the same transaction was recorded in pre-
vious announcements. Another reason for reading through raw announcements is to obtain
the trustee information as much as possible. For some raw announcements, however, the
trustee information was missing. In this case we search the annual reports of listed nonfinan-
cial companies that documented the same transactions for the trustee information missing
in those announcements. A third reason for reading through raw announcements relates
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                          12

to the nuances of the Chinese language in expressing how the transaction of an entrusted
loan was conducted. For some announcements, the amount of a particular entrusted loan
was planned but never executed or executed with a different amount in a later announce-
ment. During the loan planning stage, the name of the trustee was often omitted from an
announcement. If we had not been careful about these announcements, we would have exag-
gerated the number and the amount of entrused loans collected. A fourth reason is that we
must remove announcements about loans that had already been paid to avoid duplication.
The announcements organized this way are the ones we use for the paper and we call them
“announcements” rather than “raw announcements” with the understanding that those an-
nouncements have been already cleaned up from raw announcements. The total number of
raw announcements is 1279. The number of (cleaned-up) announcements is 778.
  Our data construction involves extracting the transaction data, manually, from our cleaned-
up announcements of new loans. For each announcement, we record the lender and the
borrower. Because the same transaction may be announced by both lender and borrower,
two announcements may correspond to only one transaction. In such cases we manually
compare both announcements to ascertain the accuracy of our processed data set.8 After
the comparison, we merge the two announcements for the same transaction into one unique
observation. It turns out that the number of such announcements is only three. Subtracting
these three double-counted announcements give us 775 unique observations. The timing of
the observation corresponds to the exact timing of the transaction and thus does not nec-
essarily correspond to the time when an announcement was made. The transaction data
constructed from these unique observations are used for our empirical analysis.
  The micro transaction-based data of entrusted loans we have collected differ from the
aggregate data in several important aspects. First, the aggregate series includes loans be-
tween nonfinancial firms as well as four other categories: (i) cash management, (ii) provident
funds for housing, (iii) entrusted loans financed by WMPs, and (iv) syndicated loans. In a
strict sense, these four other categories are not loans entrusted from one nonfinancial firm
to another.9 Indeed, some of these categories, such as cash management and syndicated
loans, were re-classified and disqualified as entrusted loans in 2015. According to a 2015
CBRC report, moreover, housing provident funds are not subject to the CBRC regulations


  8
   We find that the lender’s announcement typically contains more information than the borrower’s.
  9
   Cash management refers to an outsourcing to a bank by a conglomerate to manage short-term funds
across its own subsidiaries.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                        13

on activities of commercial banks that facilitate entrusted loans. Second, announcements
are made by listed firms while aggregate entrusted loans may include those transacted be-
tween nonlisted firms. Third, aggregate data on entrusted loans may include those repaid
already and the same transactions that were reported multiple times. Fourth, it is unclear
whether the timing of aggregate entrusted loans corresponds to the time when the loans
were reported or the time when actual transactions took place. Despite these differences,
however, the aggregate series calculated from our micro data has a similar growth pattern as
the macro aggregate data provided by the CEIC (the average growth rate is 40.55% for our
micro data and 35.75% for CEIC macro data between 2007 and 2013 and 33.77% for ours
and 32.57% for CEIC between 2010 and 2013).


III.2. Data description and other data sources. This section provides key banking
characteristics of our constructed transaction data from 2007 to 2013 and describes how our
data are merged with other data sources.


III.2.1. Data observations and characteristics. Table 1 shows how we arrive at the number
of unique observations without duplicated announcements. Thus, the number of unique
observations must equal the sum of “NLA” and “NBA” minus “NLABA” (the number of
duplications). Clearly, the number of announcements made by lenders was considerably
greater than the number of announcements made by borrowers, a fact that is consistent
with the legal requirement that listed lending firms must reveal entrusted-loan transactions.
  Table 2 shows a breakdown of transactions by different types of trustees and different
types of loans. Affiliated loans involve both lending and borrowing firms within the same
conglomerate. While most entrusted loans facilitated by nonbank trustees were affiliated
ones, a majority of affiliated loans were channeled by banks, a fact that is not well known.
As one can see from the table, no matter whether entrusted loans were affiliated or not,
small banks facilitated more transactions than large banks, and large banks faciliated more
transactions than nonbank trustees. Thus, banks played a critical role in facilitating both
affiliated and non-affiliated entrusted loans.
  Small banks accounted for the largest fraction of both loan transactions and loan volume
(amount). Table 3 shows that the number of entrusted-loan transactions facilitated by small
banks took 48% of the total number and the amount of entrusted loans 40% of the total
amount. Thus, small banks played a special role in funneling entrusted loans.
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                        14

             Table 1. Number of announcements made by lenders and borrowers

                         Description             NLA NBA NLABA Total
                   Number of observations        644        134   -3           775
Note. NLA: number of lenders’ announcements; NBA: number of borrowers’
announcements; NLABA: number of the same transactions announced by both lenders and
borrowers.

       Table 2. A breakdown of the total number of transactions by types of trustees
       and types of loans

                   Description         NBTs Large banks Small banks Total
               Non-affiliated loans     3              87          135               225
                 Affiliated loans       122        188             240               550
                      Total             125        275             375               775
Note. NBTs: nonbank trustees.

       Table 3. Proportions (%) of loan transactions and loan volume according to
       different types of trustees

                   Description          NBTs Large banks Small banks Total
             Number of transactions      16.13         35.48           48.39          100
                  Loan volume            24.33         34.85           40.82          100
Note. NBTs: nonbank trustees.

III.2.2. Other data sources. In addition to the constructed transaction data, our study uses
other data sources. One main other source to which our transaction data are bridged is
banks’ balance-sheet information from WIND, which allows us to compute the correlation
of entrusted lending off balance sheet and risky investment on balance sheet as discussed in
Section V.4. WIND contains balance-sheet information of listed banks. When an announced
transaction identifies the name of the bank, we link the transaction to the WIND information
of this bank. For balance-sheet information of nonlisted banks, we resort to Bankscope. If the
balance-sheet information of a particular bank is unavailable from WIND or Bankscope, we
search the website for this particular bank to obtain its annual reports. There are a total of
19 banks listed in the Hongkong, Shenzhen, or Shanghai Exchange. In 2013, these 19 banks
possessed 70% of the total assets of 164 banks and nonbank trustees covered by Bankscope.
The five large banks and most joint-stock commercial banks were listed during our sample
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                  15

period. Some local banks or foreign banks are not covered by Bankscope. These missing
banks are usually very small and most likely unlisted.10 Bankscope contains information
related to capital adequacy ratio and loan-to-deposit ratio; WIND contains information
related to excess reserves and other nonloan asset categories.
  Annual reports (in pdf form) of listed nonfinancial companies as well as listed banks are
manually collected from the WIND dataset. The WIND dataset also contains some financial
information of both banks and nonfinancial firms, which helps expedite the process of data
collection and organization as well as verify the accuracy of our constructed dataset.
  The annual report of a listed nonfinancial company may also contain information about
entrusted loans, as used by Allen, Qian, Tu, and Yu (2015). The scope of our paper,
however, compels us to use information contained in announcements of entrusted loans for
several reasons. First, announcements are more likely to disclose names of the banks than
annual reports. Of all the transactions in our sample, most facilitating trustees are identified
by announcements except 52 banks and one nonbank trustee we identify with annual reports.
Since our focus is on the role of banks in transacting entrusted loans, the bank information
is of vital importance. Second, for a particular transaction, annual reports may contain
information about the amount of outstanding entrusted loans, instead of the amount of
newly originated loans. For example, in a 2010 announcement of “Shandong Chenming
Paper Holdings Limited,” the total amount of entrusted loans worth 500 million RMB was
recorded; after this loan transaction, there were no additional entrusted loans made in 2010
and 2011 by this company and thus there were no more announcements from the company
during this period. In both 2010 and 2011 annual reports of the same company, it listed
entrusted loans to its subsidiary “Jiangxi Chenming Paper Holdings Limited” with the total
amount of 500 million RMB, because the outstanding loans had maturity dates beyond 2011.
Without the knowledge of maturity dates, one would have double counted the number of
actual transactions as well as the total amount of newly issued loans.

                                       IV. Empirical findings

  In this section we undertake the task of establishing evidence of the risk-taking behavior
of Chinese banks in channeling entrusted loans during the period of monetary contractions.
With our constructed micro dataset, we use two instruments to identify such a risk-taking
  10In   2015, China had 3 policy banks, 5 state-owned banks, 12 joint-stock banks, 120 local banks, and 75
foreign banks. Policy banks are simply the arms of the PBC for carrying out monetary policy operations
and thus are treated as part of the central bank, not commercial banks.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                    16

behavior. One instrument is the data on entrusted lending facilitated by nonbank trustees
in our difference-in-difference approach. The other instrument is the data on entrusted
lending to the risky industry. The risky industry is identified according to Number 111
of the “2010 Manufacturing Industry Announcement” issued by the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology. The industry includes real estate, iron, steel, coke, ferroalloy,
calcium carbide, aluminum, copper smelting, lead smelting, zinc smelting, cement, glass,
paper, alcohol, monosodium glutamate, citric acid, tanning, dyeing, and chemical fiber—a
total of 19 industries.
  We accomplish the task by answering the following questions sequentially. (1) Relative to
nonbank trustees, did banks play an important role in entrusted lending during the period of
monetary tightening? (2) What type of banks, small or large, was more likely to be engaged
in facilitating entrusted loans? and (3) What type of loans, risky or non-risky, did such banks
tend to facilitate? Prior to answering these questions, we first document the relationships
among risky entrusted loans, their maturities, and their interest rates. These relationships
are essential to one of the assumptions in our theoretic model developed in Section VI.

IV.1. Maturities and lending rates of entrusted loans. Each loan transaction is uniquely
determined by a quadruple index s = (t, i, b, j), where t represents the year in which the
transaction takes place, i the loan recipient (borrower or borrowing firm), b the bank or
nonbank trustee that facilitates the loan, and j the loan originator (lender or lending firm).
The loan amount is thus denoted by Ss .11 Since the risky characteristic concerns borrowers
only, the characteristics related to j (lending firms) are not the subject of this paper and
thus left to the residuals of our various regressions. As a first step, we run the following
regression:
                              ss = α + αt + αm ms + αr I (Riskyi ) + εs ,                                (1)

where s is the interest rate spread between the loan rate and the 7-day CHIBOR rate
(measuring the degree of riskiness of each loan), m is the loan maturity, αt controls for the
time fixed effect, and I (Riskyi ) returns 1 if the borrower is in the risky industry and 0
otherwise. The control variable vector αt includes gt−1 (annual change in M2 from the end
of t − 2 and the end of t − 1), GDPt−1 , (annual change in GDP from the end of t − 2 and the
end of t − 1), and Inft−1 (annual change in the general price level from the end of t − 2 and
  11For   our transaction-based data, it is not uncommon that a borrower utilizes an entrusted loan only once
for the whole sample or that a borrower utilizes two or more entrusted loans in a distant interval of many
years.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                       17

the end of t − 1). The GDP measure is real GDP measured by value added. The inflation
series is the GDP deflator; we have experimented with other inflation series as in Nakamura,
Steinsson, and Liu (2014) and Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2015) but with almost
identical results for all our empirical findings.
  After controlling for loan maturities (αm ms ), the coefficient αr reflects the interest rate
spread between risky and non-risky lending rates.12 According to the estimates reported
in Table 4, additional one-year maturity reduces the lending rate spread over the 7-day
CHIBOR rate by 46 basis points. After we control for maturities, the spread between risky
and non-risky lending rates is 1.28% annually. The significantly estimated coefficient, αm ,
indicates that the longer the maturity is, the less risky entrusted lending is. This is a unique
feature of Chinese entrusted loans that underlies our theoretical model’s assumption that
risky assets have a shorter duration than safe loans.

                            Table 4. Estimated results of regression (1)

                           Explanatory variable                                    Coefficient     (Std. Err.)
                                   ms : αm                                         −.0384%∗∗∗       (.0077%)
                               I (Riskyi ) : αr                                     1.276%  ∗∗∗
                                                                                                     (.300%)
   Impact of a one-year longer maturity on the spread: 12 ∗ αm                     −0.461%∗∗∗        pv=0.00
 The estimate spread between risky and non-risky loan rates: αr                     1.276%∗∗∗        pv=0.00
Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
significance level. The abbreviation “pv” stands for p-value.


IV.2. Role of banks in entrusted lending. In this section we answer the question of
whether banks played an important role in overall entrusted lending during the period of
monetary tightening. To determine such a role of banks, we use the data of entrusted loans
facilitated by nonbank trustees as an instrument. This instrument is necessary for us to
identify banks’ behavior in entrusted loans conditional on changes in monetary policy. The
following regression involves double interactions between monetary policy and the type of
trustees:
                  log Ss = α + αt + αg gt−1 + β b gt−1 I (Bankb ) + Controlb + εs ,                         (2)
  12Except   for the characteristic of whether the lending to the borrowing firm is risky, there is no need to
control for borrowers’ other characteristics because they do not affect the spread. As the interest rate spread,
labeled by s, captures the degree of riskiness as well as the term premium, what should be controlled for are
the maturity and other time fixed effects captured by αt .
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                     18

where I (Bankb ) controls for the type of trustees and αt , as defined in Section IV.1, is
a vector of variables controlling for aggregate time fixed effects other than the effect of
monetary policy and captures, for example, business-cycle effects. The variable I (Bankb )
returns 1 if the trustee is a bank and 0 otherwise.13 The additional control variable Controlb
is I (Bankb ).
  Following Kashyap and Stein (2000), we use the double-interaction term to capture bank’s
willingness to be engaged in entrusted lending.14 Table 5 reports the ordinary least squares
results of regression (2) for all the coefficients (except those of control variables). The
coefficient β b of the double-interaction term gt−1 I (Bankb ) captures how much of entrusted
lending is facilitated by banks in addition to the lending channeled by nonbank trustees
when M2 growth changes. From the table one can see that this marginal effect is estimated
to be negative and the estimate is highly significant. The negative sign means that monetary
tightening (a fall in M2 growth) increases, not decreases, entrusted lending.

                            Table 5. Estimated results of regression (2)

                           Explanatory variable                      Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                                   gt−1 : αg                             1.85          (2.77)
                            gt−1 I (Bankb ) : β b                      −6.05∗∗         (2.86)
                Impact of money growth via NBTs: αg                      1.85         pv=0.51
             Impact of money growth via banks: αg + β b               −4.20∗∗∗        pv=0.00
Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
significance level. NBTs stands for nonbank trustees. The abbreviation “pv” stands for
p-value.

  The coefficient αg captures the impact of monetary tightening on entrusted loans facilitated
by nonbank trustees. The positive value indicates that the amount of entrusted lending
facilitated nonbank trustees decreases in response to a fall in M2 growth, reflecting the
impact of monetary contractions on the overall economy. Although this term is statistically
insignificant, it is necessary for our difference-in-difference approach to controlling for the
effect of nonbank trustees in order to capture the effect of banks. According to the estimates
  13Since   we do not quantify, at this point, any effect of borrowers on entrusted loans, there is no need to
control for borrowers’ characteristics, which are simply captured by εs . In Sections IV.3 and IV.5 we expand
our analysis by explicitly controlling for borrowers’ characteristics.
  14Kashyap and Stein (2000) do not use the bank dummy as we do, but instead use the balance-sheet

information to identify factors that affect banks’ willingness to supply loans.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                               19

in Table 5, the estimated impact of a one-percentage-point decline in M2 growth increases
the amount of entrusted lending channeled by banks by 4.20% and this estimate is highly
significant. This sharply estimated result indicates that banks played a different role from
nonbank trustees in channeling entrusted loans in 2007-2013.

IV.3. Types of banks. Given the estimated differences between banks and nonbank trustees
in channeling entrusted loans in the face of monetary policy changes, we expand the difference-
in-difference regression by taking into account different roles played by different types of
banks as

  log Ss = α + αt + αs I (Smallb ) + α` I (Largeb ) + αg gt−1

                                 + β s gt−1 I (Smallb ) + β ` gt−1 I (Largeb ) + Controlb + εs , (3)

where I (Smallb ) returns 1 if the trustee is a small bank and 0 otherwise; I (Largeb ) returns
1 if the trustee is a large bank and 0 otherwise. Other control variables, denoted by Controlb ,
are listed in Table 9.
                         Table 6. Estimated results of regression (3)

                         Explanatory variable                    Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                               gt−1 : αg                              1.92        (2.78)
                         gt−1 I (Largeb ) : β `                     −4.63         (3.10)
                         gt−1 I (Smallb ) : β s                    −7.15∗∗        (2.98)
             Impact of money growth via NBTs: αg                      1.92       pv=0.48
        Impact of money growth via large banks: αg + β `            −2.71        pv=0.12
        Impact of money growth via small banks: αg + β s           −5.23∗∗∗      pv=0.00
Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
significance level. NBTs stands for nonbank trustees. The abbreviation “pv” stands for
p-value.

  Table 6 reports the estimated results, which are consistent with the previous results. The
estimate of αg is similar to that in Table 5. As expected, the estimated coefficients for the
two double-interaction terms

                              gt−1 I (Largeb ) and gt−1 I (Smallb )

sandwich the estimated double-interaction coefficient reported in Table 5 for all banks (−4.63
> −6.05 > −7.15). The statistical significance of the estimate for all banks in Table 5 comes
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                            20

from small banks as reported in Table 6. Similarly, the significant impact of monetary
changes on entrusted lending via all banks stems from small banks as well. According to
Table 6, a one-percentage-point fall in M2 growth has a much stronger effect on entrusted
loans via small banks than those via large banks in both magnitude and significance: en-
trusted lending via small banks increases by 5.23% with a less than 1% significance level
while entrusted lending via large banks increases by only 2.71%, which is statistically in-
significant. M2 growth also has an insignificant impact on entrusted lending facilitated by
nonbank trustees. When monetary policy contracts, therefore, small banks’ behavior differs
quantitatively from nonbank trustees as well as large banks. This evidence is consistent
with evidence of why large banks differ from small banks on their balance-sheet behavior as
provided in Section V.

IV.4. Types of loans. In the preceding analysis we use the data on nonbank trustees as
an instrument to effectively identify banks’ willingness to facilitate entrusted loans. In this
section we use the data on entrusted lending to the risky industry as another instrument
to identify banks’ risk-taking behavior, which involve triple interactions in the following
regression.

  log Ss = α + αt + αsec + αg gt−1 + β b gt−1 I (Bankb ) + γ n gt−1 I (Riskyi )

                                          + γ b gt−1 I (Bankb ) I (Riskyi ) + Controlib + εs , (4)

where I (Riskyi ) returns 1 if the borrower is in the risky industry and 0 otherwise, αsec
controls for borrowers’ characteristics at the industry level, and additional control variables,
denoted by Controlib , are listed in Table 9. Because the risky character is identified at the
industry level according to the 2010 announcement issued by the Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology, we need to control for other borrower characteristics at the industry
level such as the size, market power (monopoly), capital intensity (labor share), and share of
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in each industry. The control variable αsec has 46 dummies
representing 46 classified industries.
  Why do we use the industry risk represented by I (Riskyi ), not firm-specific risks, as
an instrument to identify the riskiness of entrusted lending? Firm-specific risks can be
diversified by banks, but the industry-level risk is non-diversifiable and it is this kind of risk
that Chinese policymakers care about and view as a serious threat to the banking system.
A series of laws and regulations aim at curtailing the industry-level risk, which is specifically
defined by the law.
                     WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                   21

     With the data on risky entrusted lending as an instrument, the triple-interaction term
plays a crucial role in isolating the effect of banks’ penchant for channeling risky loans when
monetary policy changes. If the triple-interaction term

                                          gt−1 I (Bankb ) I (Riskyi )

were left out of regression (4), the double-interaction term gt−1 I (Riskyi ) would capture the
effect of monetary policy changes on risky entrusted borrowing no matter who is the trustee.
After this double-interaction term is controlled for, the above triple-interaction term helps
isolate the effect of monetary tightening on banks’ willingness to channel risky entrusted
lending.15 Table 7 reports the results consistent with the findings reported in Tables 5 and
6.
                               Table 7. Estimated results of regression (4)
                            Explanatory variable                                 Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                                   gt−1 : αg                                       −5.52∗         (2.88)
                             gt−1 I (Riskyi ) : γ n                                5.66 ∗∗
                                                                                                  (2.42)
                             gt−1 I (Bankb ) : β b                                  2.95          (2.68)
                       gt−1 I (Bankb ) I (Riskyi ) : γ b                          −4.01∗∗         (1.67)
  Impact of money growth on risky loans via NBTs: αg + γ n                          0.14         pv=0.96
Impact of money growth on risky loans via banks: αg + β b + γ b                   −6.58∗∗∗       pv=0.00
Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
significance level. NBTs stands for nonbank trustees. The abbreviation “pv” stands for
p-value.

     The estimate of αg indicates that a one-percentage-point fall in M2 growth increases
non-risky entrusted lending by nonbank trustees by 5.52% with only the 10% significance
level. With the presence of triple interactions, the sum of αg and the double-interaction
term gt−1 I (Riskyi ) measures the impact of monetary policy changes on risky entrusted
lending channeled by nonbank trustees, which is estimated to be insignificant. By contrast,
the impact of monetary policy changes on risky entrusted lending channeled by banks is
estimated to be very strong in both magnitude and significance; the estimate indicates that
a one-percentage-point decline in M2 growth leads to a 6.58% increase of risky entrusted
lending with a less than 1% significance level. The instrument of the data on risky entrusted
     15See   a similar methodology of Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014) in identifying banks’ risk-
taking behavior.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                              22

loans helps identify the difference between banks and nonbank trustees in facilitating risky
entrusted loans and determine the magnitude and significance of risky loans channeled by
banks in response to monetary contractions.

IV.5. Types of loans interacting with types of banks. Since the share of the amount
of risky entrusted lending facilitated by nonbank trustees in total risky entrusted loans was
only 23.3% during our sample period of 2007-2013, it is not surprising that the impact
of monetary policy changes on these loans is estimated to be insignificant. The remaining
share was channeled by commercial banks; among them, small banks funneled risky entrusted
lending as much as large banks did (37.2% vs. 39.5%). Now that Section IV.4 establishes
evidence that banks were principally responsible for channeling more risky entrusted loans
when money growth slowed, a natural question is whether small banks behave differently
from large banks as we find in Section IV.3. To answer this question, we expand the triple-
interaction regression (4) by separating large and small banks as follows:


  log Ss = α + αt + αsec + αg gt−1 + β s gt−1 I (Smallb ) + β ` gt−1 I (Largeb )

     + γ n gt−1 I (Riskyi ) + γ s gt−1 I (Smallb ) I (Riskyi ) + γ ` gt−1 I (Largeb ) I (Riskyi )

                                                                              + Controlib + εs , (5)

where additional control variables Controlib are listed in Table 9. Regression (5) allows the
interactions between types of loans and types of banks and is thus our benchmark regression
for this paper.
  The estimated results for nonbank trustees, as reported in Table 8, remain the same. That
is, nonbank trustees tend to facilitate non-risky, rather than risky, entrusted lending during
the period of monetary slowdown. Although risky entrusted lending channeled by both large
and small banks increases in response to monetary contractions, small banks tend to do more
than large banks in both magnitude and significance. According to the estimates reported
in Table 8, a one-percentage-point drop in M2 growth has the impact of a 7.57% increase in
risky entrusted lending funneled by small banks and the significance level of the estimate is
0.002%, while risky entrusted lending channeled by large banks is estimated to increase by
5.28% increase with the 3% significance level. The significantly estimated impact for banks
as a whole, reported in Table 7, is between these two estimates (−5.28 > −6.58 > −7.57).
Consistent with the results reported in Table 6, the effect on risky lending via small banks
is stronger than that via large banks in both magnitude and significance.
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                              23

                         Table 8. Estimated results of regression (5)

                         Explanatory variable                              Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                               gt−1 : αg                                    −5.21∗             (2.87)
                         gt−1 I (Riskyi ) : γ n                              5.25∗∗            (2.39)
                         gt−1 I (Largeb ) : β `                                 2.63           (2.85)
                         gt−1 I (Smallb ) : β s                                 2.66           (2.82)
                   gt−1 I (Largeb ) I (Riskyi ) : γ `                       −2.70∗             (1.69)
                   gt−1 I (Smallb ) I (Riskyi ) : γ s                       −5.02   ∗∗∗
                                                                                               (1.81)
     Impact of money growth on risky loans via NBTs: αg + γ n                   0.04          pv=0.99
Impact of money growth on risky loans via large banks: αg + β ` + γ `       −5.28∗∗           pv=0.03
Impact of money growth on risky loans via small banks: αg + β s + γ s       −7.57∗∗∗          pv=0.00
 Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
 significance level. NBTs stands for nonbank trustees. The abbreviation “pv” stands for
 p-value.

                          Table 9. Relevant effects to be controlled

                      Control variable                           Regression
                                                        (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
              GDPt−1 : macroeconomic effect             X   X   X      X    X      X      X
               Inft−1 : macroeconomic effect            X   X   X      X    X      X      X
                 I (Bankb ): trustee type               X       X
                 I (Largeb ): trustee type                  X          X                  X
                 I (Smallb ): trustee type                  X          X           X      X
                I (Riskyi ): borrower type                      X      X    X      X      X
                 αsec : industry fixed effect                   X      X    X      X      X
        I (Riskyi ) I (Bankb ): double interactions             X
        I (Riskyi ) I (Largeb ): double interactions                   X                  X
        I (Riskyi ) I (Smallb ): double interactions                   X           X      X
 Note. “X” indicates that the corresponding fixed effect is included. Regression (5) is the
 benchmark regression.


 IV.6. Further robustness analysis. In the preceding sections we show that the data on
 entrusted lending facilitated by nonbank trustees serve as a powerful instrument to help
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                               24

identify banks’ behavior. It is therefore necessary to provide a careful analysis of the quan-
titative importance of this instrument. A nonbank trustee is an ideal trustee as it is the
kind of trustee as intended by the law (i.e., the PBC’s 2000 guidelines on entrusted lending).
Nonbank trustees face no deposit withdrawal risks and bear no credit risks as commercial
banks do. Consequently, the banking regulations we have discussed thus far do not apply
to these trustees. In this sense nonbank trustees act truly as middlemen. Entrusted loans
facilitated by nonbank trustees capture demand from borrowers and supply from lenders.
Controlling for these data with the difference-in-difference approach, therefore, enables us to
identify banks’ willingness to engage in entrusted lending.
  A natural question is what the estimated results would indicate if we exclude from the
sample the transactions facilitated by nonbank trustees. With this exclusion, the effective
sample size is reduced to 650 and the triple-interaction regression represented by (4) is
reduced to the following double-interaction regression:

            log Ss = α + αt + αsec + αg gt−1 + γ r gt−1 I (Riskyi ) + Controli + εs ,            (6)

where an additional control variable Controli is listed in Table 9. The estimated results are
reported in Table 10.

                        Table 10. Estimated results of regression (6)
                        Explanatory variable                         Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                              gt−1 : αg                                −2.31            (1.56)
                        gt−1 I (Riskyi ) : γ r                          0.93            (2.01)
   Impact of money growth on non-risky loans via banks: αg             −2.31        pv=0.14
   Impact of money growth on risky loans via banks: αg + γ r            -1.38       pv=0.41
Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
significance level. NBTs stands for nonbank trustees. The abbreviation “pv” stands for
p-value.

  As one can see from Table 10, all the estimates of the impact of monetary policy changes on
entrusted loans channeled by banks, risky or not, have a small magnitude and are statistically
insignificant. The absence of the nonbank-trustee instrument creates uninformative results.
Without the nonbank-trustee instrument, one may still use the loans channeled by large
banks as an instrument to identify small banks’ risk-taking behavior as in the following
regression similar to the triple-interaction benchmark regression (5) but without the data on
                   WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                 25

    entrusted loans facilitated by nonbank trustees:

      log Ss = α + αt + αsec + αg gt−1 + β s gt−1 I (Smallb ) + γ ` gt−1 I (Riskyi )

                                               + γ s gt−1 I (Smallb ) I (Riskyi ) + Controlib + εs , (7)

    where additional control variables Controlib are listed in Table 9. The estimated results are
    reported in Table 7.

                             Table 11. Estimated results of regression (7)

                           Explanatory variable                               Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                                 gt−1 : αg                                       -1.93         (1.98)
                           gt−1 I (Riskyi ) : γ `                                 1.70         (2.08)
                           gt−1 I (Smallb ) : β s                                -0.59         (1.93)
                    gt−1 I (Smallb ) I (Riskyi ) : γ s                          −2.22∗∗        (1.08)
   Impact of money growth on non-risky loans via large banks: αg                 −1.93        pv=0.33
  Impact of money growth on risky loans via large banks: αg + γ `                -0.23        pv=0.91
                                                                                         ∗∗
Impact of money growth on risky loans via small banks: αg + β s + γ s           −4.74         pv=0.02
    Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
    significance level. The abbreviation “pv” stands for p-value.

      One can see from Table 7 that the large-bank instrument helps identify the risk-taking
    behavior of small banks. Indeed, the impact of monetary policy changes on risky entrusted
    loans funneled by small banks is estimated to be −4.74% with the 5% significance level.
    But both magnitude and significance are considerably underestimated when compared to
    the results in Table 8. Moreover, since the lack of the nonbank-trustee instrument makes
    it difficult, if not impossible, to identify large banks’ behavior, the estimate of the impact
    of monetary policy changes on risky entrusted loans channeled by large banks has a minute
    value (−0.23) without any statistical significance. These analyses demonstrate the practical
    and quantitative importance of using the data of entrusted loans facilitated by nonbank
    trustees as an instrument to identify the behavior of banks, large or small.
      One of the most important transmission features of China’s monetary policy is the un-
    equivocal effect of M2 supply on bank loans and thus on bank deposits. As shown in Figure 1,
    M2 growth and deposit growth move in tandem. By changing monetary policy through con-
    trol of M2 growth, the government effectively controlled growth of the banking system at
    least prior to 2014. Indeed, the correlation between M2 and deposit growth rates is as high
                      WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                 26

     as 0.93 during the period of 2007-2013 and 0.96 during the period of 2010-2013. When de-
     posit growth slows down, banks’ activities on balance sheet, such as growth in traditional
     bank loans, would slow down accordingly. Banks would have an incentive to engage in off-
     balance-sheet activities. To see whether our results hold for bank deposits in place of M2,
     we run the following triple-interaction regression equivalent to the benchmark regression (5)
     except that M2 growth is now replaced by deposit growth:

        log Ss = α + αt + αsec + αd dt−1 + β s dt−1 I (Smallb ) + β ` dt−1 I (Largeb )

           + γ n dt−1 I (Riskyi ) + γ s dt−1 I (Smallb ) I (Riskyi ) + γ ` dt−1 I (Largeb ) I (Riskyi )

                                                                                    + Controlib + εs , (8)

     where dt−1 represents the growth rate of deposits at t − 1 (annual change from the end of
     t − 2 to the end of t − 1) and additional control variables, denoted by Controlib , are listed in
     Table 9.
                              Table 12. Estimated results of regression (8)

                          Explanatory variable                                   Coefficient (Std. Err.)
                                 dt−1 : αd                                         −5.31∗         (2.71)
                           dt−1 I (Riskyi ) : γ n                                   5.08∗∗        (2.27)
                           dt−1 I (Largeb ) : β `                                    2.80         (2.67)
                           dt−1 I (Smallb ) : β s                                    2.73         (2.65)
                     dt−1 I (Largeb ) I (Riskyi ) : γ `                            −2.74    ∗
                                                                                                  (1.68)
                     dt−1 I (Smallb ) I (Riskyi ) : γ s                           −5.01∗∗∗        (1.79)
     Impact of deposit growth on risky loans via NBTs: αd + γ n                     -0.23        pv=0.92
Impact of deposit growth on risky loans via large banks: αd + β ` + γ `            −5.25∗∗       pv=0.03
Impact of deposit growth on risky loans via small banks: αd + β s + γ s           −7.59∗∗∗       pv=0.00
     Note. * represents the 10% significance level, ** the 5% significance level, and *** the 1%
     significance level. NBTs stands for nonbank trustees. The abbreviation “pv” stands for
     p-value.

        The estimated results in Table 12 are very similar to those in Table 8. These robust
     findings, reflecting the close relationship between M2 growth and deposit growth in China,
     continue to show the difference between large and small banks in channeling risky entrusted
     loans. Such a behavioral difference, as discussed in Section V, is not due to the size differ-
     ence between large and small banks in their assets or equities, but stems from institutional
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                         27

asymmetry in several important aspects. First, large banks enjoy implicit government guar-
antees on their bank loans. Second, large banks, being state-owned, are a primary funding
source for non-financial SOEs and other large firms of strategic importance to the govern-
ment. Third, as a result, large banks have a stable and broad customer relationship with
both households and firms so that they encounter little difficulty in acquiring additional
deposits to weather unexpected deposit shortfalls. These advantages are hardly enjoyed by
small banks. Such institutional asymmetry gives small banks, not large banks, a strong
incentive to bring their risk-taking behavior off balance sheet as found in this section into
their balance-sheet activity. In Section V we provide the relevant institutional background
as well as further evidence that small banks were prone to bring the risk off balance sheet
into the balance sheet in the form of nonloan investment while there is no such evidence for
large banks. In Section VI we build a theory for a coherent explanation of such risk-taking
behavior of small banks in the context of China’s unique institutional background.

                             V. Institutional asymmetry

  In this section we provide a narrative of China’s institutional background and discuss the
unique features of China’s banking system that are pertinent to our paper.

V.1. The usual suspects. Obvious candidates for explaining the difference in risk-taking
behavior between large and small banks relate to balance sheet information that reveals how
banks respond to monetary and regulatory policies. The monetary and regulatory authorities
in China had in place three major regulations on all commercial banks during 2007-2013:
capital requirement, reserve requirement, and LDR requirement. We provide evidence on
whether there was a notable difference between large and small banks in meeting each of the
three requirements.
  First, both large and small banks met the capital requirement by a comfortable margin as
shown in Table 13. One can see from the table that the difference in capital adequacy ratios
between large and small banks was inconsequential and that both their capital ratios were
far above the capital requirement ratio of 8%.
  Second, small banks had a considerably higher excess reserve ratio than large banks. The
numbers reported in Table 13 are not available in any electronic data format. We read the
annual report of each commercial bank in a pdf file downloaded from WIND (each pdf file
has over-100 pages) and find the numbers for excess reserves and total deposits in the chapter
called “Notes of Financial Statement.” We compute the excess reserve ratio for each bank
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                28

        Table 13. Capital adequacy ratios, excess reserve ratios, and LDRs across
        types of banks and samples

Description       Capital adequacy ratio         Excess reserve ratio         Loan-to-deport ratio
                  2007-2013    2010-2013       2007-2013 2010-2013           2007-2013 2010-2013
Large banks        12.60%        12.87%           1.95%        1.60%          64.03%        66.22%
Small banks        11.88%        12.30%           4.47%        3.17%          70.82%        67.89%
   Overall         12.35%        12.65%           2.51%        2.01%          66.22%        66.80%
Note. Each reported ratio is weighted by bank assets. The calculation is based on the
balance-sheet information of all commercial banks reported by Bankscope and WIND.
Capital adequacy ratios and LDRs are from Bankscope and excess reserve ratios are from
WIND.

in every year, take a weighted average of these ratios for all the banks within the group
(the large or small type) in each year, and then average these ratios across years. As clearly
shown in Table 13, small banks, like large banks, had no problem managing their reserves
and the reported excess reserve ratios indicate that small banks had more cushion than large
banks in meeting the reserve requirement.
  Third, both large and small banks met the LDR requirement of 75% and the difference in
LDR between large and small banks became smaller over time.16 For the period of monetary
tightening (2010-2013), the difference almost did not exist. The issue for banks is not the
LDR ceiling per se, but rather the risk of hitting the ceiling due to unexpected deposit
shortfalls. Such a risk is an important ingredient in our theory developed in Section VI.
  In summary, all banks large or small met the three major policy requirements and in
this respect there is no difference between large and small banks. It is therefore not these
policies per se that helped explain the robust empirical findings of how small banks behaved
differently from large banks in channeling entrusted loans. The aforementioned obvious
balance-sheet candidates are unlikely to be a major explanation of asymmetric responses of
small and large banks to monetary policy changes in their risk-taking behavior. A less obvious
candidate for explanation is banks’ ability to cope with the pressures of deposit shortfalls,
  16Since   only the PBC (not central banks in many other countries) requires a bank to report the LDR
and since Bankscope collects variables that are common across countries, a direct measure of the LDR is
not provided by Bankscope. We construct this measure as the ratio of “gross loans” to “total customer
deposits.” For a listed bank, we verify this measure with the reported LDR published by the bank’s annual
report and they match. The published ratio must comply with the PBC’s requirement by law.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                           29

which has been an intensive topic within the Chinese policy circle. This is a unique feature of
China’s banking system and has yet to be thoroughly analyzed by researchers. As discussed
in the following sections, it is this institutional detail that helps explain the difference in
risk-taking behavior between large and small banks.


V.2. Banking regulations against the macroeconomic background. Bank loans in
China are a major source of financing to fund economic activities; changes in bank loans are
largely influenced by monetary policy. As shown in Figure 1, the growth rates of M2 and
total bank loans moved in tandem, reflecting the unique characteristic of China’s monetary
policy of controlling bank lending by adjusting growth of monetary aggregates.
  In response to the 2008 global financial crisis, the Chinese government injected money
supply into the banking system in late 2008 and early 2009 in which growth in M2 growth
doubled and so did growth in bank loans. For fears of rising inflation, the PBC began to
tighten money supply and bank lending toward the end of 2009. As a result of monetary
tightening, growth in bank loans and deposits fell steadily since 2009. To counter the rapid
slowdown in bank loans, shadow banking activities sprang up (Figure 2). Entrusted lending
in particular has become the second largest financing source of loans after traditional bank
lending. The volume of newly originated entrusted loans reached its climax in 2013. In that
year, total shadow lending was equivalent to nearly 34% of total social financing excluding
stocks and bonds, and the amount of entrusted lending accounted for nearly 49% of total
shadow lending.17
  Both monetary tightening and a series of regulatory changes contributed to the rapid
rise of China’s shadow banking and to the observed opposite movements in bank loans and
entrusted loans. Loans between nonfinancial firms, which define the concept of entrusted
lending, were practiced in China at the outset of advanced economic reforms in the early
1990s but did not really blossom until after 2009. In 1996 the PBC issued “General Rules
for Loans” that allowed entrusted lending. In 2000 the PBC provided formal operational
guidelines for commercial banks to be trustees of entrusted loans in its May (No. 100)
“Notice on Issues Related to Practices of Commercial Banks in Entrusted Lending.” The
key requirement in these guidelines was the mandatory participation of financial institutions
acting as a trustee to facilitate loan transactions between the two nonfinancial firms. This
regulation required the participating financial institution to verify that all the paperwork

  17Total   shadow lending is the sum of entrusted loans, trusted loans, and bank acceptances.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                     30

met various legal forms and requirements and encouraged financial institutions to use their
specialty in monitoring and screening technology to help curtail nonperforming or risky loans.
  As found by our empirical analysis in Section IV, although entrusted loans facilitated by
nonbank trustees tended to be safe, those channeled by banks ended up in the real estate and
overcapacity industries. The incentive for banks to engage in funneling risky loans stemmed
from a series of regulatory changes and restrictions imposed on banks. In 2006 the State
Council, concerned with China’s real-estate and overcapacity industry, issued a notice to
accelerate the restructuring process of the risky industry. The CBRC took concrete steps in
2010 to curtail expansion of traditional credits from the banking sector to the risky industry.
Subsequently, in 2013 the State Council issued an order that strictly prohibited banks from
providing new credits to the risky industry.
  On top of these regulations, the PBC imposed an additional restriction on traditional
loans made by banks. In as early as 1994 the PBC established a 75% ceiling on the ratio
of traditional loans to total bank deposits for the entire banking system for the purpose of
curbing risk-taking behavior and reducing the potential systemic risk. This ceiling was not
credibly enforced until the late 2000s. In 2011, through the CARPAL system (the Chinese
version of Basel III), the PBC began to monitor the LDR during the course of the year
(quarterly) rather than at the end of the year.

V.3. The last-minute rush for deposits by small banks. As M2 growth began to slow
down in late 2009, the pressure of unexpected deposit shortfalls against the LDR ceiling
began to build up, that is, banks were more vulnerable to deposit withdrawal risks.18 While
the LDR regulation applied to all banks, small banks had disadvantages in attracting ad-
ditional deposits to meet shortfalls, especially around the time when the LDR was closely
monitored by the PBC at the end of the quarter. In fact, the government uses the phrase
“the last-minute rush (chongshidian in Chinese)” to refer to the last-minute actions taken
by banks to pay high prices to artificially increase temporary deposits in order to recoup
deposit shortfalls when the monitoring time is near.19
  In practice, the last-minute rush was more relevant to small banks than large banks. State-
owned large banks, with branches in almost every corner of the country and with implicit

  18For   detailed discussions of such risks, see the PBC’s various “Financial Stability Reports” published in
the early 2010s.
   19See the proclamation “Number 236 Notice on Strengthening Commercial Banks Deposit Stability Man-

agement” jointly announced on 12 September 2014 by the CBRC, the Ministry of Finance, and the PBC.
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                         31

guarantees from the central government, had advantages of attracting household deposits on
a broad basis at low costs. Moreover, because nonfinancial SOEs as well as nonfinancial large
non-SOE firms had easy and preferential access to loans made by the large banks (Chang,
Chen, Waggoner, and Zha, 2015), these firms in return were willing to place additional
deposits in large banks when requested by these banks. The large banks’ long-standing
customer relationships with a broad base of firms and households enabled them to weather
deposit shortages without much cost.
  These advantages were hardly enjoyed by small banks, which often had relationships with
only local and small firms and whose customer base for deposits was not nearly as broad and
stable. As a result, when the deposit monitoring time came near, small banks had to resort
to higher prices for additional deposits by either manipulating the timing of expirations of
the WMP products or offering a much higher deposit rate than the legal ceiling imposed by
the PBC. The twin problem of deposit shortfalls and high costs for small banks to attract
deposits, as well as other related issues, has been discussed extensively in various Chinese
financial newspapers and some Chinese academic articles (Ba, Yan, and Wang, 2013, for
example).



V.4. The asset side of banks’ balance sheet. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2,
the share of entrusted loans in the sum of entrusted lending and bank lending tripled during
the monetary tightening period. According to our micro data, more than 60% of the total
amount of entrusted loans was channeled to the risky industry between 2007 and 2013; out
of these risky entrusted loans, 77% was facilitated by commercial banks. How such risky
entrusted lending was connected with the asset side of the bank’s balance sheet is a focus of
this section.
  As early as 28 May 2010, the PBC and CBRC issued a joint new regulation, called ”Notice
on Financial Services to Further Support Energy Saving and Eliminate Backward-Production
Capacity,” to ensure “the soundness of the banking system.” The main purpose of this new
regulation was to reinforce the earlier laws of prohibiting banks from originating new bank
loans to the risky industry. While this and earlier laws made traditional bank loans safe, they
created their own unforeseen problem. Because small banks faced much higher costs than
large banks, implicit or explicit, in attracting deposits to cope with the LDR regulation risk,
small banks had an incentive to reduce bank loans that were subject to the LDR regulation
and increase nonloan investment that was not subject to the same regulation.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                               32

  The LDR regulation risk is a unique institutional characteristic of China because the LDR
ceiling is set arbitrarily by the PBC. On the asset side of banks’ balance sheet, there is one
major entry called “account-receivable investment (ARI),” which is an asset not counted
as part of bank loans. As our theory in Section VI predicts, this nonloan investment can
become an effective device for small banks to circumvent both regulations simultaneously:
the LDR ceiling and the safe-loan law. But how was ARI on banks’ balance sheet related
to entrusted loans off balance sheet? When small banks were engaged in risky entrusted
lending during the period of 2007-2013, they purchased the beneficiary rights of those loans
(entrusted rights), which were recorded in the category of ARI. This nonloan investment
category, even though on the asset side of bank’s balance sheet, was nonetheless immune
from both LDR and safe-loan regulations and thus gave small banks an incentive to funnel
risky entrusted loans by either purchasing entrusted rights or offering implicit guarantees to
such loans.

       Table 14. Correlation between new entrusted loans (L ) channeled by banks
       and changes in ARI for two different samples.

       Description             2007-2013 Sample                     2010-2013 Sample
                          Small banks     Large banks           Small banks     Large banks
    Corr (∆ARI, L )       .467∗∗∗ (.001) -.092 (.617)          .495∗∗∗ (.007)   .025 (.929)
           ARI
                ,L        .386∗∗∗ (.010) -.121 (.509)           .330∗ (.087)
                      
   Corr ∆ ARI+B                                                                 .008 (.978)
Note. The symbol “B” stands for traditional bank loans. The numbers in parentheses
represent p-values.


  Chinese small banks had a penchant for partaking in risky loan activities because their
expected returns were higher than those on non-risky loans (see Table 19 in Section VI.5);
as we find in our own empirical study, they were indeed engaged in funneling risky entrusted
loans during the period of monetary tightening, more so than large banks. The sharp contrast
of small banks to large banks in their risk-taking behavior is manifested by the findings
presented in Table 14, which reports the correlations of entrusted loans channeled by banks
off balance sheet and nonloan investment on balance sheet. For both samples of 2007-
2013 and 2010-2013, the correlation between new entrusted loans and changes in ARI is
significantly positive for small banks, while the same correlation is statistically insignificant
                                                     ARI
for large banks. This result holds for changes in   ARI+B
                                                          .   For large banks, the same correlations
are either close to zero or negative without statistical significance.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                            33

       Table 15. Correlation between new risky entrusted loans (L r ) channeled by
       banks and changes in ARI for two different samples.

       Description              2007-2013 Sample                   2010-2013 Sample
                            Small banks     Large banks        Small banks      Large banks
    Corr (∆ARI, L r )       .433∗∗∗ (.003) -.058 (.754)        .501∗∗∗ (.002)    .176 (.459)
           ARI
                ,L          .367∗∗ (.014)                      .362∗∗ (.033)
                      r
                        
   Corr ∆ ARI+B                             -.088 (.631)                         .187 (.430)
Note. The symbol “B” stands for traditional bank loans. The numbers in parentheses
represent p-values.



                                                  Loans                  Regulation
           Safe-loan regulation
                                               (traditional)             on the LDR




                Lenders                                               Risky borrowers
                                               Large banks
                (Firm A)                                              (Firm B)


                                                Deposits


               Regulation
                                                Investors
               on capital


       Figure 5. An illustration of the Chinese institutions for entrusted loans: how
       large banks channeled entrusted loans. “Safe-loan regulation” refers to a se-
       ries of 2010-2013 laws that strictly banned commercial banks from expanding
       bank loans to the risky industry. The dashed lines originating from “Regula-
       tion on capital” and “Safe-loan regulation” indicate that these two regulations
       are far from binding. The dashed line originating from “Regulation on the
       LDR” indicates that there is no extra cost to comply with this regulation. See
       Section VI.5 for further discussions.
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                              34

  While the correlations of overall entrusted lending with ARI are positive and significant
for small banks but not for large banks, the question is whether this result holds for the
correlations of risky entrusted lending and ARI. Table 15 reports such correlations for the
same two periods. Clearly, the estimated correlations for small banks continue to be positive
and statistically significant; again, the estimates are statistically insignificant for large banks.
This striking finding is confirmed by the government’s concern that commercial banks, espe-
cially small ones, have taken balance-sheet risks by providing implicit and explicit guarantees
to entrusted lending, where the explicit guarantees were in the form of entrusted rights. So
grave was the concern that the government in 2014 made it illegal for banks to mask the
balance-sheet risk “through the channel of entrusted lending.”
  The above empirical finding reveals that the linkage between entrusted loans and China’s
banking system has developed far beyond the basic structure displayed in Figure 3. Since
traditional loans on banks’ balance sheet were largely safe by regulations or by implicit
guarantees of the government and since large banks were capable of weathering deposit
shortfall with no extra cost, the behavior of large banks described by Figure 5 is in essence
similar to the basic structure represented by Figure 3. The issue, however, lies in the risk-
taking behavior of small banks. As shown in Table 14, entrusted lending funneled by small
banks is significantly and positively correlated with ARI, while the correlation does not exist
or may even be negative for large banks. The extensive institutional structure for small
banks’ activity in entrusted lending is illustrated by Figure 6. Because of the disparity
between small and large banks in costs of acquiring additional deposits under the pressure
of deposit shortfalls, we show in Section VI that a combination of the LDR and safe-loan
regulations gives small banks a wrong incentive to take on risky nonloan investment through
regulatory arbitrage.


   VI. A theoretical model against the unique institutional background

  Below we build a tractable equilibrium model, grounded in Chinese institutional details,
for understanding how the behavior of Chinese banks influences their optimal portfolio choice
under the constraint of both LDR and safe-loan regulations. We then discuss how our model
predictions are consistent with our empirical findings.


VI.1. Environment. There are two types of banks, large and small, distinguished only by
the costs of meeting unexpected deposit shortfalls that threaten to violate the LDR ceiling
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                               35




                                                     Loans                 Regulation
              Safe-loan regulation
                                                  (traditional)            on the LDR


                    Regulation risk
                                                                     Regulation risk

                   Lenders                                              Risky borrowers
                                                 Small banks
                   (Firm A)                                             (Firm B)

           Entrusted rights                                                  Default risk
                                                   Deposits


                  Regulation
                                                   Investors
                  on capital


       Figure 6. An illustration of the Chinese institutions for entrusted loans:
       how small banks funneled entrusted loans and what were the associated risks.
       “Entrusted rights” refers to investment in purchases of beneficiary rights of en-
       trusted loans. “Safe-loan regulation” refers to a series of 2010-2013 laws that
       strictly banned commercial banks from expanding bank loans to the risky
       industry. The dashed line indicates that the current capital requirement reg-
       ulation is far from binding. See Section VI.5 for further discussions.


constraint. Although all banks face the same LDR regulation, large banks, being state-
owned, pay no extra cost to recoup deposit losses. Small banks, on the other hand, have
to pay extra costs to recover temporary deposit shortfalls. There is an aggregate shock
that increases a withdrawal risk to deposits in all banks.20 For simplicity, both large and
small banks face the same deposit withdrawal risk, an assumption that is consistent with the
evidence provided by the PBC’s various Financial Stability Reports on the monthly deposit
volatilities across different types of banks.

  20This   assumption is consistent with the facts presented in Figure 1. Aggregate shocks that contract
monetary aggregates tend to increase pressures on deposit withdrawals and as a result contract deposits.
Our model abstracts from trend growth by assuming that any changes are deviations from trend.
                   WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                     36

   The bank has three types of assets: (i) cash, (ii) traditional loans (Bt ) subject to the
safe-loan regulation as well as regulation risks associated with random deposit shortfalls,
and (iii) risky nonloan assets (Itr ) subject to the default risk but not to the regulation risks
as Itr are not counted as part of Bt according to the LDR regulation. Given the deposits,
the bank makes an optimal portfolio choice between safe loans and risky assets. Within each
period, banking activities for both types of banks involve two stages: a lending stage and a
balancing stage.

VI.2. Lending stage. At the lending stage, the representative small bank decides how
much deposit to demand, how much dividend to distribute, and how to allocate three types
of assets for investment: intertemporal safe bank loans (longer term), within-period risky
shadow assets (shorter term), and cash.21 Bank loans, Bt , are safe (default free) but subject
to the regulatory constraint on the LDR, and are purchased at a discount price qt . Risky
assets, Itr , have a default probability pr and are purchased at a discount price 0 < qtr < 1.
   The law of motion for bank loans evolves as

                                               B̃t = δBt + St ,                                            (9)

where (1 − δ)Bt represents a fraction of loans that is retired and St represents new safe loans
made by the bank to comply with the safe-loan regulation. Denote cash by C and

                                                C̃t = Ct + ϕt ,                                           (10)

where ϕt represents additional cash holdings chosen by the bank.
   At the beginning of the period, the bank’s balance-sheet constraint is

                                    Dt + Et = Ct + (1 − δ)Bt +qt δBt ,                                    (11)
                                              |     {z     }
                                                     new cash

where Dt represents deposits and Et the bank’s equity or capital. Table 16 or Table 17,
below, represents the balance sheet in which the left hand column indicates the asset side
and the right hand column the liability side.
   The bank’s balance-sheet constraint, after choosing C̃t (or ϕt ), Itr , B̃t (or St ), D̃t , and
dividend DIVt , is
                                D̃t /RtD + Et − DIVt = C̃t + qtr Itr + q B̃t ,                            (12)
   21The   maturities assumed for bank loans and risky assets capture the essence of our empirical finding that
risky assets tend to have a shorter maturity than safe assets (see Section IV.1). This assumption, along with
other assumptions in the rest of the analysis, is made to keep our model tractable for obtaining intuitive
results.
                 WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                37

                    Table 16. Balance sheet at the beginning of the period

                                           Assets                 Liabilities
                              Cash (Ct + (1 − δ)Bt )           Deposits (Dt )
                                   Loans (qt δBt )               Equity (Et )

                    Table 17. Balance sheet at the beginning of the period

                                Assets                      Liabilities
                              Cash (Ct )            Deposits (Dt − (1 − δ)Bt )
                            Loans (qt δBt )                 Equity (Et )


which leads to

                 D̃t /RtD + Et − DIVt + (1 − qtr )Itr + (1 − qt )B̃t = C̃t + Itr + B̃t ,           (13)
                 | {z } |                   {z                     } |{z} | {z }
                 deposits                      equity                         cash        assets


where RtD is the deposit rate. The balance sheet now becomes Table 18.

                    Table 18. Balance sheet after the bank’s optimization

                                  Assets                   Liabilities
                                      
                                Cash C̃t                    Deposits
                               Risky assets                  D̃t /RtD
                                     Itr                     Equity
                                Safe loans                Et − DIVt +
                                    B̃t             (1 − qtr )Itr + (1 − qt )B̃t


  Substituting (9), (10), and (11) into (13) gives us the flow-of-funds constraint as
                                                                                 
          D̃t /RtD − Dt + (1 − qtr )Itr + (1 − qt )St − DIVt = ϕt + Itr + B̃t − Bt .               (14)
          |     {z      } |                {z              } |           {z       }
              ∆deposits                  ∆equity
                                                                                     ∆assets

  The standard credit constraint is

                                       D̃t /RtD ≤ κ [Et − DIVt ] ,                                 (15)

where κ is the leverage ratio and the term in brackets after κ represents the equity after the
dividend payout.
                    WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                      38

VI.3. Balancing stage. At the balancing stage, two random events occur. First, all banks
(large and small) are subject to idiosyncratic withdrawal shocks to deposits. The idiosyn-
cratic risk is represented by ω t such that
                                   
                                   ω h with probability pω
                                                          t
                             ωt =                               ,                                          (16)
                                   ω l with probability 1 − pω
                                                              t

where ω h > ω l . To obtain a closed-form solution for intuitive results, we simplify the
withdrawal risk distribution (16) by letting ω h = 1 and ω l = 0.22 Second, risky assets are
defaulted with probability pr .
  The amount of bank loans is subject to the LDR regulation as
                                                        (1 − ω t ) D̃t
                                           qt B̃t ≤ θ                  ,
                                                            RtD
where θ is the LDR ceiling set by the PBC. Denote
                                                            (1 − ω t ) D̃t
                                         x̃t = qt B̃t − θ                                                  (17)
                                                                RtD
and                                                  
                                                     rb x̃t    if x̃t ≥ 0
                                                        t
                                        χ (x̃t ) =                           ,
                                                     0         if x̃t < 0
where rtb > 0 is the extra cost of obtaining additional deposits x̃t . For clear illustration,
we assume rtb = 0 for large banks to capture the fact that these banks can weather deposit
fluctuations with no extra costs. It is straightforward to show that large banks’ portfolio
choice is indifferent to safe loans and risky investment (after adjusting for the risk premium).
Thus, the rest of the analysis is about small banks. Unless indicated otherwise, the word
“bank” is shorthand for “small bank” in Section VI.
  If default on Itr (risky assets) does not occur (in the no-default state), one can derive from
equation (13) the balance-sheet constraint for the bank as

                    D̃t /RtD − Itr + Et − DIVt + (1 − qtr )Itr + (1 − qt )B̃t = C̃t + B̃t .                (18)
                    |     {z    } |                  {z                     } | {z }
                     debt reduction                    Ẽt : equity                  assets

  22One      can see from Appendix C.3 that bank deposits decline when pω increases, consistent with the
empirical observation that monetary aggregates and bank deposits in China comove. Under regularity
conditions, our results hold for a more complicated distribution for ω t . A general distribution takes the
form of a cumulative density function Ft (ω t ) and the corresponding probability density function ft (ω t ). The
derived mathematical expressions, however, would be unnecessarily complex at the expense of obscuring the
intuition.
                     WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                         39

If Itr is defaulted (in the default state), the bank’s balance-sheet constraint becomes

                            D̃t /RtD + Et − DIVt − qtr Itr + (1 − qt )B̃t = C̃t + B̃t .        (19)
                            | {z } |                {z                  } | {z }
                            liabilities               ˜ : equity                    assets
                                                     Ẽt



Since Ẽ˜t = Ẽt − Itr , the bank’s equity is reduced in the default state. At the end of period t
(the beginning of period t + 1), the stock variables are balanced as
                                                                             D
                                                                         εt Rt+1 Itr
                                     Dt+1 = D̃t (1 − ω t ) + χ(x̃t ) −               ,         (20)
                                                                             qtr
                                                Ct+1 = C̃t − ω t D̃t ,                         (21)

                                                     Bt+1 = B̃t ,                              (22)

where                        
                             1 with probability 1 − pr (the no-default state)
                        εt =                                                   .
                             0 with probability pr (the default state)

VI.4. The bank’s optimizing problem. The bank’s optimizing problem is complex. To
maintain tractability, we simplify the liability-side behavior as it is not a focus of our model.23
The asset-side story, motivated by China’s institutional arrangements and our empirical ev-
idence, is a central piece of our theory. To avoid notational glut and make our theory trans-
parent, we omit the time subscript whenever no confusion arises. The optimizing behavior
at the lending stage can thus be described as
                                                            h                 i
                           l                                  b
                         V (C, B, D; z) = max U (DIV) + Eω,ε V (C̃, B̃, D̃; z) ,

where z = {rb , pω , q, q r , RD }, V l is the value function at the lending stage, V b is the value
function at the balancing stage, and Eω,ε is the mathematical expectation with respect to
the (ω, ε) measure. By choosing (DIV, ϕ, S, I r ), the bank solves the above problem subject
to

                               D̃/RtD = D − (1 − δ)B + DIV + ϕ + q r I r + qS,                 (23)

                                                    C̃ = C + ϕ,                                (24)

                                                B̃ = δB + S,                                   (25)
                                              h                        i
                                          D          r r             D
                                      D̃/R ≤ κ C̃ + q I + q B̃ − D̃/R ,                        (26)

     23See   Hachem and Song (2015) for a detailed modeling of the bank’s liabilities.
                 WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                               40

where constraint (23) corresponds to (14); and constraint (26), derived from (13) and (15),
represents the credit constraint on the bank’s optimization problem.
  The balancing-stage behavior can be described as

                      V b (C̃, B̃, D̃; z) = βEM V l (C 0 , B 0 , D0 ; z 0 ) | z
                                                                               


subject to
                                                                  εRD 0 I r
                                  D0 = (1 − ω)D̃ + χ(x̃) −                  ,                     (27)
                                                                    qr
                                             C 0 = C̃ − ω D̃,                                     (28)

                                                 B 0 = B̃,                                        (29)

                                      x̃ = q B̃ − θ(1 − ω)D̃/RD ,                                 (30)

where β is a subjective discount factor, z 0 = {rb 0 , pω 0 , q 0 , q r 0 , , RD 0 }, and EM represents
the mathematical expectation with respect to macroeconomic factors such as the risk of
deposit withdrawal. Such factors determine how z 0 evolves conditioning on the realization
of z. Constraints (27), (28), and (29) correspond to (20), (21), and (22); constraint (30)
corresponds to (17).
  Combining the two stages, we can describe the overall optimization problem as

  V l (C, B, D; z) = max U (DIV)
                                                                         εRD 0 I r
                                                                                      
                                     l
                          + βEM,ω,ε V C̃ − ω D̃, B̃, (1 − ω)D̃ + χ(x̃) −           ; z̃ z (31)
                                                                           qr
subject to (23), (24), (25), and (26). The choice variables for this optimization are (DIV, ϕ, S, I r ).
Given E = C + qδB − (D − (1 − δ)B), we have the following proposition:

Proposition 1. The optimization problem (31) can be simplified and collapsed into the single-
state representation

                          V (E ; z) = max U (DIV) + βEM,ω,ε [V (E 0 ; z 0 ) | z]                  (32)

subject to (26), (30), and

                               E − DIV = |{z}
                                          C̃ + q r I r + q B̃ − D̃/RD ,                           (33)
                                               | {z } | {z }
                                              cash       assets       liabilities

                                                                        εRD 0 I r
                                                                                 
               E = C̃ − ω D̃ + q δ B̃ + (1 − δ)B̃ − (1 − ω)D̃ + χ(x̃) −
                0               0
                                                                                    ,             (34)
                   | {z } |            {z       }                         qr
                      cash            assets       |            {z                }
                                                                         liabilities
                   WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                   41

where the single state is E , (33) corresponds to (12), (34) is derived from (11), (20), (21),
and (22) (by moving time t in (11) forward to time t + 1), and the choice variables are
(DIV, C̃, B̃, D̃, I r ).

Proof. See Appendix C.1.

   Since constraints (26), (33), and (34) are linear in E and the objective function is ho-
mothetic in E , the solution to the bank’s problem not only exists but also is unique and
the policy function is linear in equity E . Moreover, thanks to the Principle of Optimality,
the bank’s dynamic problem can be separated into two subproblems, one concerning an in-
tertemporal choice of dividend payoffs and the other relating to an intratemporal portfolio
allocation. The following proposition formalizes these two results.24

Proposition 2. Let
                                                            DIV1−γ
                                            U (DIV) =              ,
                                                             1−γ
where γ ≥ 1. Optimization problem (32) satisfies the two properties: homogeneity in E and
separability of portfolio choice from dividend choice.
      • Homogeneity. The value function V (E ; z) is

                                           V (E ; z) = v(z)E 1−γ ,

                                                                                                ˜
           and v(z) satisfies the Bellman equation over the choice variables {div, c̃, ir , b̃, d}
                                                  h                                  i
                                                                              1−γ
                     v(z) = max U (div) + βEM,ω,ε v(z 0 ) (e0 (ω, ε; z 0 , z))    |z               (35)

           subject to
                                         h                         i
                                  d/R                          ˜ D ,
                                  ˜ D ≤ κ c̃ + q r ir + q b̃ − d/R                                     (36)
                                                                      ˜ D,
                                       1 = c̃ + div + q r ir + q b̃ − d/R                              (37)
                                                                           εRD 0 ir
                     e0 = c̃ + (q 0 δ + 1 − δ)b̃ − d˜ − χ q d˜ − θ(1 − ω)d˜ +         ,                (38)
                                                                               qr
           where
                                                         h                      i
                             h                      i     DIV, C, B, D, I , E
                                                               e  e  e   r    0
                                           ˜ ir , e0 =
                              div, c̃, b̃, d,                                       .                  (39)
                                                                    E
   24The   homogeneity and separability properties in Proposition 2 are similar to Bianchi and Bigio (2014).
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                                 42

     • Separability. Problem (35) can be broken into two separate problems. The first
        problem is for banks to make an optimal portfolio choice, by choosing {wc , wi , wb , wd }
        to maxmize the certainty-equivalent portfolio value, described as
                                                                     1−γ 1
              Ω(z 0 , z) = max{Eω,ε wc + RI wi + RB wb − RD wd − Rx
                                   
                                                                          } 1−γ                                 (40)

        subject to

                                           1 = wc + wi + wb − wd ,                                              (41)

                                         wd ≤ κ(wc + wi + wb − wd ),                                            (42)

        and taking the following prices as given
                            εRD         q0 + 1 − δ x
                     RI =       , R B
                                      =           , R = χ (wb − θ(1 − ω)wd ) ,                                  (43)
                             qr              q
        where
                                   ς                  ˜
                                  wς =  , for ς = c̃, d/R, q r ir , q b̃.
                                1 − div
        The second problem is to choose div in response to aggregate shocks, described as

                v(z) = maxU (div) + β(1 − div)1−γ EM Ω(z 0 , z)1−γ v(z 0 ) z .
                                                                           
                                                                                       (44)
                            div

Proof. See Appendix C.2.

  Note that equations (36), (37), and (38) are derived from equations (26), (33), and (34)
and that e0 is a function of ω, ε, z 0 , and z such that

                              e0 (ω, ε; z 0 , z) = (1 − div)RE (ω, ε; z 0 , z) ,                                (45)

where RE is the return to bank’s equity after divident payout

            RE (ω, ε; z 0 , z) = wc + RI wi + RB wb − RD wd − χ (wb − θ(1 − ω)wd ) .                            (46)

  Proposition 2 breaks the potentially unmanageable problem into two tractable problems
by separating dividend decision about DIV in response to aggregate shocks from portfolio
choice about ϕ, S, I r , and D̃ in response to idiosyncratic risks. This technical advancement
enables us to establish the following substantive proposition.

Proposition 3. As pω increases, the bank’s optimal portfolio choice is such that
                                                            qr I r                             r r
    (i) the share of risky assets in total assets       q r I r +qB 0
                                                                        increases, i.e., ∂ qr Iqr +qB
                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                      0 /∂p
                                                                                                            ω
                                                                                                              > 0;
   (ii) the amount of risky assets q r I r increases, i.e., ∂ (q r I r ) /∂pω > 0.

Proof. See Appendix C.3.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                43

  The theory developed thus far, especially Proposition 3, provides a coherent explanation
of the “conspicuous phenomenon” illustrated by Figure 2. It also provides a general and
tractable framework for studying the optimal but risk-taking behavior of small banks. Ac-
cording to Proposition 3, the optimal portfolio decision leads to an increase of investment
in risky assets under monetary tightening for small banks and thus provides a theoretical
underpinning of our empirical findings. The intuition for this powerful result comes from
the asset-pricing equation governing a tradeoff between safe bank loans and risky nonloan
investment25
                             "                    #
                       I     Covε RI , Eω (RE )−γ
                 Eε (R ) − −             E  −γ
                                                     = RB − Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)],                 (47)
                                Eε [Eω (R ) ]               |         {z          }
                          |          {z            }        expected regulation cost
                                   default risk premium


where Rbx (wb , wd ; ω) is the partial derivative of Rx (wb , wd ; ω) with respect to safe loans:

                                                          ∂Rx (wb , wd ; ω)
                                    Rbx (wb , wd ; ω) =                     .
                                                               ∂wb
  In the asset-pricing equation (47), the left-hand-side term is the expected return on risky
investment, adjusted for the risk premium due to the default risk. The right-hand-side term
is the expected return on safe bank loans, adjusted for the expected regulation cost. The
risk premium is always positive. The expected regulation cost, also positive, is the expected
marginal cost associated with the lending amount B subject to the LDR regulation. This
term captures the extra cost of recovering deposit shortfalls. When the risk of deposit short-
falls rises, the expected regulation cost increases and so does the return on risky investment
relative to the return on bank loans. Thus, small banks have an incentive to rebalance the
portfolio by increasing the share of risky assets in total assets.
  For the asset-pricing equation (47) to hold, the necessary and sufficient condition is

                                          Eε (RI ) > RB − rb pw ,                                   (48)

where rb pw = Eω (Rbx ) is the expected regulation cost. Equation (48) states that the expected
return on risky investment is greater than the effective return on bank loans such that the
bank has an incentive to invest in risky assets, even if the bank is risk-averse. Thus, the
asset-pricing equation implies that it is optimal for the bank to increase the share of risky
assets in its total investment on the asset side of the balance sheet.

  25See   Appendix C.3 for the derivation of this condition.
                 WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                         44

  Not only does theory predict a rise of the share of risky assets for any fixed amount of
total investment, it also predicts another powerful result: investment in risky assets increases
in absolute terms. The proof of this result is more involved (see Appendix C.3), but the
intuition can be clearly laid out. Consider a low deposit rate such that

                                          R D < R B − r b pw .                             (49)

That is, the borrowing cost RD is lower than the effective return on bank loans. The low
borrowing cost is a unique Chinese institutional feature that the deposit rate imposed by the
government was kept artificially low.26 Such a low borrowing cost makes it optimal for the
bank to leverage to the maximum; as a result, the credit constraint (15) or (26) is always
binding. In our theoretical model, when the risk to deposit withdrawal increases at the
lending stage, the expected net return for leverage adjusted for the risk premium becomes
greater than RD (see equations (48) and (49)). It is therefore profitable to borrow as much as
possible by increasing D̃ until the credit constraint binds. The resource from the increased
borrowing goes to risk assets to compensate for the costs associated with actual withdrawals
in the balancing stage.
  Economically, when the income effect of a reduction in the expected return on equity
(Eω,ε RE ) due to an increase in the expected regulation cost dominates the corresponding
substitution effect (the substitution between today’s and tomorrow’s dividend payoffs), it is
optimal for the small bank to raise risky investment to compensate extra costs of recouping
deposit losses. This can be seen from (12) in which the left-hand-side term increases because
DIVt falls. This increase, together with the increase in the share of risky assets in response
to monetary tightening, implies that qtr Itr must increase.
  In summary, the amount of risky investment increases during the period of monetary
tightening because risky investment is an effective tool to compensate an increase in the
expected regulation cost due to unexpected deposit losses. By purchasing entrusted rights the
small bank receives a higher expected return on this nonloan investment, thereby killing two
birds with one stone as discussed in the Introduction. In effect, investment in risky nonloan
assets allows the small bank to exploit regulatory arbitrage because this risky investment is
not subject to the safe-loan regulation that explicitly bans bank lending to the risky industry
nor to the LDR regulation.

  26On   23 October 2015 the PBC decided to remove the deposit rate ceiling.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                          45

VI.5. Further discussions. In the above theory, the necessary and sufficient condition for
small banks to increase investment in risky assets relative to safe loans is

                         Eε (RI ) > RB − Expected regulation cost.

That is, the expected return to risk assets must be greater than the effective return on bank
loans. This important condition is supported by the data reported in Table 19, whereby
the interest rate on risky entrusted loans was substantially higher than the interest rate on
non-risky entrusted loans, which in turn was higher than the interest rate on bank loans in
2007-2013 and in 2010-2013. The interest rate on bank loans is the one-year base lending
rate set by the PBC. The reported interest rates on entrusted loans, risky or not, are not
adjusted for maturity or the term premium. The interest rate spread between risky entrusted
lending and bank lending, however, has a similar magnitude after we control for maturity
by using a method similar to equation (1).

      Table 19. Interest rates of risky and non-risky loans across different samples

                            Description           2007-2013 2010-2013
                             Bank loans             6.16%        6.00%
                     Non-risky entrusted loans      7.92%        7.71%
                       Risky entrusted loans        9.22%        9.05%


  There are two competing hypotheses about the effect of entrusted lending. The first
hypothesis that banks were supposed to act only as trustees or middlemen without bearing
any credit risks on their balance sheet as indicated in Figure 3. This hypothesis was true only
on paper, but in practice banks, especially small banks, were prone to funnel risky entrusted
loans during the period of monetary tightening. Our empirical and institutional analyses
support a competing hypothesis that such a risk-taking perchant for funneling entrusted
loans to the real estate and overcapacity industries threatened the health of the banking
system. The size of small banks as a whole was no small potatoes; the capital size (equity)
of small banks as a whole accounted for 39% of the total capital for all commercial banks
for the periods 2007-2013 and 2010-2013. Figure 6 describes the mechanism of how the
risks were transmitted to small banks’ balance sheet through shadow loans. As discussed in
Section V, it is the unique institutional asymmetry between large and small banks that made
a Chinese small bank willing to take on risky investment. This asymmetry is precisely the
                   WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                   46

difference between large and small banks in costs of meeting deposit shortfalls when there
are aggregate negative shocks that cause unexpected declines in deposits.
  The risk spillover from shadow loans to banks’ balance sheet began to be recognized
by both G20’s Financial Stability Board and various Chinese authorities in late 2013 and
early 2014.27 Their concerns about the spillover were so grave that the Chinese government
took concrete steps after the first quarter of 2014, by issuing and then implementing new
regulations specifically designed to curb the risk-taking behavior of banks’ participation
in entrusted lending. On 29 April 2014 the CBRC held a state-wide official meeting on
“Financial and Economic Analyses,” identifying “nonstandard assets” as a threat to the
health of the financial system and specifically outlining steps in containing the riskiness of
entrusted lending and entrusted rights in the banking system.28 In particular, the specific
rules outlined in the meeting prohibit banks from providing implicit or explicit guarantees
of risky entrusted lending and from purchasing entrusted rights.
  The cost disparity between large and small banks in attracting additional deposits under
the pressure of deposit shortfalls against the LDR regulation is part of the driving force in
our theory of the benefit of increasing nonloan investment in risky assets through regulatory
arbitrage. The decree “Notice No. 236: On Strengthening Commercial Banks Deposit
Stability Management” jointly issued on 12 September 12 by the CBRC, the Ministry of
Finance, and the PBC effectively banned the practice of small banks in acquiring additional
deposits through the WMP channel, by offering higher deposit rates, or through other high-
cost means. Perhaps realizing that this practice was not the only problem, the State Council
passed a draft of the “People’s Republic of China Commercial Bank Amendment Act” on
24 June 2015 to remove the LDR ceiling and thus officially ended this regulation that was
enacted in 1995.
  With all these changes, many more new regulations were enacted in 2015 for the purposes
of insulating the banking system from being endangered by risky entrusted lending and more
generally risky shadow banking. Yet the average capital adequacy ratio between 2010 and
2013 was almost the same for both large and small banks. On paper all Chinese banks met,
by a large margin, the capital requirement (8%) set by Basel III. A deeper analysis reveals a
different story: risk weights assigned in calculation of the capital ratio may not adequately
  27In   2009 the G20 countries created the Financial Stability Board from their previous financial stability
forum to promote the goal of achieving global financial stability.
   28Nonstandard assets include the WMPs, interbank businesses, trusted loans, entrusted loans, and invest-

ment in nonstandard claims (for example, entrusted rights purchased by banks).
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                            47

reflect the degree of riskiness expressed by China’s various new regulations. For example,
Basel III rules give a risk weight of 1250% to asset backed securities or structure securities to
avoid the systemic risk. By contrast, Chinese banks assign only a 100% risk weight to ARI,
the same weight as that assigned to regular corporate loans. One can argue that entrusted
rights in the category of ARI is in essence equivalent to an asset-backed security issued by
lending firms with entrusted loans as backing assets. It is therefore likely that the risk weight
for entrusted rights does not fully capture the degree of riskiness borne by such assets. With
proper risk weights, the LDR and safe-loan regulations should be removed all together and
the institutional asymmetry would have no place in helping create a wrong incentive for
small banks, as illustrated by Figure 7. Future research on a proper regulatory design of risk
weights for different categories of assets in Chinese banks, therefore, would prove fruitful and
important to avoid the systemic risk.




                                                Loans
                                             (traditional)




                     Lenders                                     Borrowers
                                             All banks
                     (Firm A)                                    (Firm B)


                        Proper risk weights Deposits

                    Regulation
                                              Investors
                    on capital


       Figure 7. An illustration of how to regulate commercial banks with proper
       risk weights on different categories of assets as Chinese banks continue to
       facilitate entrusted loans as middlemen.
                 WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                               48

                                         VII. Conclusion

  Using our constructed micro data, we establish evidence that banks actively engaged in
channeling risky entrusted loans during the period of monetary contractions. We argue that
the LDR regulation, coupled with regulations prohibiting banks from making traditional
loans to the risky industry, created an incentive for small banks to bring the risk of shadow
loans into their balance sheet through regulatory arbitrage to compensate high costs of
meeting random deposit shortfalls. Our study is a positive analysis, which delivers a concrete
example of how well-intended regulations can lead to wrong incentives that may endanger
the health of the banking system through shadow banking.
  The period of monetary tightening and regulatory restrictions on commercial banks in our
2007-2013 sample offers a natural experiment to provide a positive analysis on the linkages
between monetary policy, shadow banking, and traditional banking. Our empirical and
theoretical findings demonstrate that banks’ risk-taking behavior in funneling shadow loans
was not just an isolated incident, but rather it foreshadowed how banks effectively used
regulatory arbitrage to take on risks both on and off balance sheet. In particular, our positive
analysis highlighted two specific loopholes of China’s regulatory design that contributed to
such risk-taking behavior.29
  Since 2014 the Chinese government has taken concrete steps to enact and implement a
host of new regulations in an effort to close such loopholes. In particular, these regulations
prohibit banks from taking risks in entrusted lending either on or off balance sheet, to ban
banks from paying higher prices than what regulations allowed to meet deposit shortfalls,
and finally to remove the decades-long LDR regulation all together. In the context of these
new and vigorous regulations, our postive study begets new and challenging normative ques-
tions. What is an effective and efficient way for the government to remove the institutional
asymmetry between small and large banks? How should the government assign risk weights
to various categories of assets, including securitized assets, in the capital requirement that
accord with Basel III to avoid the systemic risk? How should the banking system be so re-
formed that commercial banks have a correct incentive to price the risks properly, especially



  29There   may be other potential regulatory loopholes that have allowed banks to mask credit risks by
entrusted lending. A recent regulation called “On Commercial Banks’ Practices of Managing Entrusted
Lending: Open for Public Comment,” issued by the CBRC on 16 January 2015, is an attempt to prohibit
commercial banks from taking on credit risks through various means.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                       49

those reflecting the risks specific to the Chinese economy?30 How should the regulators de-
sign an ambitious and comprehensive package of regulations for creating right incentives for
commercial banks to invest and lend? How should the government design regulatory tools
that are capable of taking into full account how the risks associated with individual banks
might potentially cause the systemic financial risk triggered by, for example, the bank panic
or fire sales of shadow assets. And how should monetary policy coordinate with regulatory
policy in achieving an efficient but stable financial system? These and other important ques-
tions will undoubtedly enlarge the scope of this research and we hope that the steps taken in
this paper will help foster further research on the effects of monetary and regulatory policies.




  30In   reality, although we observe that the interest rate charged to the risky industry is higher than the
rate charged to other industries, the pricing might still fail to capture fully the underlying default risks due
to implicit government guarantees to either banks or risky industries.
              WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                        50

                             Appendix A. Data appendix

  Given the large amount of data we have collected from various sources, we organize all the
variables used in this paper and the corresponding data sources in the table below. Unless
we indicate CEIC or Bankscope, all other data sources come from WIND.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                         51

                          Table 20. Variables and data sources

               Data source A                                    Data source B
                 M2 growth                                   Names of borrowers
      Growth in aggregate bank loans                          Names of lenders
     Growth in aggregate bank deposits                        Names of trustees
   Aggregate newly originated bank loans             Transactions announced by lenders
 Total social financing bar stocks and bonds        Transactions announced by borrowers
        Aggregate entrusted lending                       Date of each transaction
           Aggregate trust lending               Amount of each transacted entrusted loan
              Bank acceptances                 Interest rate of each transacted entrusted loan
                GDP growth                       Maturity of each transacted entrusted loan
                  Inflation                                    Affiliated loans
            7-day CHIBOR rate                                Borrower’s industry
         One-year base lending rate
               Data source C                                   Data source D
            Loan-to-deposit ratio                            Gross loan amount
           Capital adequacy ratio                          Total customer deposits
               Excess reserves                             Capital adequacy ratio
                Total deposits                                   Bank equity
  Amount of account receivable investment                        Bank assets
          Amount of bank lending
Note: Data source A: CEIC. Data source B: announcements of entrusted loan transactions
and annual reports of non-financial firms. Data source C: annual reports of listed
commercial banks. Data source D: Bankscope (including non-listed banks). The variable
“total deposits” from data source C is different from “total customer deposits” from data
source D. Consistent with the PBC’s requirements, “total deposits” is used to compute the
reserve ratio while the loan-to-deposit ratio is computed as the ratio of “gross loan
amount” and “total customer deposits”. For the variable “capital adequacy ratio”, we
compare data sources C and D to make sure they match.
               WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                          52

                    Appendix B. Regulation timeline appendix

  The list of descriptions, below, organizes all the regulations either explicitly discussed in
the paper or relevant to the discussion.

  Regulations relevant to the discussions in the paper in chronological order
                                           (1995-2015)

LDR: 5/10/1995. “People’s Republic of China Commercial Bank Law ” passed by the Na-
       tional People’s Congress. The law specified the 75% LDR ceiling.
Entrusted Loans: 8/1/1996. “General Rules for Loans” issued by the PBC. The regulation
       provided a definition of entrusted lending.
Entrusted Loans: 4/5/2000. “Notice on Issues Related to Practices of Commercial Banks
       In Entrusted Lending” issued by the PBC. In the notice, the PBC changed the
       approval system to the registration system for entrusted loans.
Disclosure Requirements: 12/1/2004. “Stock Listing Rules of the Shanghai Stock Ex-
       change” issued by the Shanghai Stock Exchange. The rules required that a listed
       firm on Shanghai Stock Exchange must disclose every entrusted-loan transaction if
       the loan amount is larger than 10% of the firm’s net assets, revenue, or profits.
Disclosure Requirements: 12/1/2004. “Stock Listing Rules of the Shenzhen Stock Ex-
       change” issued by the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. The rules required that a listed
       firms on Shenzhen Stock Exchange must disclose every entrusted-loan transaction if
       the loan amount is larger than 10% of the firm’s net assets, revenue or profits.
Disclosure Requirements: 10/27/2005. “China Securities Law ” revised and passed by
       the Eighteenth Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Tenth National People’s
       Congress. The law stated that listed firms must announce all major events which may
       have influenced their stock prices. This law applied to all listed firms that engaged
       in entrusted-loan transactions.
Risky Industry: 5/28/2010. “Notice on Financial Services to Further Support Energy Sav-
       ing and Eliminate Backward-Production Capacity” issued jointly by the PBC and
       CBRC. This regulation reinforced the 2006 notice issued by the State Council to
       make it operational to prohibit banks from originating new bank loans to the risky
       industry.
Risky Industry: 6/12/2010. “Reply to Number 001443 Proposal of the Third Session of
       the Eleventh National People’s Congress” issued by the CBRC. The reply stressed
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                         53

      the need to continue curtailing expansion of traditional bank credits to the risky
      industry.
Risky Industry: 8/8/2010. “Number 111 Announcement on the Manufacturing Industry”
      issued by China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology. The announce-
      ment specifically classified the 18 overcapacity industries and reinforced the restric-
      tion of new bank credits to these industries.
Disclosure Requirements: 8/18/2010. “Memorandum of Information Disclosure for Small
      and Medium-Sized Enterprises” issued by Shenzhen Stock Exchange. The memo re-
      quired that a listed firm must disclose information of entrusted loans as long as its
      subsidiary firm was a lender of these loans, even if the company itself was not a direct
      lender.
LDR: 1/1/2011. “CARPALS Supervision System” announced by the CBRC. The announce-
      ment provided 13 supervised indicators such as loan-to-deposit ratio and capital ade-
      quacy ratio and recommended that the PBC shall begin to monitor the LDR during
      the course of the year (quarterly) rather than at the end of the year.
Entrusted Loans: 2/9/2011. “Notice on Further Promoting Reforms and Development
      and on Strengthening Risk Management” issued by the CBRC. Item 6 in this notice
      regulated how the businesses of “shadow banks” should operate and recognized a pos-
      sibility of regulatory arbitrage by stating “when off-balance-sheet assets are brought
      into balance sheet, banks must calculate all relevant indicators such as leverage ratio
      and capital adequacy ratio.”
Risky Industry: 6/23/2011. “Conference on the Bellwether Series” held in China and
      organized by The Economist. An official from the CBRC who attended the conference
      stated the CBRC’s requirement that commercial banks must continue to curtail bank
      loans to the real estate.
Disclosure Requirements: 6/29/2011. “Memorandum of Information Disclosure for Shen-
      zhen Stock Exchange” issued by Shenzhen Stock Exchange. The memo re-emphasized
      that a listed firm must disclose information of entrusted loans as long as its subsidiary
      firm was a lender of entrusted loans, even if the company itself was not a direct lender.
Disclosure Requirements: 1/1/2012. “Rules for Information Disclosure By Companies
      Offering Securities to the Public” issued by China’s Securities Regulatory Commis-
      sion. The rules reinforce the requirement that every listed firm has the obligation to
      disclose all entrusted-loan transactions. This law is still in effect.
             WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                           54

Risky Industry: 7/5/2013. “Guidelines for Financial Support of Economic Structure Ad-
      justments and for Transformation and Upgrade of the Insurance Industry” issued by
      the State Council. These guidelines reiterated the law that prohibited banks from
      providing new credits to the risky industry.
Shadow Banking: 12/10/2013. “Notice on Issues of Tightening Regulations on Shadow
      Banking” issued by the State Council. The notice mentioned possible regulatory-
      arbitrage problems associated with shadow banking, suggested the potential systemic
      risk caused by shadow banking, and tightened regulations on the shadow banking
      system including entrusted loans.
Nonstandard Assets: 4/29/2014. “Official Meeting on Financial and Economic Analy-
      ses” held by the CBRC. The meeting identified “nonstandard assets” as a threat to
      the health of the financial system and specifically outlining steps in containing the
      riskiness of entrusted lending and entrusted rights in the banking system.
Last-Minute Rush: 9/12/2014. “Number 236 Notice on Strengthening Commercial Banks
      Deposit Stability Management” issued jointly by CBRC, the Ministry of Finance,
      and the PBC. The notice identified last-minute actions taken by banks to pay high
      prices to artificially increase temporary deposits in order to recoup deposit shortfalls
      when the PBC’s deposit-monitoring time was near. While the notice applied to
      all banks, it effectively banned the practice of small banks in acquiring additional
      deposits through the WMP channel, by offering higher deposit rates, or through other
      high-cost means.
Entrusted Loans: 1/16/2015. “Draft for Management Rules on Commercial Banks’ En-
      trusted Loans: Open for Public Opinions” issued by the CBRC. The draft reinforced
      the earlier regulations that commercial banks were prohibited from taking on credit
      risks when facilitating entrusted loans.
LDR Ceiling Removal: 6/24/2015. “People’s Republic of China Commercial Bank Law
      Amendment (Draft)” proposed by the State Council on that day and approved by
      the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress on 20 August 2015. It
      removed the LDR ceiling and thus officially ended this regulation enacted in 1995.
Deposit Rate Ceiling Removal: 10/24/2015. “Notice on the Removal of Deposit Rate
      Ceiling of Commercial Banks” issued by the PBC. The notice removed the ceiling of
      bank deposit rates.
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                            55

           Appendix C. Technical appendix: proofs of Propositions 1-3

C.1. Proof of Proposition 1. The proof for Proposition 1 follows from the fact that E is a
sufficient statistics for the bank’s problem. In other words, once E is determined, the bank’s
optimal decision does not depend on the sources from which the equity E is accumulated.

C.2. Proof of Proposition 2. Homogeneity: We use the conjecture-verify approach to this
complicated problem. We conjecture the form of the value function as

                                                V (E ; z) = v(z)E 1−γ .

Because
                                                 E 0 = e0 (ω, ε; z 0 , z)E ,

the optimization problem (32) can be rewritten as
                                               h                                 i
                                                                         1−γ
           V (E ; z) = max U (div E ) + βEM,ω,ε v(z ) (e (ω, ε; z , z)E )
                                                   0    0        0
                                                                               z
                            n                       h                                io
                                                                             1−γ
                     =E 1−γ                               0   0        0
                             max U (div) + βEM,ω,ε v(z ) (e (ω, ε; z , z))         z

subject to (36), (37), and (38). Let ṽ(z) be the solution of

                                                 h                                    i
                                                                                1−γ
                    ṽ(z) = max U (div) + βEM,ω,ε ṽ(z 0 ) (e0 (ω, ε; z 0 , z))     z        (A1)

subject to (36), (37) and (38). Hence v(z) = ṽ(z), which verifies the guess to our Bellman
equation
                                                V (E ; z) = v(z)E 1−γ .

Separability: From (45) we have
                                               1−γ                                    1−γ
                        (e0 (ω, ε; z 0 , z))         = (1 − div)1−γ RE (ω, ε; z 0 , z)

so that
                  h                       i                    h                  1−γ i
                                      1−γ
            Eω,ε (e0 (ω, ε; z 0 , z))       = (1 − div)1−γ Eω,ε RE (ω, ε; z 0 , z)       .  (A2)
                                                                               h           1−γ i
Since the utility is power utility, the certainty equivalence of Eω,ε RE (ω, ε; z 0 , z)         ,
denoted as Ω(z 0 , z), follows as
                                n     h                           1
                                                         1−γ io 1−γ
      Ω(z 0 , z) =      max       Eω,ε RE (ω, ε; z 0 , z)
                    {wc ,wi ,wb ,wd }
                                        n    h                                   1
                                                    I      B      D
                                                                            io 1−γ
                                                                          x 1−γ
                =        max             Eω,ε wc + R wi + R wb − R wd − R                    (A3)
                    {wc ,wi ,wb ,wd }
                       WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                                 56

subject to (41) and (42). Substituting (A2) into (A1) and using the definition of Ω(z 0 , z) in
(A3), we obtain (44).

C.3. Proof of Proposition 3. As pω increases, we first establish that the share of risky
                                      qr I r                  qr I r
assets in total assets,           q r I r +qB 0
                                                      or   q r I r +q B
                                                                      e   , increases; we then prove that the volume of risky
assets, q r I r , increases as well.
  Combining (41) and (42) and substituting them into (A3) transforms the optimization
problem to

  Ω(z 0 , z) =                                        RB − (RB − 1)wc + (RI − RB )wi
                                                 
                        max                Eω,ε
                   {wc ,wi ,wb ,wd }
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                 B      D            x
                                                                                                            1−γ io 1−γ
                                                                            −(R − R )wd − R (wb , wd ; ω)                 (A4)

subject to wd ≤ κ (with the Lagrangian multiplier φd ) and wc ≥ 0 (with the Lagrangian
multiplier φc ). The first order condition with respect to wc gives
                                                                       γ/(1−γ)
                               φc − (RB − 1)Eω,ε (RE )−γ Eω,ε (RE )1−γ
                                                        
                                                                                = 0.

It follows from RB > 1 that φc > 0, which implies that wc = 0.
  Substituting wc = 0 and wi = 1 − wb + wd into (A4) reduces the optimization problem to

  Ω(z 0 , z)
                           n    h                                                            1
                                                                                    1−γ io 1−γ
          = max             Eω,ε RI + (RB − RI )wb + (RI − RD )wd − Rx (wb , wd ; ω)                                      (A5)
               {wb ,wd }

subject to wd ≤ κ and φd (κ − wd ) = 0. The first order condition with respect to wb gives

                       γ/(1−γ)
      Eω,ε (RE )1−γ                Eω,ε (RE )−γ Eε RB − RI
                                                          

                                                                γ/(1−γ)
                                                − Eω,ε (RE )1−γ          Eω,ε (RE )−γ Rbx (wb , wd ; ω) = 0,
                                                                                                     


where
                                                                               ∂Rx (wb , wd ; ω)
                                                  Rbx (wb , wd ; ω) =                            .
                                                                                    ∂wb
Noting from (46) that RE depends on both ω and ε, we simplify the above expression as

                 RB Eε Eω (RE )−γ − Eε RI Eω (RE )−γ = Eω,ε (RE )−γ Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)
                                                                                 


⇐⇒
                                 Eε RI Eω (RE )−γ      Eω,ε (RE )−γ Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)
                                                                                   
                              B
                             R −                     =                                  ,
                                  Eε [Eω (RE )−γ ]           Eε [Eω (RE )−γ ]
                 WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                       57

which leads to the asset-pricing condition between safe loans and risky investment:
                                                      "                         #
                                                                 I         E −γ
                                                         Covε  R   , Eω (R  )
              RB − Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)] = Eε (RI ) − −                           .
                    |         {z          }                 Eε [Eω (RE )−γ ]
                    expected regulation cost          |           {z             }
                                                                        default risk premium

The left-hand-side term represents the effective return to safe loans, expressed as the bank
lending rate minus the expected regulation cost. The right-hand-side term is the expected
return to risky investment, adjusted for the risk premium of default. Note that the risk
premium is positive. The expected regulation cost is the expected marginal cost of meeting
the LDR ceiling. Indeed, it is straightforward to show that this regulation cost is
                                                                
                     Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)] = Prob θω ≥ θ − B̃/D̃ rb .                                    (A6)
                                              |       {z          }
                                                               regulation risk
                        wb
     By defining L =    wd
                             as the LDR, we can rewrite the bank’s portfolio choice problem (A5)
as

               Ω (z 0 , z)
                                                                                                1
             = max Eω,ε RI + wd RI − RD − RI − RB L − Rx (L, 1; ω)
                                                                                        1−γ
                 L,wd

subject to wd ≤ κ. The first order condition with respect to L is
                                                                         
                                                                        E −γ
                                                 
                                                               I
                                                     Cov ε   R   , Eω R
             RB − Eω [RLx (L, 1; ω)] = Eε RI − −
                                             
                                                                             ,                           (A7)
                                                        Eε Eω (RE )−γ
                                                                        
                   |        {z          }
                   expected liquidity cost
                                                 |               {z          }
                                                                        default risk premium

where
                                             ∂Rx (L, 1; ω)
                                          RLx (L, 1; ω) =  .
                                                  ∂L
This asset-pricing equation with respect to L is an alternative expression of the previous
asset-pricing equation with respect to wb (i.e., equation (47)). As one can see from below,
this alternative expression makes our proof more transparent.
     By definition,
                                         qr I r            wi         1
                                                    =           =            .
                                   qr I r   + qB
                                               e        wi + wb   1 + wb /wi
                                                                                                ∂wb /wi
To prove that the share of risky assets increases with pω is equivalent to prove that            ∂pω
                                                                                                          < 0.
When pω increases, Eω [RLx (L, 1; ω)] will increase. It follows from (A7) that the effective
return to safe loans will decline relative to the effective return to risky investment. Hence,
                                     qr I r
wb /wi falls, implying that      q r I r +q B
                                            e   increases.
                WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                58

                         ∂q r I r
  We now prove that       ∂pω
                                    > 0. We first establish the following lemma.

Lemma 1. With the low deposit rate such that

                                             R D < R B − r b pω ,                                (A8)

the credit constraint (26) or wd ≤ κ is binding.

Proof. When ω = 0, there is no need to acquire additional deposits to meet the LDR ceiling.
When ω = 1, however, the bank always needs to acquire additional deposits in order to meet
the LDR requirement L ≤ θ. Accordingly,

                                         Eω [Rx (L, 1; ω)] = rb pω L                             (A9)

and
                                          Eω [RLx (L, 1; ω)] = rb pω .                          (A10)
Define the leverage return as

                        RL = RI − RD − RI − RB L − Rx (L, 1; ω) .
                                             


We have

  Eω,ε RL (L; ω, ε) = Eε (1 − L) RI − RD + L RB − RD − Eω [Rx (L, 1; ω)]
                                                
                                                                                                (A11)

The first order condition for wd is
                                                                  
                                                        E −γ
                                                               L
                                           Covε   E ω R      , R
                    Eω,ε RL (L; ω, ε) − −                            ed
                                    
                                                                    =φ                         (A12)
                                                          −γ 
                                              Eε Eω (RE )

      ed =
where φ                        φd
                                γ                   . The left-hand-side term is the effective expected
              [Eω,ε (RE )1−γ ] 1−γ Eω [Eε (RE )−γ ]
return to leverage, adjusted for the default risk premium and the expected regulation cost.
  To prove the credit constraint is binding, it is equivalent to show that the effective expected
return to leverage is positive. That is, we need to show
                                                                  
                                                         E −γ
                                                               L
                                            Covε Eω R         ,R
                   Eω,ε RL (L; ω, ε) − −
                                   
                                                                     > 0,
                                                Eε Eω (RE )−γ
                                                             


                   ed > 0 or φd > 0.
which implies that φ
  According to the definition of RL ,
                              −γ L                        −γ I 
                Covε Eω RE        ,R     (1 − L) Covε Eω RE      ,R
                                       =                              .                         (A13)
                   Eε Eω (RE )−γ                 Eε Eω (RE )−γ
                                                            
                   WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                                   59

Combining equation (A9) with equation (A10) leads to

                                     Eω [Rx (L, 1; ω)] = LEω [RLx (L, 1; ω)] .                      (A14)

Substituting both (A13) and (A14) into the left side of (A12) and reordering, we have
                                                       
                                            E −γ
                                                    L
                             Covε Eω R            ,R
      Eω,ε RL (L; ω, ε) − −
                      
                                                         
                                  Eε Eω (RE )−γ
                                                 

                                                     
                                          E −γ
                                                I
                           Covε   E ω  R      , R       
  = (1 − L) Eε RI −                                    + L RB − Eω [RLx (L, 1; ω)] − RD
                                                           
                                            −γ 
                              Eε Eω (RE )               

  = RB − Eω [RLx (L, 1; ω)] − RD ,

where the second equality comes from the asset-pricing condition (A7) . Given (A10) and
(A8), we have                                                         
                                                            E −γ
                                                                   L
                                               Covε   E ω R      , R
                        Eω,ε RL (L; ω, ε) − −
                                        
                                                                         > 0.
                                                  Eε Eω (RE )−γ
                                                                 

       ed > 0 or φd > 0.
Hence, φ

  We are ready to prove ∂ (q r I r ) /∂pω > 0. Because q r I r = wi (1 − div) E , it is sufficient to
                                                                                        wi          wi
prove that ∂wi /∂pω > 0 and ∂div/∂pω ≤ 0. Since wi + wb = 1 + wd , we have            wi +wb
                                                                                               =   1+wd
                                                                                                          =
                            rIr
 wi
1+κ
    .   Therefore,   ∂ qr Iqr +q e /∂p
                                 B
                                       ω
                                           > 0 gives ∂wi /∂pω > 0.
  We now need to prove ∂div/∂pω ≤ 0. The Euler equation associated with problem (44)
can be written as
                                  h       1−γ              i
  div−γ = β (1 − γ) (1 − div)−γ EM Eωε RE      v (z 0 ) | z

                                      = β (1 − γ) (1 − div)−γ EM [v (z 0 ) | z]
                                             h               1−γ                       1−γ i
                                              p ω Eε R E ω l       + (1 − pω ) Eε RE ω h         (A15)

  Equation (A15) expresses div as an implicit function of pω . Taking partial derivative of
div with respect to pω and reorganizing the terms, we obtain
               h                        i
                       l 1−γ          h 1−γ
                                              β (1 − γ) EM [v (z 0 ) | z] (1 − div)−γ−1
                   E
                                E
   ∂div    E ε   R   ω       −  R   ω
        =                                                                           .              (A16)
   ∂pω         −γdiv−γ−1 − βγ (1 − γ) EM [v (z 0 ) | z] (1 − div)−γ−1 Eωε (RE )1−γ
                                                                          

The denominator of (A16) is always negative, thanks to the concavity of the bank’s utility
                                                                                 1−γ
function.31 For the numerator, whether it is positive or not depends on RE ω l          −
  31Note   that (1 − γ) EM [v (z 0 ) | z] > 0.
                  WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?            60
          1−γ                                
 RE ω h           |ε ≷ 0. Since RE ω l − RE ω h |ε < 0 and given γ ≥ 1, we have
                                        1−γ          1−γ
                                 RE ω l       − RE ω h       |ε ≥ 0.

Therefore, ∂div/∂pω ≤ 0. With ∂wi /∂pω > 0, we have ∂ (q r I r ) /∂pω > 0.
              WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                 61

                                       References

Adrian, T., A. B. Ashcraft, and N. Cetorelli (2013): “Shadow Bank Monitoring,”
  Staff Report 638, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Allen, F., Y. Qian, G. Tu, and F. Yu (2015): “Entrusted Loans, A Close Look at
  China’s Shadow Banking System,” Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Ba, S., M. Yan, and Y. Wang (2013): “Analysis of the Inference of Interest Rate Lib-
  eralization on Commercial Banks,” Journal of Huazhong Normal University Humanities
  and Social Sciences (in Chinese), 52(4), 27–37.
Bianchi, J., and S. Bigio (2014): “Banks, Liquidity Management and Monetary Policy,”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report 503.
Chang, C., K. Chen, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2015): “Trends and Cycles in
  China’s Macroeconomy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 30.
Christiano, L. J., and D. Ikeda (2013): “Leverage Restrictions in a Business Cycle
  Model,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Elliott, D. J., and A. R. K. Q. Yu (2015): “Shadow Banking in China: A Primer,”
  Research paper, The Brookings Institution.
Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
  Business Cycle Analysis,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman,
  and M. Woodford, vol. 3, chap. 11, pp. 547–599. Elsevier B. V.
Hachem, K., and Z. M. Song (2015): “The Rise of China’s Shadow Banking System,”
  Manuscript, University of Chicago.
He, Q., L. Lu, and S. Ongena (2015): “Who Gains from Credit Granted Between
  Firms? Evidence from Inter-corporate Loan Announcements Made in China,” Bank of
  Finland Discussion Paper 1.
Ivashina, V., and D. Scharfstein (2010): “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis
  of 2008,” Journal of Financial Economics, 97, 319–338.
Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró, and J. Saurina (2014): “Hazardous Times
  for Monetary Policy: What do Twenty-three Million Loans Say About the Impact of
  Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?,” Econometrica, 82(2), 463–505.
Kashyap, A. K., and J. C. Stein (2000): “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say
  About the Transmission of Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 90, 407–428.
              WHAT DO WE LEARN FROM CHINA’S RISING SHADOW BANKING?                62

Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, and M. Liu (2014): “Are Chinese Growth and Inflation
  Too Smooth? Evidence from Engel Curves,” Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia Univer-
  sity.
Qian, X., and X. Li (2013): “Operating Mechanism and Guarding Financial Risks of
  Entrusted Loans: Stemming from the Public Data of Listed Companies in China from
  2004-2013,” Enterprise Development (in Chinese), 10, 125–134.

  Emory University; Emory University; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Emory Univer-
sity, and NBER
