NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OUT OF AFRICA: HUMAN CAPITAL CONSEQUENCES OF IN UTERO CONDITIONS
Victor Lavy
Analia Schlosser
Adi Shany
Working Paper 21894
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21894

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016

Victor Lavy acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council through ERC Advance
Grant 323439 and the Falk Institute. Analia Schlosser acknowledges financial support from the Sapir
Center for Development and the Foerder Institute for Economic Research. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Victor Lavy, Analia Schlosser, and Adi Shany. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Out of Africa: Human Capital Consequences of In Utero Conditions
Victor Lavy, Analia Schlosser, and Adi Shany
NBER Working Paper No. 21894
January 2016
JEL No. I1,I2,J13,O15
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the effects of environmental conditions during pregnancy on later life outcomes
using quasi-experimental variation created by the immigration of Ethiopian Jews to Israel in May 24th
1991. Children in utero prior to immigration faced dramatic differences in medical care technologies,
prenatal conditions, and prenatal care at the move from Ethiopia to Israel. One of the major differences
was adequacy of micronutrient supplements, particularly iodine, iron and folic acid. We find that children
exposed in an earlier stage of the pregnancy to better environmental conditions in utero have two decades
later higher educational attainment (lower repetition and dropout rates and higher Baccalaureate rate)
and higher education quality (achieve a higher proficiency level in their Baccalaureate diploma). The
average treatment effect we estimate is driven mainly by a strong effect on girls. We find however,
no effect on birth weight or mortality for girls.

Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk
Analia Schlosser
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978
ISRAEL
analias@post.tau.ac.il

Adi Shany
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus, 91905 Jerusalem
Israel
adi.shani@mail.huji.ac.il

1. Introduction
There is growing epidemiological and economic literature that suggests that certain chronic
conditions later in life can be traced to the course of fetal development.1 The idea that the nine months
in utero are a critical period in a person's life which influences health, cognitive and non-cognitive, and
economic outcomes later in life has meaningful implications for individual and policy decisions.
However, it is a challenge to identify the casual effect of in utero conditions on later life outcomes
since children’s family background is most likely correlated with in-utero conditions. But it may also
have direct effects on human capital investments and outcomes. Economists have expanded the
epidemiological literature on this hypothesis by analyzing the effect of in utero conditions on nonhealth outcomes such as education and income while improving the identification strategies (see
reviews by Almond and Currie, 2011 and Currie and Vogl, 2013).
In this paper, we use a permanent out of Africa episode where the Jewish population in Ethiopia
immigrated to Israel in May 1991. We exploit the quasi-experimental variation in the environmental
conditions during pregnancy experienced by women who gave birth shortly after arrival to Israel. There
is a large environmental difference between Ethiopia and Israel that may have affected pregnant
mothers. One important difference is the micro nutrient supplements. While Ethiopia suffers from
severely iodine and iron deficiencies and there is no consumption of vitamins during pregnancy, in
Israel, pregnant women received vitamins (mainly iron and folic acid) and the iodine level is adequate.
In our study, we examine the effects of in utero length of exposure to micronutrient supplement of
iodine, iron and folic acid and to other improved conditions in Israel on birth outcomes (birth weight),
mortality until age 12 and academic achievements of children by the end of high school. We exploit
quasi-experimental variation in exposure to better environmental conditions in utero generated by the
large and sudden immigration wave of Ethiopian Jews to Israel, called "Operation Solomon". This out
of Africa immigration episode was unexpected and occurred quickly over 36 hours when more than
14,000 Jews were airlifted to Israel. The operation was organized by the Israeli government and it
relocated almost all the Ethiopians Jews living in Ethiopia to Israel. Thus, the immigrants were not a
selected group and the sudden occurrence and timing of this operation did not allow families to plan
or time pregnancy. Therefore, variation in the timing of pregnancy relative to date of immigration can
be regarded as random.
We construct a dataset based on high school administrative data linked to individual demographic,
birth weight and mortality records of all Ethiopian children born between May 27th 1991 and February
15th 1992, within a narrow time window after the immigration (May 24th 1991). We use the birth date
of each child to determine number of weeks of exposure in utero to better environmental conditions
in Israel. Epidemiological studies suggest that the most critical period of pregnancy for child brain and
1

Barker (1992) define this relationship as the fetal origin hypothesis.

1

cognitive development is the first trimester. We therefore examine how in utero exposure to the Israeli
environment during the first trimester of gestation (and afterwards) affects birth weight, mortality,
and medium-term cognitive outcomes relative to exposure that started at later stages of pregnancy.
For this purpose, we define three treatment groups by the gestational age at the time of immigration:
the first group includes children whose mothers arrived to Israel after conception during the first
trimester of gestation, the second group includes children whose mothers arrived to Israel during the
second trimester of gestation, and the third group includes children whose mothers arrived during the
third trimester of gestation but before birth. We also estimate separate treatment effects for each of
the three months of the first trimester and explore linear and nonlinear effects of weeks of exposure
to better environmental conditions on child outcomes.
The medium-term outcomes we examine include grade repetition, drop-out rate, Baccalaureate
diploma certification, and the total number of Baccalaureate credits units in all subjects and in
Mathematics and English in particular. The latter outcomes are viewed as a measure of student’s ability
because they are highly correlated with IQ and of quality of a student's Baccalaureate study program.
They are also known to have a large payoff in terms of post-secondary schooling and labor market
outcomes later in life in Israel. We also examine the impact on birth weight as an early health indicator
and the impact on mortality before the age of 12 as a medium-term health indicator.
We find that children exposed to better environmental conditions in utero during the first trimester
of pregnancy performed substantially better in all medium-term cognitive outcomes relative to those
exposed to these better conditions at a later stage of pregnancy. Children who were in utero in Israel
starting from the first trimester are about 12 percentage points more likely to obtain a Baccalaureate
diploma. This is a large effect since the average Baccalaureate rate of children who arrived at the
second and third trimester is only 20 percent. Children who arrived to Israel during the first trimester
also engage in more challenging study programs during high school. For example, they obtain 3.2 more
credit units relative to those who arrived at the third trimester, an effect of about 33 percent. These
individuals also attain 0.4 more credit units in Mathematics and 0.5 additional units in English, implying
a gain of more than 50 percent. They are also 12 percentage points less likely to repeat a grade and 7
percentage points less likely to drop out of high school. On the other hand, we do not find any effect
on birth weight, but we do find that children exposed to better environmental conditions in utero
during the first and second trimester are less likely to die before age 12.
We assess the robustness of these results by controlling for birth cohort and seasonality effects.
Particularly, we extend our basic model by adding two comparison groups: children of the same birth
cohorts from families that emigrated from Ethiopia to Israel prior to "Operation Solomon" and after
"Operation Solomon". These analyses point clearly that the positive effect of the better environmental
conditions in utero that we estimate is only for children who were in utero in Israel during the critical
period (the first trimester) and that cannot be explained by birth cohort or seasonality effects.
2

Stratifying the sample by gender, we find that the effect on cognitive outcomes is larger and significant
mostly among girls and that the effect on mortality is negative and significant only for boys. Finally, in
a sort of a placebo exercise, we apply the same empirical strategy and estimate the same treatment
effect for immigrants who arrived around the same time to Israel from the Former Soviet Union (FSU),
where in utero environmental conditions were similar to those in Israel. Interestingly, and reassuring
our main hypothesis, we find that gestational age upon arrival to Israel has no effect on cognitive
outcomes among immigrants from the FSU, in sharp contrast with our findings regarding the
immigrants from Ethiopia.
This research contributes to the existing literature by investigating the effects of better
environmental conditions in utero in different stages of pregnancy on cognitive outcomes. The focus
on children of immigrants is particularly important given the large immigration waves from developing
to industrialized countries that are observed in recent decades. Our findings on the critical period of
in utero conditions have paramount implications for the understanding of intergenerational effects of
immigration and have policy implications for developed and developing countries. In the context of
rich countries that have become destinations for legal and illegal immigrants from poor nations, it
provides rationale for targeting resources at early childhood to children of immigrant families who
were born abroad and especially, to pregnant immigrant women. For poor nations, it identifies a prebirth period where improved conditions can have economically meaningful payoffs in the long-term.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the related
literature. Section 3 provides some background on micronutrient deficiencies during pregnancy in
developing countries, describes the historical background of Ethiopian Jews that immigrated to Israel
in May 1991, and shows evidence on major environmental differences between their life in Ethiopia
and their life in Israel upon arrival. Section 4 describes the data and section 5 describes the empirical
strategy. Section 6 presents the results about the effect of environmental conditions in utero on a
variety of high school outcomes as well as robustness checks and reports results on birth weight and
mortality. Section 7 examines potential alternative interpretations and discusses measurement issues,
section 8 assesses the potential longer-term returns and section 9 concludes.
2. Literature on the Effect of in Utero Conditions
The epidemiological literature has explored the fetal origins hypothesis analyzing different effects
and timing. Starting with Barker (1992), this hypothesis suggests that certain chronic conditions later
in life can be traced to the course of fetal development. Neugebauer et al. (1999) showed that prenatal
under-nutrition caused by the Dutch famine after the end of World War II increased the risk for
antisocial behaviors in off-springs. de Rooij et al. (2010) found that men and women exposed to this
famine during the early stage of gestation performed worse on a selective attention task. Nowakowski
and Hayes (2008) and Loganovskaja and Loganovsky (1999) investigated the effect of radiation
3

exposure during pregnancy on cognitive abilities of the off-springs and report that sub-clinical damage
caused by radiation to human fetuses between 8 and 25 weeks of gestation can result in cognitive
deficits that still manifest 16-18 years after birth. This period of gestation is critical since it is the major
neuron genetic period of the developing human neocortex. Other researches have shown that
maternal dietary deficiencies of micronutrient like iron, folic acid, and iodine are associated with a
variety of poor fetal and infant health outcomes, mostly impacting brain development and function in
infancy and often throughout life. Mihaila et al. (2011) links mother’s iron deficiency early in pregnancy
to profound and long-lasting effect damage to brain development of the child. de Escobar et al. (2007)
claims that an inadequate supply of iodine during gestation results in damage to the fetal brain and
the birth of many children with learning disabilities may be prevented by advising women to take
iodine supplements as soon as pregnancy starts.
Recent studies in economics contribute to the identification of the effects of in utero conditions
on later life outcomes by exploiting random and exogenous shocks affecting pregnant mothers. Studies
that focus on short term outcomes find that negative environmental shocks have a detrimental effect
on fetal health after birth, often measured by birth weight [Lien and Evans (2005), Evans and Lien
(2005) Camacho (2008) Currie and Walker (2011)].2 Most recent studies focus on estimating the effect
of environmental conditions in utero on long-term human capital outcomes. For example Almond
(2006) reports that children of Influenza Pandemic infected pregnant mothers in the US were about
20% more likely to be disabled and experienced lower educational attainment and wages. Similarly,
Lin and Liu (2014) find that cohorts in utero during the Influenza Pandemic in Taiwan are shorter, less
educated and more likely to have serious health problems. Almond et al. (2007) report that acute
maternal malnutrition caused by the 1959-1961 Chinese famine was associated with greater risk of
being illiterate and worse labor market and marriage outcomes. Almond et al. (2009) find that the
birth cohort exposed in Sweden to the 1986 Chernobyl (Ukraine) accident radiation between week 8
and 25 of gestation performed substantially worse in school but do not detect corresponding health
damage. Banerjee et al. (2010) consider the 19th century blight to French vineyards from the phylloxera
insect that decreased wine production and income and find that children born to affected families
were 0.5 to 0.9 centimeters shorter in adulthood. Other studies show that infection diseases (Barreca,
2010) and food scarcity (Baten et al. 2007) around the time of birth lead to detrimental educational
outcomes later in life.
Our paper is related to these studies by focusing on the link between in utero environmental
conditions and later life outcomes. A unique feature of this study is that it is based on a positive event
of environmental differences caused by moving from a developing country with poor health care and

2

Other related studies evaluate the long-term effects of newborn outcomes (e.g. birth weight) on human capital
[Currie and Hyson (1999), Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004), Black et al.(2007) and Oreopoulos et al.(2008)].

4

living conditions to a western country with advanced medical care and better living conditions such as
better hygiene and nutrition. One of the main differences that pregnant women faced upon
immigration was the supplement of micronutrients. Almond and Mazumder (2011) and Almond et al.
(2014) found a positive relationship between appropriate nutrition of the mother during the pregnancy
and cognitive abilities of their children in the long term. Field et al. (2009) found that iodine
supplementation for pregnant women in Tanzania led to an increase in schooling attainment of
children of treated mothers with a larger effect for girls, consistent with laboratory evidence indicating
greater cognitive sensitivity of the female fetus to maternal thyroid deprivation. Feyrer et al. (2013)
find that salt iodization in the US raised IQ by approximately one standard deviation.
Hoynes et al. (2012) evaluate the impact of the Food Stamps Program (FSP) as a positive policydriven event that generated an increase in family resources. They find that access to the FSP in utero
and in early childhood led to a large reduction in the incidence of “metabolic syndrome” (obesity, high
blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes) as well as an increase in self-reported ‘good health’. Van den
Berg et al. (2012) estimate the effects of changes in environmental conditions of immigrant children
to Sweden on height as a proxy to long run health status.
3. Background
3.1. Micronutrient Deficiencies during Pregnancy in Developing Countries
Vitamins and minerals, referred to collectively as micronutrients, have important influences on the
health of pregnant women and the growing fetus. A recent Joint statement by the World Health
Organization (WHO), the World Food Program, and the United Nations Children’s Fund (2007) states
that more than 2 billion people in the world are estimated to be deficient in key vitamins and minerals,
particularly vitamin A, iodine, iron and zinc. Most of these people live in low income countries and are
typically deficient in more than one micronutrient. Iron, iodine and folic acid are among the most
important micronutrients that are relevant for in utero cognition and brain development. The WHO
report from 2008 on worldwide prevalence of anemia 1993–2005 estimates that the highest
proportion of individuals affected by anemia is in Africa. In Ethiopia, anemia is a severe problem
affecting both pregnant (62.7%) and non-pregnant women of childbearing age (52.3%). According to
the WHO report, more than half of this anemia burden is due to iron deficiency (ID), the rest partly
due to deficiency of folic acid, vitamin B12, vitamin A, and due to parasitic infections.
Many important developing processes such as myelination, dendritogenesis, synaptogenesis, and
neurotransmission are highly dependent on iron-containing enzymes and hemoproteins (Lozoff, 2007).
ID disrupts these processes in a regionally specific manner, depending on which brain areas are rapidly
developing at the time of the deficiency (Kretchmer et al., 1996). Several longitudinal studies in
humans have concluded that fetal or neonatal iron deficiency anemia is associated with diminished
general autonomic response, motor maturity and self-regulation (Hernandez-Martinez et al. 2011),
5

higher levels of negative emotionality and lower levels of alertness and soothability in infants (Wachs
et al. 2005), slower neuronal conduction (Amin et al. 2010), worse learning ability and memory at 3 to
4 years, and poorer performance (Riggins et al. 2009). The irreversibility of maternal iron deficiency
was demonstrated by reports on cognitive and behavioral alterations that persisted into childhood and
adolescence despite iron treatment in infancy (Grantham-McGregor and Ani 2001,Lozoff et al. 2000).
Researchers hypothesized that there exists a "window of vulnerability" to the harmful effects of
iron deficiency. In an animal study, Mihaila et al. (2011) demonstrated that maternal exposure to an
iron-deficient diet either prior to conception, at the start of the first trimester, or at the onset of second
trimester had a significant negative impact on the offspring’s nervous system, placing the window of
vulnerability for the fetus in the first two trimesters of gestation.
An additional critical micronutrient deficiency in developing countries is Iodine deficiency. A 2004
WHO report notes that almost two billion people (260 million of them in Africa) are estimated to be at
risk of iodine deficiency. Iodine deficiency is now recognized by the WHO as the most common
preventable cause of brain damage in the world today (Preedy et al., 2009). Populations who live in
areas with low iodine content in soil and water are at highest risk for iodine deficiency. Dairy foods and
certain fruits and vegetables can be rich in iodine but only if they originate from iodine rich areas where
the nutrient can be absorbed into the foods (Ahmed et al., 2012).
Humans require iodine for biosynthesis of thyroid hormone. The thyroid hormones affect the
central nervous system development and regulate many physiological processes. In utero,
development of the central nervous system required for intellectual functioning depends critically on
adequate supply of thyroid hormone, which influences the density of neural networks established in
the developing of the brain (Lamberg, 1991). Up to mid-gestation, the mother is the only iodine source
for the developing brain of the foetus. An inadequate supply of iodine during gestation results in
damage to the fetal brain that is irreversible by mid-gestation unless timely interventions can correct
the accompanying maternal hypothyroxinemia. Even mild to moderate maternal hypothyroxinemia
may result in suboptimal neurodevelopment (de Escobar et al., 2007).
A longitudinal study in China showed that iodine supplementation in the first and second
trimesters of pregnancy decreased the prevalence of moderate and severe neurological abnormalities
and increased developmental test scores through 7 years, compared with supplementation later in
pregnancy or treatment after birth (Cao et al., 1994). Results from a long term follow-up of this
intervention suggests that Iodine supplementation before the third trimester predicted higher
psychomotor test scores for children relative to those provided iodine later in pregnancy or at 2 years
(O'Donnell et al. 2002). Additional studies also show that iodine treatment late in pregnancy or
afterward had no benefits of children’s IQ at 5 years of age and under, but treatment early in pregnancy
or prior to conception improved IQ (see review by Bougma et al, 2013) . Overall, the consensus in the
literature is that cognition is sensitive to iodine deficiency exclusively during early fetal life (prior to
6

mid-gestation) whereas growth and psychomotor development are believed to be most affected by
deficiency in infancy (Cao et al., 1994 and Isa et al., 2000).
Folic acid deficiencies in developing countries are a major public health problem among two high-risk
groups: pregnant women and young children. Adequate folic acid (folate) is critical to embryonic and
fetal growth developmental stages characterized by accelerated cell division. It plays an important part
in the development of the fetus' spinal cord and brain. In particular, folate is needed for closure of the
neural tube early in pregnancy (Czeizel and Dudas, 1992, Czeizel et al., 2004). Folic acid deficiency in
early pregnancy increases dramatically the chance of a spinal cord problem (Neural Tube Defect) or
brain development problems. Therefore, folic acid supplement is advised for at least the first 12 weeks
of pregnancy for all women - even if they are healthy and have a good diet. If folic acid supplementation
starts after the first trimester of pregnancy, it will not help to prevent these poor birth outcomes.
Several human studies demonstrated improved cognitive performance in children, following maternal
folic acid supplement use during the first trimester of pregnancy (Villamor et al. 2012; Chatzi et al.
2012; Roth et al. 2011; Julvez et al. 2009).
3.2. The Immigration of Ethiopians Jews to Israel3
The Ethiopian Jewish community, known also as "Beta Israel", has lived in the region of Northern
Ethiopia called Gondar for several centuries.4 The existence of this remote community became known
in the Jewish world only late in the 19th century and they were recognized as Jewish by the state of
Israel only in 1975, after the Chief Rabbinate's ruling that recognized the Beta Israel as descendants of
one of Israel’s lost tribes. They were then entitled to migrate to Israel as full citizens under the Law of
Return. Since then, 92,000 Ethiopians were brought to Israel in organized immigration projects and
become immediately Israeli citizens.
Figure 1 presents the immigration trend of the Ethiopians Jews from Ethiopia to Israel. The pick in
1984 reflects the worsening conditions in Ethiopia due to the drought and consequent famine and the
unstable political situation during this period. Thousands of Beta Israel fled Ethiopia on foot for refugee
camps in Sudan, a journey which took from two weeks to a month. It is estimated that as many as
4,000 died during the trek, due to violence and illness along the way. Sudan secretly allowed Israel to
evacuate the refugees in a project known as "Operation Moses" which begun in November 21, 1984.
The Operation involved the air transport of about 8,000 Ethiopian Jews from Sudan via
Brussels to Israel, ending on January 5, 1985, when the operation became public and Arab countries
pressured Sudan to stop the airlift.

3

This section is based on Kaplan and Rosen (1994)
After the rise of Christianity in Ethiopia in the fourth century, the Jews who refused to convert were persecuted
and withdrew to the mountainous Gondar region where they made their homes for more than 2000 years.
4

7

Between 1985 and 1989 the Ethiopian authorities limited the movement of all citizens, Jews
included, making immigration almost impossible. The renewal of diplomatic relations between Israel
and Ethiopia in November of 1989 and the involvement of American and Canadian Jewish
organizations, in particular the American Association for Ethiopian Jews (AAEJ) and North American
Conference on Ethiopian Jewery (NACEJ), opened new possibilities to renew immigration to Israel. On
May 1990, AAEJ hired busses and brought Jews from their villages at the north of the country to the
capital Addis Ababa. Then NACEJ opened a compound in Addis Ababa where Jewish families resided,
waiting for permission to fly to Israel. They did not know when they will be going to Israel and accepted
the fact that they would be living in Addis Ababa for the time being. However, following political and
military turmoil in Ethiopia, and after the Ethiopian dictator Mengistu fled the country in May 1991,
the Israeli government decided to airlift the Ethiopians Jews from the Ethiopian capital before rebels
take over Addis Ababa. On May 24th 1991, over 14,000 Ethiopian Jews (all the Jewish population who
lived in Addis Ababa and almost the entire Jewish population remaining in Ethiopia) were airlifted to
Israel within 36 hours (see Figure 2) in an operation named “Operation Solomon”. Upon arrival to
Israel, the immigrants were placed in absorption centers where they stayed for a few years until they
moved to permanent housing.5 The immigration from Ethiopia to Israel continued after "Operation
Solomon" but in small numbers, mainly from rural areas in Qwara near Gondar until 1999. Afterwards
the immigration was mainly of the "Falash Mura" people while the last flight of immigrants from
Ethiopia to Israel landed on August 2013.6
3.3. Environmental Conditions of "Operation Solomon" Immigrants in Ethiopia and in Israel
There are large environmental differences between Ethiopia and Israel that may have affected
pregnant mothers. We conducted in depth interviews with fifteen mothers of children from our base
sample who were pregnant at the time of immigration and asked them about the living conditions,
nutrition, micro nutrient supplements, health care, and pregnancy monitoring before and after
immigration. We describe below the main differences in environmental conditions experienced by
mothers in our sample in Ethiopia and in Israel based on these interviews, the media, and other
relevant literature.
Living conditions: Prior to "Operation Solomon", the Ethiopian Jews were still living in hundreds of
small remote villages in northern Ethiopia. Their lifestyle, beliefs and occupations were typical of a
traditional society. Less than 30 percent of the population was literate in their native languages and

5

For more details, see Gould, Lavy and Paserman (2004).
"Falash Mura" is a name given to those of the "Beta Israel" community in Ethiopia who converted to Christianity
under pressure from the mission during the 19th century and the 20th century. In 2003, the Israeli government
gave to those who are descendants from Jewish mothers’ lineage the right to immigrate to Israel under the Israeli
Law of Return and to obtain citizenship only if they converted to Orthodox Judaism.
6

8

schools were not accessible to the majority of the population. In May 1990, a large part of this
population migrated to Addis Ababa, where they were housed in refugee camps scattered all over the
city, in living conditions not better than in the rural areas they came from. After their arrival to Israel,
immigrants were housed in absorption centers (80 percent) and mobile home camps (20 percent) for
the first few years.
General medical care: In rural villages local traditional practitioners provided most of the medical care
utilizing traditional medications and treatments. The common western perception of disease causation
was not common. For many, the first exposure to western medical practices was through the AJDC's
medical clinics in Addis Ababa before their evacuation to Israel. Shortly after arrival to Addis Ababa,
the incidence of malaria, hepatitis and tuberculosis increased and the AJDC rapidly developed a
comprehensive medical program that was implemented in August 20, 1990. The program included
immunization and training of Ethiopian health practitioners by Israeli doctors and served
approximately 4,000 families. These health services reduced significantly the death rate in the
following months (Myers, 1993).
Following their arrival to Israel, the immigrants were registered in family groups according to date
of arrival, age and sex. Weight and height were recorded, and physical examinations were carried out
by medical teams. Blood samples were obtained for complete blood count, VDRL, HBsAg, GCPD and
SMA-12. Urinalysis and thick film examination for malaria and borreliosis were performed
concomitantly. Chest X-rays and tuberculin tests were performed in all immigrants (Nahmias et al.,
1993).
Most of the absorption centers had a primary care clinic, which provided medical services to the
immigrants. Other centers were in close proximity to a primary health clinic where they were entitled
to receive free health care as all Israeli citizens. All clinics were staffed with a family physician, a nurse,
an interpreter/mediator and an administrator (Flatau et al., 1993; Sgan-Cohen et al., 1993, Shtarkshall
et al., 2009; Levin-Zamir et al. 1993). The medical teams at the primary care clinics provided care of
acute and chronic illness and preventive care, which included mother and child health and
immunizations (Yaphe et al., 2001).
The Israeli health authorities developed an education health program to bridge the cultural gaps
between immigrants and health care practitioners and to promote effectively the transfer of skills to
the immigrants regarding proper health care, nutrition, western perception of prescribed medications,
and personal hygiene (Levin-Zamir et al., 1993).
Nutrition: The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) reports that in 1993 the calorie
supply per capita in Ethiopia was 1,516 while in Israel it was twice as large, 3,089 (Israeli Central Bureau
of Statistics7). The traditional Ethiopian diet consisted of unrefined flours, grains, vegetables, refined

7

Sixty Years in the Eyes of Statistics - Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), May 2008, pp.17 [in Hebrew]

9

sugars, and processed foods and was limited in meat. These eating habits changed upon arrival to
Israel as many of the traditional Ethiopian staples were not available at the time in Israel. In the
absorption centers in Israel, they were served Israeli style food communally and those who prepared
food at home had to use other ingredients, for example, refined white flour instead of teff (Levin-zamir
et al, 1993).
Micronutrient supplements for pregnant women: Three main micro nutrient supplements are
important for cognition and their intake is recommended for pregnant women: iron, iodine and folic
acid. The 2011 Ethiopian Demographic and Health Survey reports that 83% of women did not take iron
tablets during their last pregnancy and less than 1% took them for 90 days or more during their last
pregnancy.8 Furthermore, in Ethiopia, according to a situational analysis carried out by the Ministry of
Health (MOH) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) in 1993, 78% of the total population
of Ethiopia are exposed to iodine deficiency and 62% are iodine deficient (Taye and Argaw, 1997).
Based on the WHO report from 2004, Ethiopia is categorized among moderately iodine deficient
countries and only 20% of the households had salts adequately iodized.9
In Israel in contrast, it was a standard practice at that time to prescribe vitamin and iron
supplement to pregnant women. Ethiopian women who arrived in operation Solomon agreed to take
these supplements even though they thought that in Ethiopia this was not needed because "the food
was better, it contains more vitamins than the food in Israel" (Granot et al., 1996). In addition, there is
no iodine deficiency disorders among pregnant women in Israel, largely because Israel's food chain
contains adequate amounts of iodine (Benbassat et al., 2004).10
Health Care and Pregnancy Monitoring: Ethiopian women who lived in rural areas shared the view that
pregnancy does not require medical attention. The Ethiopian immigrant's beliefs that pregnancy
outcomes are all at god’s will. They gave birth at home with assistance from family and neighbors, and
a traditional birth attendant or lay midwife. In contrast, in Israel, pregnancy is closely monitored, the
baby and mother are examined periodically before and after birth and almost all births are at hospitals.
As a result, most deliveries of Ethiopian babies in Israel were also at hospitals with the assistance of
formally trained professionals rather than traditional home delivery practices as in Ethiopia. At the
years 1990-1991, the infant mortality rate was 12% in Ethiopia and 1% in Israel and child mortality rate
was 20% in Ethiopia but only 1.2% in Israel (The World Bank, 1991). All the women in our survey

8

Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 2011, pp.187.
Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 2005, pp.151.
10
Israel is one of the few western countries that have no iodization policy and where a national iodine survey
was not done until 2013, largely because of the perception that Israel is an iodine-sufficient country due to its
proximity to the Mediterranean (Zohar, 1994). According to Ovadia et al. (2013) only recently, there is some
evidence for inadequate iodine intake in Israel (two thirds of the recommended dietary allowance). A possible
explanation is the increasing proportion of desalinated seawater in Israeli's drinking water (desalination plants
typically remove 90-98% of soluble minerals, including iodine, from seawater). However, desalination seawater
in Israel started few years after the period in our analysis.
9

10

mentioned that in Ethiopia they did not receive any medical care related to the pregnancy while in
Israel they were under medical monitoring which included blood tests, ultrasound, and vitamin
supplements intake (mainly iron and folic acid).
4. Data
We construct a dataset based on the Israeli population registry of all the Ethiopian population in Israel
born in Ethiopia or in Israel during the years 1980 to 2005 and their parents. Our data includes their
birth date, date of immigration, and country of origin. It also includes the date of immigration and
country of origin of the parents, the number of siblings, and the locality of residence of the mother
upon arrival to Israel. We also have information on date of death which permit measuring mortality of
children until age 12. We merge these data with administrative records on birth weight for children
born in Israel collected by the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics based on hospital deliveries and with
data on parent's income from the Israeli Tax Authority. We identify those children whose both parents
immigrated to Israel from Ethiopia in "Operation Solomon" on May 24th 1991 and link these data to
administrative records collected by the Israeli Ministry of Education which include information on
students parental education, yearly schooling status (graduated, currently attending school, dropped
out) and high school Baccalaureate exams outcomes.11 We focus on two types of school outcomes; the
first measures schooling attainment by the following indicators: repeated a grade after primary school
(after 6th grade), completed high school and received a Baccalaureate certificate.12 The second type of
outcomes measure quality of schooling attainment and includes the following variables: total credit
units awarded in the Baccalaureate certificate and credit units awarded in mathematics and English.
We also note that total credit units in mathematics and English are highly correlated with IQ (Dvir et
al., 2009). We do not use test scores as outcomes because a large proportion of our sample do not sit
for the Baccalaureate exams or do so only some of them.13

11

More precisely, since the immigration operation lasted 36 hours, we include children whose date of
immigration was May 24 or May 25 1991. To simplify writing, we mention in the paper May 24 as immigration
date (although we use the exact day – May 24 or May 25 for our calculations of gestational age).
12
Since our sample includes children born between 1991 and 1992, they all should be high school graduates in
2011 or at least be high school students (compulsory schooling at that time was until 10th grade). A
Baccalaureate certificate is a prerequisite for admission for academic post-secondary institutions. There are also
many employers who require this certificate. Students award a Baccalaureate certificate by passing a series of
national exams in core and elective subjects during high school years. Students can choose to be tested in each
subject at different levels of proficiency, with each test awarding the student between one and five credit units
per subject, varying by the proficiency level of the exam (one is the lowest level and five the highest).
13
Given that all Baccalaureate and school attainment outcomes that we examine are binary or count variables,
they are also well defined for those who have missing values because they died or dropped out from school. We
therefore perform the analysis on educational outcomes using the whole sample of children thus, avoiding
selection issues. We discuss this in detail in section 6.5.b where we analyze mortality and assess robustness of
our main results.

11

Our primary sample includes 594 students born in Israel whose pregnancy was incepted in Ethiopia
and their mothers immigrated to Israel in "Operation Solomon" (on 24th May 1991). That is, we select
students born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992.14 This yields cohorts that span a
different share of time in the living standards of Israel between conception and birth. Table 1 presents
summary statistics for the variables used in our analysis for our primary sample and for two other
groups of children of Ethiopian origin born at the same period (between May 27th 1991 and February
15th 1992). Column 1 presents means of background and outcome variables for the children in our
primary sample, column 2 for the children born in Israel at the same time to Ethiopian parents who
arrived to Israel before 1989 (we refer to them as group A – second-generation immigrants from
"Operation Moses"), and column 3 for children born in Ethiopia at the same time who immigrated to
Israel after 1991 but before 2000 (we refer to them as group B – post "Operation Solomon"
immigrants). In our main sample (column 1), the mothers are slightly older at birth relative to the
mothers who conceived and gave birth in Israel (column 2) and to the mothers who conceived and
gave birth in Ethiopia (column 3). The average mother ages are 30.7, 28.9 and 27.4, respectively. In
addition, the age gap between parents is higher in our main sample (column 1): almost 11 years
compared to 6.9 (column 2) and 9.4 (column 3) in the other two groups. Parents’ average years of
schooling is 1.3 and 1.4, which is less than a half of the average years of schooling of parents of children
from Ethiopian origin born in Israel during that period (4 for the fathers and 3.8 for the mothers in
column 2) but it is similar to the average years of schooling of parents of Ethiopian born children who
immigrated with their parents after May 1991 (column 3). These means are much lower in comparison
to respective average years of schooling of parents of the Jewish Israeli native students, which are
around 12 years of schooling. We also report in the table the mean of family income in 1995, which
shows clearly that it is much higher for families that immigrated before 1989. We show below that the
mean of this variable is not statistically different across the samples of first, second and third
trimesters.
The means of the outcome variables in our primary sample are also lower than those of children
born in Israel to Ethiopian parents who arrived to Israel before 1989 (column 2) but they are similar
(though marginally lower) to those of the Ethiopian born sample (column 3). For example, the
Baccalaureate rate at age 18 in our main sample is 30.5 percent, it is 35.1 percent for the Ethiopian
origin Israeli born sample (column 2) and it is 32 percent for the Ethiopian born sample (column 3).
However, these rates are much lower in comparison to the native Jewish population, 59 percent in
2012.15 The means of other high school outcomes follow the same pattern. For example, total credit
units of the Israeli native population is above 17, while it is around 11.58 for our main analysis sample,

14
15

Assuming 38 weeks of post conception gestation.
Source: Israel's CBS, Statistical Abstract of Israel 2014 (Education – pp.406)

12

12.85 for children of Ethiopian parents who immigrated previous to "Operation Salomon" and 11.98
for children born in Ethiopia who immigrated with their parents after May 1991. Birth weight and child
mortality data is available only for children born in Israel. So we can only compare between "Operation
Salomon" offspring and those born in the same period whose parents immigrated in the previous
immigration wave. The average birth weight in our primary sample is 3.06 kg while 11 percent were
born at low birth weight (less than 2.5 kg) and only 0.5 percent were born at very low birth weight (less
than 1.5 kg). The birth weight of children born in Israel to Ethiopian parents who immigrated before
1989 is similar. The mortality rate in our primary sample is 2%, but the mortality rate for the children
born in Israel at the same time to Ethiopian parents who arrived to Israel before 1989 is much lower,
about 1 percent, a rate similar to the respective rate among the entire Israeli population (The World
Bank, 1991).
5. Empirical Strategy
5.1. Baseline Model and Specification
"Operation Solomon" crates a quasi-experimental framework where children of Ethiopian
immigrants who shared the same background characteristics and were born shortly after arrival to
Israel experienced one important difference: their mothers were at different stages of pregnancy on
the day of immigration. That is, all these children experienced the same conditions at birth and at later
life but faced dramatic differences in prenatal conditions in utero based on their gestational age upon
arrival to Israel in May 1991. This difference was determined solely by the timing of the pregnancy in
Ethiopia. Children who were in-utero in Ethiopia for a longer period and were born a short time after
their mothers immigrated to Israel on May 1991 ‘missed’ the Israeli environmental conditions in utero
and probably suffered more from micronutrient deficiencies of iron, folic acid, and iodine. However,
children whose mothers conceived a short time before they immigrated to Israel on May 1991 were
in-utero in Israel for a longer period and could benefit from these better Israeli environmental
conditions and micronutrient supplements.
In order to estimate the causal effect of these conditions in utero on later life outcomes we assume
that children who were born in Israel but whose mothers were at different stages of pregnancy at the
time of immigration have the same unobserved characteristics and would have the same mean
potential outcomes. The key identifying assumption is that the timing of conception in Ethiopia relative
to the timing of immigration was random.
Migration decision and the timing of migration are usually endogenous and correlate with
immigrant's characteristics. However, "Operation Solomon" created a different setting of migration
since it was an unexpected event, completed in a very short time. The operation was organized by the
Israeli government and it brought to Israel almost all Ethiopians Jews who lived in Ethiopia. Thus, the
immigrants were not a selected group. Moreover, the timing of immigration was unknown so that
13

pregnancies could not be planned according to migration date and migration could not be planned
according to the expected due date.16 This sudden immigration event generated a unique exogenous
improvement to in-utero environmental conditions allowing us to compare between children who
were exposed to better environmental conditions at a different gestational age but experienced the
same conditions at birth and later life to identify the causal effect of in utero environmental conditions
on later life outcomes.
In this paper, we focus on schooling outcomes by age 18-20 which are good measures of cognitive
ability and skills. Since the immigration event we study occurred 24 years ago, we are able to observe
the schooling outcomes of children who were in utero at that time but it is still too early to analyze
their labor market performance. Nevertheless, as we show below, schooling outcomes are a good
predictor for adult achievement in the labor market. Our basic identification strategy differs from
previous design-based studies in the fetal origins literature. Typically, natural experiments induced by
famines, disease outbreaks, or droughts are episodic: they are turned on and then turned off. In
contrast, once the mother immigrated to Israel the child was exposed to better environmental
conditions of a western country not only in utero but also at birth and for his entire life course.
In order to estimate the impact of in utero environmental conditions on later life outcomes we
focus only on children who differ in the timing of exposure to the improved environmental conditions
in utero but experienced the same environmental conditions at conception and at birth and later in
life. That is, comparison is inherently about additional exposure to better environmental conditions in
utero, conditional on being exposed at birth and later in childhood, similar to the approach in Hoynes
et al. (2012). We also analyze the effect on birth weight and mortality as outcomes of early life health.
The key variable for our analysis is the gestational age of the child at immigration. The gestational
age is measured as the difference between the date of immigration, which is May 24th 1991, and the
individual’s birth date. We transform the difference into numbers of weeks since it is the common
measure for pregnancy duration. The weeks of gestation at the time of immigration (May 24th 1991)
are computed assuming 38 weeks of post conception gestation (40 weeks of gestational age).17

16

It is reasonable to assume that there was no birth planning among the Ethiopian Jewish population before
immigration. The contraceptive prevalence rate in Ethiopia in 1990 was only 2.9 percent (Olson and Piller, 2013).
Total fertility rate among Ethiopian immigrants was 5.2 (Israel's CBS, 2003). An article published in January 2008
in the daily newspaper "Yediout Hacharonot", claimed that contraceptive injections of Depo-Provera were
administered systematically to Ethiopian women before they migrated since the mid 1990’s (after the wave of
Operation Solomon). We also note that Depo-Provera received the FDA approval only in 1992 and was first
approved to be used in Israel as a contraceptive method in 1996. Therefore, it could not affect the timing of
pregnancy of women in our samples and has no effect on the cohorts under the analysis in this study. For more
information see Fidelman (2013).
17
The most common measure of pregnancy age is based on gestational age, which counts number of weeks from
the last menstrual period. The average pregnancy length computed by gestational age is 40 weeks, which means
38 weeks by fertilization age. Through the paper, we only focus on the 38 week period after fertilization since
we do not want to include children whose mothers became pregnant upon arrival to Israel. We therefore drop
weeks 0 and 1 of the sample but we still refer to gestational age to be consistent with common nomenclature.

14

In the medical literature, it is common to divide the pregnancy duration into three periods by
trimesters. We therefore define treatment categories by gestational age at time of immigration
according to the three trimesters as follows: (1) gestational age between conception time (week 2)
and week 12 where exposure to the Israeli environmental conditions started during the first trimester,
(2) gestational age between week 13 and week 26 and (3) gestational age between week 27 and birth.
These three trimesters can be mapped into three groups defined by date of birth: the first trimester
includes children born between December 4th 1991 and February 15th 1992, the second trimester
includes children born between August 28th 1991 and December 3rd 1991, and the third trimester
includes children born between May 27th 1991 and August 27th 1991. Figure 3 illustrates the definition
of the three trimesters according to birth date and estimated conception date. One potential challenge
regarding our definition of treatment is that we do not have exact information on conception date and
we estimate it using date of birth. This means that we might misclassify some of the children regarding
their length of exposure to the Israeli environment. We discuss the issue of misclassification in section
7 and show that our results are robust to potential misclassification of treatment status.
The medical literature, (e.g. Catherine et al., 2009) suggests that the first trimester is a period of
rapid growth, and the fetus main external features, including the brain, begin to take form. At the end
of the first trimester, all major systems are developed, so this is a crucial time for the development of
the offspring. In the second trimester, the fetus grows considerably in size. By the beginning of the
third trimester, the fetus may survive if born premature. In this period, growth slows down but there
is a substantial weight gain. We therefore refer to the first trimester group as the "fully treated" group;
the second trimester group is "partly treated" and the third trimester is "untreated". Our basic
regression model is specified as follows:

(1) yi   0  1 First _ Trimesteri   2 Second _ Trimesteri  X i'  ui
Where

yi is the outcome of child𝑖. The dummy variables First _ Trimesteri and

Second _ Trimesteri are the key explanatory variables. First _ Trimesteri takes the value 1 for
children whose mothers immigrated to Israel during the first trimester of gestation (group 1) and

Second _ Trimesteri takes the value 1 for children whose mothers immigrated to Israel during the
second trimester of gestation (group 2). The omitted category is the third group Third _ Trimesteri
which includes children with the shortest exposure to better in utero conditions (i.e. those whose
mothers spent most of their pregnancy in Ethiopia). The estimated parameters ( 1 and

 2 ) reflect the

difference between being exposed to better environmental conditions and receiving micronutrient
supplements starting from the first or second trimester respectively, relative to the third trimester.

X i is a vector of child i 's characteristics which includes mother age at birth, parents age gap, birth
15

order, parents' education, socio-economic index of the mother's first locality of residence upon
immigration to Israel, gender, and indicator for twins.18
If micronutrient supplements and better environmental conditions in utero enhance cognitive
abilities, we expect that children who were exposed to these conditions in utero for a longer period,
especially during the first trimester, will have better schooling outcomes. In particular, we expect

1   2  0 . The quasi-experimental variation generated by the unexpected date of immigration
relative to conception date guarantees that duration of exposure to better conditions in utero is
uncorrelated with the residual, thus the parameters  1 and

 2 can be interpreted as causal.

5.2. Controlling for Cohort and Months of Birth Effects
A potential concern about the baseline specification presented above is that the estimates may be
confounded by unobserved cohort effects or seasonality in school performance by month of birth since
the students in the full treatment group (first trimester) are younger. Such potential cohort or
seasonality effects may be picked by the treatment effect estimates. To address these concerns we
look for a comparison group that has no variation in gestational age at migration but was born within
the same window of interest. This allows for estimation of birth cohort and seasonality effects in a kind
of Difference-in-Difference framework. As discussed in the data section, we define as comparison
group A second-generation immigrants from "Operation Moses" (immigrated before 1989) born in the
same time window as our main sample. Since the entire pregnancy of children in group A was in Israel,
they were all fully treated. Therefore, differences between children born at different months should
reflect cohort effects and month of birth (seasonality) effects in Israel. However, since the conception
of our main sample was in Ethiopia, seasonality in the timing of conception will not be captured by
comparison group A. We therefore add a comparison group B – Ethiopian children born in Ethiopia
who immigrated with their families after "Operation Solomon" as a second comparison group.19 Since
the entire gestation period of children of this second comparison group was in Ethiopia, they are all
considered untreated and so the difference between children born at different months in this group
should only reflect cohort effects and seasonality in the timing of conception in Ethiopia. The key
assumption in this analysis is that the birth cohort and month of birth effects of these two groups are
good proxies for the same effects in our main sample of in utero "Operation Solomon" immigrants.
The "Operation Solomon" group and the two comparison groups were different in many aspects.
However, all the children in our sample – those who were born to parents who immigrated in
18

The Israel's CBS computes a socio-economic index of the Israeli localities based on several demographic and
economic variables such as dependency ratio, average years of schooling of the adult population, percentage of
academic degree holders, employment and income levels, etc.
19
The immigration from Ethiopia to Israel continues after 2000 but we restricted it to the year 2000 in order to
include only children who start the Israeli secondary education system in Israel and to exclude the "Falash Mura"
people.

16

"Operation Moses", those who were born to parents who immigrated in "Operation Solomon", and
those who were born in Ethiopia and immigrated after "Operation Solomon" - originate from the same
country, have the same genetic profile and culture and were raised by immigrant parents. Moreover,
they were conceived at the same time as our treated sample. Thus, we expect that cohort and
seasonality effects would be similar for these three groups.
To net out seasonality effects from effects that derive from the differences between our main
treated group and the comparison groups, we include also children of parents who came in these three
different immigration waves (i.e. "Operation Solomon", "Operation Moses" and "post-Operation
Solomon") who were born one year before our treated and comparison groups, but at the same
months. That is, we add three additional groups of children born between May 27th 1990 and February
15th 1991. The first group includes children who immigrated to Israel with their families on May 1991.
These children were "untreated" since they were born in Ethiopia. However, they belong to the same
population of our treatment group: "Operation Solomon" immigrants, and therefore have the same
family background. The second group includes offspring of Ethiopian parents who immigrated before
1989 and were born in Israel. The third group includes children born in Ethiopia who immigrated with
their parents after 1991. The estimated model is then specified as follows:

(2) yi   0  1 First _ Trimesteri   2 Second _ Trimesteri   1 ETH i   2 pre _ cohort i
  3 ETH i * pre _ cohort i   4 GroupAi   5 GroupBi  X i'  MOBi  u i
Where First _ Trimesteri and Second _ Trimesteri are the same variables as described for equation
'
(1). X i is a vector of child 𝑖′𝑠 characteristics (defined as in equation 1) and MOBi is a vector of month

of birth fixed effects.20 ETH i is an indicator for children born in Ethiopia. This includes children who
immigrated in "Operation Solomon" (the respective older cohort of our main sample) and children who
immigrated after 1991. pre _ cohort i is an indicator for children born between May 27th 1990 and
February 15th 1991 (the older cohort). GroupAi is an indicator for children born in Israel to "Operation
Moses" immigrants (the first comparison group) and GroupBi is an indicator for children born in
Ethiopia and immigrated after "Operation Solomon" (the second comparison group). The coefficients

1 and  2 represent the treatment effect net of seasonality and cohort effects.

20

Some of the children in our sample who were born in Ethiopia (about 10 percent) have a missing value in month
of birth. We assign to these children a random month of birth and we include dummy for it in the specification.

17

6. Results
6.1. Balancing Tests on Observables and Birth Frequencies
Our main identifying assumption is that the timing of pregnancy relative to immigration date can
be seen as random within the group of mothers who were already pregnant at the time of immigration.
We provide here supporting evidence to this claim by showing that children from the three treatment
groups (according to gestational age, in trimesters, at time of immigration) are not different in their
background characteristics. In addition, we show that the frequency of births in the three trimesters is
similar to the observed frequencies in the two comparison groups who were born during the same
period of interest.
Table 2 presents summary statistics for background characteristics by the three trimester groups.
Column 1 presents means of background variables for the children whose mothers arrived to Israel at
the earliest stage of the pregnancy (during the first trimester). Column 2 presents the respective means
for the children whose mothers arrived to Israel during the second trimester, and column 3 presents
characteristics for children whose mothers arrived during the third trimester. The median gestational
age is roughly in the middle of the range for each group, so no group suffers from over-representation
of only one part of the period. Columns 4, 5 and 6 report the difference in means and their standard
errors between these three groups and column 7 reports estimates where each of the characteristics
is regressed on weeks of gestation upon immigration to assess whether there is a systematic
relationship between immigration at an earlier stage in pregnancy and family background.
Differences in parental education between children who arrived in the different trimesters are not
statistically significant, except for a disadvantage of mothers who arrived in the first trimester relative
to the second. So overall, this works against our concern for a positive selection bias if better family
background correlate with arrival to Israel at earlier stages of pregnancy. The mean SES index of the
initial locality of residence of the mother upon immigration is also lower for the first trimester group
(though not statistically significant). On the other hand, the family annual income four years after
immigration is slightly higher in the first trimester group by more than 1,000 NIS (equal to $250)
compared to the second and third trimester groups. However, differences in income are not
statistically significant. Unfortunately, family income in 1995 is the earliest year available in the
administrative income data. Therefore, since this income variable is measured post treatment, we do
not include it as a control in the regressions.
The proportion of girls in the first and the third trimester is the same (0.462) and it is lower from
the second trimester (0.506) but these differences are insignificant. There are also no significant
differences in mother’s age at birth, mother’s age at first birth, number of siblings, birth order, and
birth-spacing. The mean of parents age gap in the first trimester group is 9.9 which is significantly lower
by 1.5 years from the second trimester group, and it is also lower by almost 1 year from the third
trimester group, although this last difference is insignificant.
18

Overall, differences in parental characteristics and family structure do not point to any particular
advantage of one group relative to the others. Moreover, as reported in column 7, there is no clear
trend showing an association between better family background and a longer exposure in utero to the
Israeli environment (e.g. arrival at earlier stages of pregnancy).
The results presented in this table support our claim that exposure to treatment is indeed as good
as randomly assigned in this natural experimental setting, by showing that children from the three
trimesters groups are not different in their observable characteristics. Specifically, they show that
there is no significant correlation between the observable characteristics of children and the timing of
pregnancy according to our definition of the three "treatment" groups. Of course, the absence of such
statistically significant correlations is not a full proof for treatment status being random but lack of
correlations with observables raises the likelihood of no correlation between treatment status and
unobservable confounders.
Figure 4 plots the frequency of births of our main analysis sample ("Operation Salomon" children)
and the comparison groups who were born in the same period, group A and group B by month of birth
and the stratification by trimesters. As can be seen in the figures, frequency of births in the three
trimesters is similar in our main sample and the two comparison groups and there is no clear evidence
of selection of births across the trimester cutoffs.
To look at this issue in a higher resolution, we plot in Figure 5 the share of births by gestational
week upon immigration to Israel (May 24th 1991) for our main analysis sample and the equivalent
gestational age computed at that same date for the two comparison groups. The vertical lines denote
the trimesters. The figure shows two important facts: (i) there is no clear discontinuity around the
trimester cutoffs in our main analysis sample; (ii) The share of births by week is not significantly
different between our main sample and the two comparison groups. To formally test this issue, we
also estimated a model where the dependent variable is the share of births by week, and examined
whether there were significant differences by trimesters between our main sample and the two
comparison groups. Results (not reported here but available upon request) show no significant
differences in none of the three trimesters.
6.2. Main Results
First, we discuss the results for our baseline model without controlling for seasonality effects. Table
3 presents the results for our baseline model (equation (1)) with and without controls for students'
observable characteristics. In all specifications, the omitted category is the third trimester group.
Columns 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 present estimates for equation (1) without controls and columns 2, 4, 6,
8, 10 and 12 present estimates for equation (1) including controls. We report the estimates of

 2 , and a p-value for the test of equality of these two coefficients.
19

1 and

The estimates reported in columns 1 through 6 show that exposure in utero to micronutrient
supplements and to the Israeli environmental conditions starting from the first trimester of pregnancy
has positive and significant effects on schooling attainment relative to a late exposure at the third
trimester. Students who were exposed to this treatment starting from the first trimester (group 1) are
10.3 percentage points (s.e.=0.036) less likely to repeat a grade during high school and 5.4 percentage
points (s.e.=0.038) less likely to drop out of high school before completing 12th grade compared to
students exposed to treatment only during the third trimester (group 3). These effects increase slightly
to 11.8 percentage points (s.e.=0.038) and 6.9 percentage points (s.e.=0.039) respectively when
controlling for background characteristics. Exposure to treatment during the second trimester is also
associated with lower likelihood of grade repetition and school drop-out compared to the third
trimester, but the effects are much smaller than those obtained for exposure from the first trimester
and are not significant. On the other hand, we cannot reject the hypothesis of equality of coefficients
between the effects of the first and second semester, probably due to a lack of power.
The average rate of high school completion in our sample is 85 percent. Therefore the above
estimate means that exposure to better in utero conditions in Israel from the first trimester improves
graduation rate by 8 percent. This effect is slightly higher relative to other studies that estimated the
effect of prenatal exposure on cognitive outcomes. For example, Field et al. (2009), who also
investigate the effect of in utero micronutrient supplement (iodine), find that that intensive iodine
supplementation for pregnant women in Tanzania increased schooling by half a year, a 6 percent
increase. Almond (2006) found that prenatal exposure to Influenza Pandemic reduced schooling by
0.25 year (2.3 percent relative to an average of 10.6 years of schooling) and the likelihood of
completing high school by 0.03 percentage points (6 percent relative to an average rate of 48 percent).
Performance in the Baccalaureate exams is also improved by a longer exposure to treatment.
Students who were exposed to the Israeli environment starting from the first trimester are 12
percentage points (s.e.=0.052) more likely to obtain a Baccalaureate diploma by the end of high school
compared to students exposed in the last trimester. This effect is twice the size than the effect of
arriving during the second trimester although not statistically different.
The estimated effect for the fully treated group (first trimester) on the Baccalaureate rate is very
large relative to the mean of this outcome in the two other groups, which is about 20 percent: it means
that treatment exposure from the first trimester improved the Baccalaureate rate by 65 percent. This
is a dramatic effect size in absolute terms and relative to any studied and well identified educational
program. Moreover, as we discuss in the data section, the Baccalaureate rate in our sample is
substantially low compared to the Baccalaureate rate among all Jewish students in Israel and the
additional 12 percentage points for the fully treated group represents almost half way of closing this
gap. This effect is twice the effect of attending a high versus low quality primary school among
Ethiopian students in Israel (Gould et al. 2004). Other related studies that examined prenatal exposure
20

to negative shocks like malnutrition and alcohol exposure found negative effect of 20 percent on test
scores (Almond et al. 2014 and Hinke Kessler Scholder et al. 2014).
The above gains are accompanied by improvements in other measures of quality of the high school
Baccalaureate study program as shown in columns 7 through 12. The total Baccalaureate credit units
of children who arrived in the first trimester are 3.3 points higher (s.e.=1.047) than those of children
who arrived in the third trimester, a gain of almost 40 percent. The Math and English credit units are
up by about 0.4 and 0.5 units, a gain of about 30 percent. These are important and large quality gains.
The effect of the second trimester is positive and significant (except for Math) and smaller than the
effect of the first trimester although we cannot reject the hypothesis of equality between these two
effects.
Table 4 presents the results for the DID specification (equation (2)) that controls for cohort and
month of birth fixed effects. The DID estimates for the schooling attainment outcomes are very similar
to the respective OLS estimates and are more precise except for the estimates for obtaining
Baccalaureate diploma by the end of high school which are smaller and less precisely estimated. (The
estimate for obtaining Baccalaureate diploma by the end of high school is smaller. Is it also less
precise? I guess not, but perhaps it could be misunderstood from this sentence). The DID estimates for
the quality of the Baccalaureate program are slightly lower from the respective OLS estimates but not
statistically significant different. Again, the results suggest that early exposure to better in utero
environmental conditions improve the quality of the Baccalaureate diploma. For most of the
outcomes, after controlling for seasonality and cohort effects, we obtain significant differences
between the effects obtained in the first trimester and the second trimester probably due to the
increase in precision. While the impacts of the first trimester are large and significant, the impacts of
the second trimester are smaller and not significantly different from the impacts of the third trimester.
These results suggest that the first trimester of pregnancy constitutes a critical period for cognitive
development.
In Table A1 we explore an alternative simpler specification where we estimate a linear model using
as a main explanatory variable the gestational age (in weeks) at time of immigration. As in our main
sample, we include weeks 2 through 40 of gestational age since weeks 0 and 1 include children who
were conceived in Israel. In line with our main results from the specification stratified by trimesters,
the estimate for gestational age is negative for all outcomes suggesting beneficial effects for earlier
exposure to better in-utero conditions. This model however, assumes a constant marginal effect by
number of weeks of exposure and does not allow capturing the differential effects of the different
gestational periods. We also experimented with additional specifications where we included higher
order polynomials instead of a linear effect but their fit to the data was inferior (lower adjusted Rsquared and higher AIC values). We also estimated a model that included both a week linear effect and
trimester dummies. In these models, the standard errors are much higher because of the high
21

correlation between these covariates but the estimated effect size for the trimester dummies are
almost unchanged and remain statistically significant, highlighting the nonlinear effect by trimester.
We also tried specifications that formally search for a structural break in the data and obtained noisy
and inconsistent estimates across outcomes, most likely because of the relatively small sample size
(594 children).
6. 3. Heterogeneity in the Effect of In-utero Environmental Conditions by Gender
Table 5 presents estimates by gender for our two main specifications: the baseline OLS and the
DID controlling for students background characteristics. We also report the means of the outcome
variables for each sample and the p-value of the difference in the coefficient between boys and girls.
Results reported in columns 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 of table 6 are based on equation (1) (OLS model).
Results reported in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 are based on equation (2) (DID model). The estimates
of the effect of earlier exposure to better environmental conditions in utero reveal an interesting
differential pattern by gender. We observe a large impact of exposure in the first trimester for girls in
all outcomes. In contrast, the impact for boys is smaller and not statistically significant. Differences in
magnitude of the estimated effects between boys and girls are not always significant but all estimates
point to the same overall pattern: exposure to better environmental conditions in utero starting from
the first trimester dramatically improves outcomes for girls but not for boys. In addition, we observe a
smaller but still positive and even sometimes significant effect for girls in the second trimester while
there is no equivalent effect for boys. However, it could be that early exposure to better environmental
conditions improves boys’ outcomes in other dimensions not analyzed here.
Evidence for a larger impact for girls is consistent with the findings of Field et al. (2009) who also
investigate the effect of in utero micronutrient supplement (iodine) and find larger improvements for
girls. Our results are also consistent with other related literature. For example, Baird et al. (2011) find
that in developing countries girls infant mortality is significantly more sensitive to aggregate economic
shocks during pregnancy relative to boys. In addition, studies that analyzed long term outcomes of
negative environmental shocks found higher effects on girls. For example, Oreopoulos et al. (2008)
show that effects of infant health on reaching grade 12 by age 17 appear to be stronger for females
than males. Hoynes et al. (2012) find that increasing family resources during early childhood improve
health at adulthood for both men and women but have positive significant effect on economic selfsufficiency only for women. Gould et al. (2011) also find that early childhood living conditions affected
only girls among families that emigrated from Yemen to Israel in 1948-49. The positive effect on girls
that they found was evident in short term outcomes such as schooling and in long term outcomes such
as employment and earnings at age 55-60.
Why are the effects on girls larger than the effects on boys? Recent scientific evidence highlights
biological gender differences in iodine sensitivity in utero. Results from laboratory studies in animals
22

show greater sensitivity of the female fetus to maternal thyroid deprivation with negative
consequences for cognitive development. Friedhoff et al. (2000) found that the effect of artificially
restricting maternal thyroid hormone in utero on fetal neurodevelopment and behavioral outcomes
was significantly larger in female relative to male rat progeny. Although the mechanism underlying
sex-selective effects of maternal nutrient deprivation on brain development could not be directly
addressed by their experiment, a recent study of gene expression in nutrient deprived fetal guinea pigs
by Chan et al. (2005) provides insight into the cellular pathways. Less conclusive evidence of
biologically-driven gender differences in iodine sensitivity based on human studies includes earlier
studies, Bautista et al. (1982) and Shrestha and West (1994). The gender differences we observe in the
impact of the gestation period in Israel may reflect physiological differences in the importance of
iodine for fetal brain development similar to those observed in animal studies. Field et al. (2009)
suggest the same explanation for their finding that reducing the deficiency of iodine among pregnant
women had a large impact on girls schooling but not on boys.
There is also a medical literature assessing the differential effects of iron deficiency in utero by
gender based on animal models. Consistent with our findings, Kwik-Uribe et al. (2000) find that iron
deficiency is more detrimental for female mice fetuses as it was possible to totally reverse this
deficiency for male mice by 8-week of postnatal iron supplementation while not for female mice. One
explanation offered by the authors is that the ovarian hormones modulate dopamine metabolism and
function, contributing to the appearance of gender-specific biochemical responses. A more detailed
examination and discussion of the physiological mechanisms that lead to the different effects by
gender is beyond the scope of this paper and is addressed by the medical literature.
6.4. Placebo Tests
To test for the validity of the research design we estimate the model based on a sample with
placebo treatment. The placebo treatment can be captured by immigrants to Israel who arrived around
the same time of "Operation Solomon" but from a more developed part of the world where in utero
conditions at that time were similar to Israel. We implement this idea by focusing on a sample of
immigrants who arrived to Israel during the massive immigration wave from the Former Soviet Union
(FSU) in 1991-1992. Relevant evidence suggests that in utero conditions in the Soviet Union (especially
in those places were the immigrants lived) were relatively similar to those in Israel.21 In addition,
parental background characteristics of children of FSU immigrants are not different from the Israeli

21

More than 80% of the FSU immigrants arrived from the European republics, mainly Russia and Ukraine, and
mainly from urban areas (Israel's CBS2001). Infant and child mortality rates in these areas were 2% and 2.3%
respectively (versus 1% and 1.2% in Israel and 12% and 20% in Ethiopia) (). Pre-natal care in FSU was also
relatively similar to Israel (The World Bank, 1991). Until the deterioration of the Soviet Union there was iodization
of salt policy (Van der Haar et al.2011). Also, anemia in pregnant women has increased significantly only after
the collapse of the Soviet Union (Sedik et al. 2003).

23

native population. For example, parental years of schooling of FSU immigrants in these years were
about 11 years, close to the respective mean in the relevant Israeli population. Therefore, we expect
to find no effect of treatment defined by length of gestation in Israel.
For this placebo test, we select all children whose mothers were pregnant upon arrival to Israel
from the FSU in 1991-1992. We define the treatment groups in the same way we define the original
treatment definition. We compute the gestational age of the child at immigration as the difference
between the date of the mother immigration and the child’s birth date. For example,

First _ Trimesteri equals 1 if the mother immigrated to Israel during the first 10 weeks after
conception. Unlike "Operation Solomon", immigration from FSU did not take place in a single date,
hence the treatment groups are not defined relative to a single specific immigration date. We can
therefore control for cohort and month of birth effects within this sample.
In Appendix Table A2 we perform balancing tests for this sample where we regress students’
background characteristics on the trimester indicators while controlling for month and year of birth
fixed effects. The results show no evidence for differential selection in the timing of immigration
according to gestational age. Namely, parental schooling, number of siblings and the proportion of
boys is similar for children who were in utero at different trimesters of pregnancy upon immigration.22
Table 6 presents estimates for the effects of exposure in the first and second trimester based on
equation (1) with year and month of birth fixed effects, under two specifications, without controls and
with controls. The two specifications include cohort and month of birth fixed effects. The controls
include parents' years of schooling, gender and number of siblings. The treatment estimates are much
smaller, most of them very close to zero, and they are all insignificant relative to the results obtained
for Ethiopian immigrants. Overall, we can safely conclude that these placebo tests show no systematic
association between gestational age at time of immigration and outcomes among children who were
born in the same period of interest but did not experience a significant change in in-utero conditions
upon immigration to Israel. These results show that our main findings for Ethiopian children are
unlikely to be confounded with other factors that could be associated with date of birth and could
affect students’ outcomes.
In Table 7 we present similar placebo evidence while stratifying the FSU sample by gender given
that our main results for Ethiopian children were mainly concentrated among girls . In sharp contrast
to the results for Ethiopians, there are no effects for boys and for girls. All estimates are small and are
not statistically different from zero.

22

We cannot use the richer set of covariates that we used for the Ethiopian sample, since we only have the
administrative data from the ministry of education for the FSU sample. Nevertheless, since we find no evidence
for differential selection in none of the available covariates, it is reasonable to assume that it is unlikely to have
selection in other covariates or unobserved characteristics.

24

6.5. Effect on Additional Outcomes
a. Birth outcomes
As discussed above, the medical literature stresses the crucial role of maternal health and in-utero
conditions during the first trimester since the fetus develops all of its organs in this period. In particular,
the first trimester is crucial for brain development. In light of this, we explore whether exposure to a
better environment from the first trimester has effects also on early life health. We explore the effect
of length of exposure to the Israeli environment on birth weight as a proxy of fetal health.
Table 8 presents the estimates of the treatment effect on birth weight (measured in grams) for the
baseline OLS specification and a DID specification that includes only the cohorts born in Israel between
May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992.23 In addition, the table shows estimates for the probability of
low birth weight (less than 2500 grams). 24 We also report means of the outcome variables for each
sample. Results reported in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 of the table use our main analysis sample and are
based on estimation of equation (1).25 Results reported in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 include, in addition,
children from Ethiopian origin born in Israel during the same period whose parents immigrated before
1989 (comparison group A). The model for this extended sample controls also for month of birth fixed
effects and includes an indicator for comparison group A. Estimates from the OLS model show some
positive effect on birth weight for children born in the first and second trimester. However, the effects
are negative and insignificant when we focus on low birth weight as an outcome. Moreover, estimates
from models that control for month of birth fixed effects are small and not different from zero.
In Table A3 we present the results on birth weight by gender. Most estimates for girls are not
significant. Actually, we find a positive effect for those who arrived during the first trimester on the
likelihood of low birth weight, which goes against our findings of better cognitive outcomes. Estimates
for boys show some positive effect on birth weight from exposure in the second trimester but no
effects from the first trimester.
Overall, results reported in Table 8 and Table A3 suggest that the large effect of early exposure to
better prenatal conditions on schooling outcomes is unlikely to be derived from improved fetal health.
It also reduces the concerns that our estimated effects on schooling outcomes are due to positive
selection of births in the first trimester since if selection is driving our results, we should see this also
in terms of an effect on birth weight.

23

We include only cohorts born in Israel because there are no administrative records on birth weight of children
born in Ethiopia.
24
There are very few observations with very low birth weight (less than 1500 grams) and therefore, we do not
estimate the effect on this outcome.
25
The sample size is smaller since we have 10 observations with missing values for birth weight. We did not find
any correlation between having missing birth weight and the three trimesters' indicators (results not reported
here but available upon request). This indicates that these 10 missing observations are unlikely to affect our
results.

25

Our results of no effect on birth weight are in line with other studies that examine the effect of
environmental conditions in utero on long-term human capital outcomes that did not find effects on
fetal and later life health. For example, Field et al. (2009) showed that delays in iodine supplementation
during pregnancy have large and robust educational impacts, but no effect on health at school age.
Almond et al. (2009) found that radiation exposure between week 8 and 25 of gestation harmed school
achievement but do did not affect birth weight and hospitalizations.
A possible explanation for our lack of results on birth weight is that higher exposure to all the three
micronutrient supplements (iron, iodine, and folic acid) affects brain development at the first trimester
while all other improved environmental conditions have a positive effect on nutrition even if exposed
during the second or third trimester. The evidence documented in Akter et al. (2012) which shows that
nutrition counseling among urban poor women in Bangladesh during the third trimester of their
pregnancy reduces the probability of low birth weight supports this interpretation.
b. Mortality
A second important health outcome that we examine is mortality (under age 12). Overall, given the
small sample size, we observe few mortality cases: two children from the first trimester, two from the
second, and eight from the third died before reaching age twelve. Table 9 reports differences in
mortality rates by trimester for the baseline OLS specification and a DID specification that includes only
the cohorts born in Israel between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992.26 The table presents the
estimates of the treatment effect on mortality for the full sample and for boys and girls separately.
Estimates in columns 1, 2, 5, 6, 9 and 10 come from our simple OLS models (equation 1) and estimates
in columns 3, 4, 7, 8, 11, and 12 include, in addition, children from Ethiopian origin born in Israel during
the same period whose parents immigrated before 1989 (comparison group A). The model for this
extended sample controls also for month of birth fixed effects and includes an indicator for comparison
group A. We also report means of the outcome variables for each sample and the p-value of the
difference in the coefficient between the first and the second trimester and between boys and girls.
The results of the full sample show that children who arrived in utero to Israel during the first or
second trimester were significantly less likely to die relative to those who arrived during the last
trimester. Results stratified by gender reveal that the negative impact comes mainly from boys.
Estimates for girls are also negative but smaller in magnitude and insignificant although we cannot
reject the hypothesis of equality in the coefficients between boys and girls. This finding suggests that
early exposure to better in utero conditions reduced mortality among boys. A reduction in mortality
without an effect on birth weight is consistent with evidence from other studies such as Almond et al.
(2005). Our findings suggest that arrival during the first or second trimester had beneficial health
26

We include only cohorts born in Israel since for cohorts who did not born in Israel we might miss children who
died in Ethiopia.

26

effects for boys but improved cognitive outcomes are present only for girls if arrival takes place during
the first trimester. We caution however that the difference in the results by gender is driven by only 2
observations: the same number of boys and girls died in the first and second trimesters but in the third
trimester 5 boys died versus 3 girls).
The reduction in mortality rates for boys in the first and second trimester raises the concern that a
negative selection could potentially explain the smaller or zero effect we estimate for boys on cognitive
outcomes. The higher mortality among children who arrived in the third trimester implies that the
remaining sample of children born in the third trimester includes less 'marginal' children relative to
the first two trimesters. However, as noted above, in our analysis on cognitive outcomes we include
all children who died and assign them the worst possible outcome (which is zero given that all
outcomes are either binary or count variables). This imputation is in the spirit of Horowitz and Manski
(2000). In any case, given the very small number of children who died by age 12, our main results are
unlikely to be driven by selection due to differential mortality. We show this in table A4 where we
replicate our main results by gender on cognitive outcomes as in table 5 while excluding the children
who died. The estimated coefficients for boys and girls are not significantly different from the
estimates presented in Table 5. The estimated effect on boys is still not significantly different from
zero even though we dropped from the sample the 'marginal' children. Estimates for girls are positive
with a larger effect for the first trimester as our main results. This clearly suggests that our findings of
no effect on cognitive outcomes for boys are not driven by inclusion of 'marginal' boys in the sample.
This is not a surprising conclusion given the very small number of mortality cases in our sample.
7. Alternative Interpretations and Measurement Issues
Our results show that children with a smaller gestational age at the immigration day had better
outcomes relative to those whose mothers arrived at more advanced stages of pregnancy. We
interpret this as a positive impact of in-utero conditions. An alternative interpretation is that mothers
who arrived at an earlier pregnancy stage had more time to adjust and prepare for birth and were able
to build social networks to get proper assistance and care for their newborns. We think that this
explanation is unlikely because all new Ethiopian immigrants were placed in absorption centers where
they stayed for at least 18-24 months. In these centers, immigrants received assistance from social and
health workers and conducted their social life. Therefore, we can safely assume that all women who
gave birth within the nine-month window upon arrival to Israel received the same post-natal care and
had the same social network.
We provide additional evidence that rule out this alternative interpretation. In Table A5 we present
estimates that show that the length of stay in Israel did not affect child outcomes. We derive this
evidence by examining the outcomes of Ethiopian children born to “Operation Salomon” mothers who
were conceived in Israel and born within 10 to 20 months after the mother arrival to Israel. We cannot
27

extend this time window more than 20 months because the additional children that will be included
in the sample are too young and do not yet have end of high school outcomes. In addition, we want
to include in the sample children conceived within a short time from the immigration date to make
sure that their mothers were all still in absorption centers and therefore received similar prenatal care.
We estimate OLS regressions of all outcomes on mother's weeks in Israel at the time the child was
born. The regressions control for the same family background characteristics that we include in all our
previous models. Even though pregnancy in the sample we use here could be endogenous, we believe
that, if anything, such selection may bias the estimates of the effect of time in Israel upward because
mothers who choose to wait and get pregnant only after they gained some experience in Israel might
have better unobservables. The evidence we present in Table A5 show that mother’s length of stay in
Israel at the time the child was born has no significant and systematic effect in none of the child’s
outcomes that we examine: the estimates are small, varying in sign, and not statistically significant.
This evidence mitigates the concern that our results are driven by the length of stay in Israel of mothers
who arrived during the first trimester of gestation.
Stress could be another potential confounding factor. Children in utero at immigration date could
be affected by maternal stress during this event. Several recent studies emphasize the negative impact
of maternal stress on child outcomes. Aizer et al. (2015) and Persson and Rossin-Slater (2015) find that
in utero exposure to maternal stress has detrimental effects on children’s cognitive outcomes and
mental health. Black et al. (2016), however, find small adverse effect on birth outcomes and no effects
on education and earnings among children whose mothers lost one of her parents during pregnancy.
These studies, however, do not examine the differential effect of maternal stress by gestational age.
Some medical studies shed light on this issue, for example, Glynn et al. (2001) report that age of
gestation at birth is shorter for mothers exposed to an earthquake in their first trimester relative to
mothers exposed to such trauma in their third trimester. Laplante et al. (2004) also find that high levels
of prenatal stress in early pregnancy have a negative effect on brain development resulting in lower
intellectual and language abilities at toddler age. King et al (2012) provide also similar evidence,
concluding that stress exposure is more detrimental in early stages of pregnancy. These findings are
consistent with non-human primate studies, which also demonstrate a stronger detrimental effect of
maternal stress on birth weight and neuro-motor functioning during early gestation compared to midlate gestation (Schneider et al. 1999).
Overall, the medical literature points to a more detrimental effect of stress on cognitive functioning
during early gestation as opposed to exposure on late gestation. Therefore, if the effect of stress during
immigration follows the same pattern, it works against finding an effect of improved in utero
conditions during the first semester. Additional evidence that reduces the possibility that our results
are explained by differential exposure to stress is that we do not find any difference in sex ratios
between children born in the first and the third trimester while various studies have found that
28

maternal stress increases the chances of male miscarriages (see e.g., Liu et al., 2015 and Kraemer,
2000). We also find no differences in birth weight by gestational age at arrival to Israel even though
the stress literature shows that maternal stress also causes lower birth weight (King et al. 2012).
Additional challenges to our design derive from measurement issues. Unlike recent studies that
measure gestational age based on clinical records on last menstrual period or ultrasound scan during
the first trimester, we compute gestational age based on date of birth. The implications are that we
might misclassify some of the children who were born preterm and assign them to the wrong trimester
of gestational age upon arrival to Israel. The question is whether we are more likely to have more
misclassifications or preterm births in a specific trimester. We suspect that this is not the case since
we find no associations between the trimester of gestation upon arrival to Israel and birth weight
(which is a good proxy for preterm births). Still, a valid concern is that we might have included in the
first trimester some children who were conceived in Israel and were born preterm. Children conceived
in Israel who were born preterm are more likely to be born in February or late January 1992. We
therefore stratify the first trimester into three groups: weeks 2-4, weeks 5-8 and weeks 9-12 of
gestation and estimate our main models examining the differential impacts of different periods in the
first trimester. Estimates reported in Appendix Table A6 show that the beneficial effects of the first
trimester do not particularly come from the first weeks after conception, reducing the concern that
our results are derived from misclassified preterm children who were actually conceived in Israel.
We further examine the robustness of our results to misclassification of births by trimester by reestimating our two main models assuming different possible scenarios. Results are reported in
Appendix Tables A7, A8, and A9. We first re-estimated the models using samples that excluded births
from the first two weeks of each trimester and a sample that dropped births from the first two weeks
of all trimesters (Table A7). These samples exclude possible late term or post term births. Next, we
repeated the exercise using samples that exclude births that took place in the last two weeks of each
trimester (Table A8). In this case, we consider misclassifications of pre-term births. Last, we re-assigned
the first or last two weeks of each trimester to the previous or next trimester (Table A9). Estimates
from the different alternative samples are very similar to our main set and suggest that our results are
unlikely to be driven by misclassification of births.
Another data concern is that we do not observe miscarriages or stillbirths. If these events were
more likely to occur to mothers who arrived to Israel during the first trimester, they may have caused
the sample of children who arrived in the first trimester of gestation to be positively selected. With
regard to this concern, we first note that if indeed the first trimester sample is positively selected then
it should have a higher mean birth weight relative to the other two samples (second and third
trimester). However, this is not the case. Second, since boys are more likely to be miscarried and die
prematurely in hard times, we expect that if there were more miscarriages and stillbirths among
mothers who arrived in their first trimester, we should observe a lower sex ratio (males to females) for
29

the first trimester sample relative to the third trimester. However, as shown earlier in section 3, the
sex ratio of children in the first trimester is equal to that of the third trimester. Third, as discussed
above, we do not find significant differences in the share of births by calendar week between our main
analysis sample and the two comparison group samples. Last, we think that if anything, the better
environmental conditions upon arrival to Israel might have lowered the incidence of miscarriages
among women who arrived at earlier stages of pregnancy relative to those who arrived at a later stage
as found in the mortality analysis. In that case, we should actually observe more marginal children born
among mothers who arrived in their first trimester, a fact that works against finding a positive impact
on longer term cognitive outcomes for this group.
8. Potential Longer Term Returns
What are the longer term economic payoffs at adulthood of the gains due to the better in utero
environmental conditions? Since the individuals in our sample are now only 23 years old, we do not
yet observe their post-secondary schooling and labor market outcomes. Hence, we examine the
relationship between improved high school outcomes, and post-secondary schooling and earnings
based on older cohorts born in Ethiopia between 1981 and 1984 who emigrated from Ethiopia during
Operation Salomon. Note that individuals in this sample arrived to Israel at ages 7 to 10 and therefore
received most of their schooling in Israel. We use administrative records provided by the National
Insurance Institute of Israel (NII) which include information on post-secondary enrollment and
earnings. We linked these data to administrative records collected by the Israeli Ministry of Education,
which include information on individuals’ Baccalaureate outcomes.
Table 10 presents the relationship between Baccalaureate outcomes as explanatory variables, and
post-secondary schooling and earnings by the ages 28-31. All the estimates are based on regressions
that control for gender, parents years of schooling, number of siblings and year of birth. Column 1
shows the estimates for any type of post-secondary schooling enrollment and column 2 shows the
equivalent estimates for university enrollment.27 Individuals with a Baccalaureate diploma are 26.3
percentage points more likely to continue schooling in some type of post-secondary schooling and 11.4
percentage points more likely to enroll to university. The total credit units in the Baccalaureate study
program, the number of advanced courses, and the number of credits in advanced science classes (4
and 5 credit units) are also positively and significantly associated with each of the two higher education
outcomes.
Column 3 shows the estimates from a regression of the Baccalaureate outcomes on monthly
earnings in 2012. Individuals with a Baccalaureate diploma earned about 580 shekels more a month

27

In Israel, post-secondary schooling includes universities, colleges and professional colleges. Admission to
university is much more selective relative to all other post-secondary institutions in terms of the quality of the
matriculation program required.

30

(about $145), or 12 percent more relative to the outcome mean. An additional credit unit in the
Baccalaureate program is associated with 36 shekels (about $9) and a respective unit in advanced
science courses is associated with 132 shekels ($33) although this estimate is imprecise. An additional
advanced course is associated with 230 shekels ($57). Estimated returns to Baccalaureate outcomes
are much higher for females than for males but this is due to the fact that males serve longer in the
army and begin their post-secondary education at an older age. Thus, returns to education among men
may still not be fully realized.
These estimates cannot be interpreted as causal but they are economically meaningful and most are
also precisely measured. Even though these estimates are much lower than the respective estimates
obtained from a sample of native Israelis, they are much larger than the cost of providing the better in
utero environmental conditions, particularly the cost of the three micronutrient supplement - iron,
iodine and folic acid, during pregnancy. Of course, a proper cost-benefit analysis of the rate of return
to these pre-birth investments must rely on causal relationship while ours are simple associations, and
it should also include an estimation of the costs of providing prenatal care. In addition, it is important
to note that because of the military service (three years for men and two years for women) many
individuals in this sample might still be enrolled in post-secondary schooling. Therefore we might not
be observing a full time employment and earnings, mainly for men.
9. Conclusions
This paper examines the role of in utero environmental conditions and micronutrient supplements
(mainly iron, iodine and folic acid) on offspring cognitive achievement. The analysis is based on
exogenous variation in environmental conditions in utero caused by the sudden immigration of
Ethiopian Jews to Israel in May 1991. Children, who were already in utero at the immigration date,
were exposed to better environmental conditions upon arrival to Israel. Some children were exposed
to these better conditions from the early weeks of gestation while others were exposed to these
conditions only at the last stage of their mother’s pregnancy. We exploit this variation to examine the
relationship between weeks of in utero exposure to better environmental conditions and high school
outcomes. We also examine the impacts on birth weight and mortality.
The results suggest that children who were exposed to micronutrient supplements and to better
environmental conditions in Israel during the first trimester of pregnancy had substantially higher
educational outcomes by age 18 relative to those exposed to these conditions at later stages of
pregnancy. The higher educational outcomes include a lower likelihood of school repetition and
dropout, a higher likelihood of obtaining a Baccalaureate diploma and of graduating with a higher
quality Baccalaureate study program. The impact is significantly larger for girls. The effects sizes are
very large, especially compared to the low counterfactuals for this group. Moreover, the expected
gains are high in terms of the relationship between Baccalaureate outcomes and post-secondary
31

schooling and earnings at adulthood. These results are robust with respect to alternative comparison
groups that attempt to control for seasonality of births and cohort effects. We find no effect of early
exposure to better environmental conditions in utero on birth weight. This result is consistent with the
fact that fetal growth and weight gain takes place in the second and third trimester so that children
who immigrated during more advanced stages of gestation were able to catch up on this outcome. On
the other hand, we find that arrival during the first or second trimester reduced mortality rates but
this negative effect is observed only for boys.
This paper adds to the growing economic literature investigating the fetal origin hypothesis by
providing compelling evidence from an unusual natural experiment. To the best of our knowledge this
is the first paper that attempts to estimate the effect of different environmental conditions in utero
caused by immigration, especially from a very poor African country to a western style economy. As
such, our estimates (especially for girls), can be viewed perhaps as an upper bound on what a full (in
utero) early-childhood development program might be able to achieve in low income settings. The
implications of these findings are also relevant for many industrialized countries that experience large
immigration waves from the developing countries. In addition, the evaluation of the impacts of
differences in environmental conditions in utero between developing and developed countries can
shed light on the early origins of gaps in human capital and health outcomes.

References
Ahmed T., M. Hossain, and K.I. Sanin (2012) "Global Burden of Maternal and Child Under Nutrition and
Micronutrient Deficiencies", Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism, Vol.61, No.1, pp.8-17.
Aizer, A., L. Stroud and S. Buka (2015) "Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes :Evidence from Siblings", The Journal
of Human Resources, forthcoming.
Akter, S.M., S.K. Roy, S.K. Thakur, M. Sultana, W. Khatun, R. Rahman, S.S. Saliheen, and N. Alam (2012) "Effects
of Third Trimester Counseling on Pregnancy Weight gain, Birthweight, and Breastfeeding among Urban Poor
Women in Bangladesh" Food and Nutrition Bulletin, Vol.33, No.3, pp.194-201.
Almond, D. (2006) "Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of In Utero Influenza Exposure in the
Post-1940 U.S. Population", Journal of Political Economy, Vol.114, No.4, pp.672-712.
Almond, D., K.Y. Chay, and D.S. Lee (2005) “The Cost of Birth Weight”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol.120, No.3, pp.1031-1083.
Almond, D., and J. Currie (2011) "Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis", Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol.25, No.3, pp.153-172.
Almond, D., L. Edlund, H. Li, and J. Zhang (2007) "Long-Term Effects of The 1959-1961 China Famine: Mainland
China and Hong Kong", NBER WP no.13384.
Almond, D., L. Edlund, and M. Palme (2009) "Chernobyl's Subclinical Legacy: Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive
Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.124, Vo.4, pp.1729-1772.

32

Almond, D., and B. Mazumder (2011) "Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect of Ramadan
Observance during Pregnancy", American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol.3, No.4, pp.56-85.
Almond, D., B. Mazumder, and R. van Ewijk (2014) "In Utero Ramadan Exposure and Children's Academic
Performance", The Economic Journal, Vol.125, No.589, pp.1501-1533.
Amin, S.B., M. Orlando, A. Eddins, M. MacDonald, C. Monczynski, and H. Wang (2010) "In Utero Iron Status and
Auditory Neural Maturation in Premature Infants as Evaluated by Auditory Brainstem Response", The
Journal of Pediatrics, Vol.156, No.3, pp.377-381.
Baird, S., J. Friedman, and N. Schady (2011) "Aggregate Income Shocks and Infant Mortality in the Developing
World", The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.93, No.3, pp.847-856.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, G. Postel-Vinay, and T. Watts (2010) "Long-Run Health Impacts of Income Shocks: Wine
and Phylloxera in Nineteenth-Century France", Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.92, No.4, pp.714728.
Barker, D.J. (1992) "Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease" BMJ Books, Wiley-Blackwell, London.
Barreca, A.I. (2010) "The Long-Term Economic Impact of In Utero and Postnatal Exposure to Malaria", The Journal
of Human Resources, Vol.45, No.4, pp.865-892.
Baten, J., D. Crayen, and H.J. Voth (2007) "Poor, Hungry and Stupid: Numeracy and the Impact of High Food Prices
in Industrializing Britain, 1780-1850", Economics WP No.1120, Department of Economics and Business,
Uniersitat Pompeu Fabra.
Bautista A., P.A. Barker, J.T. Dunn, M. Sanchez, and D.L. Kaiser (1982) "The Effects of Oral Iodized Oil on
Intelligence, Thyroid Status, and Somatic Growth in School-Age Children from an Area of Endemic Goiter",
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, Vol.35, No.1, pp.127-134.
Behrman, J.R. and M.R. Rosenzweig (2004) "Returns to Birthweight", The Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol.86, No.2. pp. 586–601.
Benbassat, C., G. Tsvetov, B. Schindel, M. Hod, Y. Blonder, and B.A. Sela (2004) "Assessment of Iodine Intake in
the Israel Coastal Area", Israel Medical Association Journal, vol.6, No.2, pp.75–77.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes (2007) "From the Cradle to The Labor Market? The Effect of Birth
Weight on Adult Outcomes", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.122, No.1, pp.409-439.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes (2016) "Does Grief Transfer aross Generations? Bereavements during
Pregnancy and Child Outcomes", American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol.8, No.1, pp.193-223.
Bougma, K., F.E. Aboud, K.B. Harding, and G.S. Marquis (2013) "Iodine and Mental Development of Children 5
Years Old and Under: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis", Nutrients, Vol.5, No.4, pp.1384-1416.
Camacho, A. (2008) "Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks", American Economic Review,
Vol.98, No.2, pp.511–515.
Cao, X.Y., X.M. Jiang, Z.H. Dou, M.A. Rakeman, M.L. Zhang, K. O'Donnell, T. Ma, K. Amette, N. DeLong and G.R.
DeLong (1994) "Timing of Vulnerability of the Brain to Iodine Deficiency in Endemic Cretinism", The New
England Journal of Medicine, Vol.331, pp.1739-1744.
Catherine Y.S., F.G. Cunningham, K.J. Leveno, S.L. Bloom, J.C. Hauth, D.J. Rouse (2009) "Williams Obstetrics: 23
Edition" McGraw-Hill Medical Publishing.
Central Bureau of Statistics (2001) "Former Soviet Union Immigrants", [in Hebrew], Jerusalem, Israel.

33

Central Bureau of Statistics (2003) “The Ethiopian Population in Israel: Demographic Characteristics 1996-1999"
[in Hebrew], Jerusalem, Israel.
Central Bureau of Statistics (2008) “Sixty Years in the Eyes of Statistics" [in Hebrew], Jerusalem, Israel.
Central Bureau of Statistics (2014) "Statistical Abstract of Israel 2014", [in Hebrew], Jerusalem, Israel.
Chan S.Y., M.H. Andrews, R. Lingas, C.J. McCabe, J.A. Franklyn, M.D. Kilby, and S.G. Matthews (2005) "Maternal
Nutrient Deprivation Induces Sex-Specific Changes in Thyroid Hormone Receptor and Deiodinase
Expression in The Fetal Guinea Pig Brain", Journal of Physiology, Vol.566, No.2, pp.467-480.
Chatzi, L., E. Papadopoulou, K. Koutra, T. Roumeliotaki, V. Georgiou, N. Stratakis, V. Lebentakou, M. Karachaliou,
M. Vassilaki, and M. Kogevinas (2012) "Effect of High Doses of Folic Acid Supplementation in Early
Pregnancy on Child Neurodevelopment at 18 Months of Age: The Mother-Child Cohort 'Rhea' Study in
Crete, Greece", Public Health Nutrition, Vol.15, No.9, pp.1728-1736.
Currie, J., and R. Hyson (1999) "Is the Impact of Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Low
Birthweight", American Economic Review, Vol.89, No.2, pp.245-250.
Currie, J., and T. Vogl (2013) “Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing Countries”, Annual Review
of Economics, Vol.5, pp. 1-36.
Currie, J., and R. Walker (2011) "Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-ZPass", American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol.3, No.1, pp.65-90.
Czeizel, A.E., M. Dobó, and P. Vargha (2004) "Hungarian Cohort-Controlled Trial of Periconceptional Multivitamin
Supplementation Shows a Reduction in Certain Congenital Abnormalities", Birth Defects Research Part A:
Clinical and Molecular Teratology, Vol.70, No.11, pp.853-861.
Czeizel, A.E., and I. Dudás (1992) "Prevention of the First Occurrence of Neural-Tube Defects by Periconceptional
Vitamin Supplementation", The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol.327, No.26, pp. 1832-1835.
de Escobar G.M., M.J. Obregóna, and F.E. del Rey (2007) "Iodine Deficiency and Brain Development in the First
Half of Pregnancy", Public Health Nutrition, Vol.10, No.12A, pp.1554-1570.
de Rooij, S.R., H. Wouters, J.E. Yonker, R.C. Painter, and T.J. Roseboom (2010) "Prenatal Undernutrition and
Cognitive Function in Late Adulthood", Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, Vol.107, No.39, pp.16881-16886.
Dvir, K., D. Romanov, and Y. Schiff (2009) "Examination of the Israeli Matriculation Certificate in light of the Israeli
Military Psychotechnic Results" The Central Bureau of Statistics Israel, WP No.40 [In Hebrew].
Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 2005, Central Statistical Agency, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and ORC Macro,
Calverton, Maryland, USA, September 2006.
Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 2011, Central Statistical Agency, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and ICF
international, Calverton, Maryland, USA, March 2012.
Evans, W.N, and D.S. Lien (2005) "The Benefits of Prenatal Care: Evidence from the PAT bus Strike", The Journal
of Econometrics, Vol.125, No.1-2, pp. 207-239.
Feyrer, J., D. Politi, and D.N. Weil (2013) "The Cognitive Effects of Micronutrient Deficiency: Evidence from Salt
Iodization in the United States", NBER WP No.19233.
Fidelman, I. (2013) "Issues of Administration of Depo-Provera for Ethiopian Immigrants", Research paper
published by the Research and Information Center of the Israeli Knesset [In Hebrew].

34

Field, E., O. Robles, and M. Torero (2009) "Iodine Deficiency and Schooling Attainment in Tanzania", American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol.1, No.4, pp.140-169.
Flatau, E., Z. Nishri, A. Mates, G. Oupty, N. Reichman, and R. Raz (1993) "Seroprevalence Of Antibodies Against
Toxoplasma Gongii Among Recently Immigrating Ethiopian Jews", Israel Journal of Medical Sciences, Vol.29,
No.6, pp.395-397.
Friedhoff A.J., J.C. Miller, M. Armour, J.W. Schweitzer, and S. Mohan (2000) "Role of Maternal Biochemistry in
Fetal Brain Development: Effect of Maternal Thyroidectomy on Behaviour and Biogenic Amine Metabolism
in Rat Progeny", The International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, Vol.3, No.2, pp.89-97.
Glynn L.M., P.D. Wadhwa, C. Dunkel-Schetter, A. Chicz-Demet, C.A. Sandman (2001) "When Stress Happens
Matters: Effects of Earthquake Timing on Stress Responsivity in Pregnancy", American Journal of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Vol.184, No.4, pp.637–642.
Gould, E., V. Lavy, and D. Paserman (2004) "Immigrating to Opportunity: Estimating the Effect of School Quality
Using a Natural Experiment on Ethiopians in Israel", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.119, No.2, pp.489526.
Gould, E., V. Lavy, and D. Paserman (2011) "Sixty Years after the Magic Carpet Ride: The Long-Run Effect of the
Early Childhood Environment on Social and Economic Outcomes", The Review of Economic Studies, Vol.78,
no.3, pp.938-973.
Granot, M., A. Spitzer, K.J. Aroian, C. Ravid, B. Tamir, and R. Noam (1996) "Pregnancy and Delivery Practices and
Beliefs of Ethiopian Immigrant Women in Israel", Western Journal of Nursing Research, Vol.18, No.3,
pp.299-313.
Grantham-McGregor, S. and C. Ani. (2001) "A Review of Studies on the Effect of Iron Deficiency on Cognitive
Development in Children", The Journal of Nutrition, Vol.131, No.2, pp.649-668.
Hernandez-Martinez, C., J. Canals, N. Aranda, B. Ribot; J. Escribano, and V. Arija (2011) "Effects of Iron Deficiency
on Neonatal Behavior at Different Stages of Pregnancy", Early Human Development, Vol.87, No.3, pp.165169.
Horowitz, J.L. and C. Manski (2000) “Nonparametric Analysis of Randomized Experiments with Missing Covariate
and Outcome Data”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol.95. No.449, pp.77-84.
Hoynes, H.W., D.W. Schanzenbach, and D. Almond (2012) "Long Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety
Net", NBER WP No. 18535.
Isa Z.M., I.Z. Alias, K.A. Kadir, and O. Ali (2000) “Effect of Iodized Oil Supplementation on Thyroid Hormone Levels
and Mental Performance among Orang Asli Schoolchildren and Pregnant Mothers in an Endemic Goitre
Area in Peninsular Malaysia”, Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition, Vol.9, No.4, pp.274–281.
Julvez, J., J. Fortuny, M. Mendez, M. Torrent, N. Ribas-Fito, and J. Sunyer (2009) "Maternal Use of Folic Acid
Supplements during Pregnancy and Four-Year-Old Neurodevelopment in a Population-Based Birth Cohort",
Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, Vol.23, No.3, pp.199-206.
Kaplan, S., and H. Rosen (1994) "Ethiopian Jews in Israel", American Jewish Year Book, Vol.94, pp.59-109.
King S., K. Dancause, A.M. Turcotte-Tremblay, F. Veru and D.P. Laplante (2012) “Using Natural Disasters to Study
the Effects of Prenatal Stress on Child and Health Development”, Birth Defects Research Part C: Embryo
Today: Reviews, Vol.96, No.4, pp.273-288.

35

Kraemer, S. (2000) "The Fragile Male", The British Medical Journal, Vol.321, No.7276, pp.1609-1612.
Kretchmer, N., J.L. Beard, and S. Carlson (1996) "The Role of Nutrition in the Development of Normal Cognition",
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, Vol.63, No.6, pp.997-1001.
Kwik-Uribe C.L., D. Gietzen, J.B. German, M.S. Golub and C.L. Keen (2000) “Chronic Marginal Iron Intakes during
Early Development in Mice Result in Persistent Changes in Dopamine Metabolism and Myelin Composition”,
The Journal of Nutrition, Vol.130, No.11, pp.2821-2830.
Lamberg, B.A. (1991) "Endemic Goiter - Iodine Deficiency Disorders", Annals of Medicine, Vol.23, No.4, pp. 367372.
Laplante, D.P., R.G. Barr, A. Brunet, G. Fort, M.L. Meaney, J.F. Ois Saucier, P.R. Zelazo, and S. King (2004) “Stress
during Pregnancy Affects General Intellectual and Language Functioning in Human Toddlers”, Pediatric
Research, Vol.56, No.3, pp.400-410.
Levin-Zamir D., D. Lipsky, E. Goldberg and Z. Melamed (1993) "Health Education for Ethiopian Immigrants in
Israel, 1991-92", Israel Journal of Medical Science, Vol.29, No.6-7, pp.422-428.
Lien D.S., and W.N. Evans (2005) "Estimating the Impact of Large Cigarette Tax Hikes: The Case of Maternal
Smoking and Infant Birth Weight", The Journal of Human Resources, Vol.40, No.2, pp.373-392.
Lin, M.J., and E.M. Liu (2014) "Does In Utero Exposure to Illness Matter? The 1918 Influenza Epidemic in Taiwan
as a Natural Experiment", Journal of Health Economics, Vol.37, pp.152-163
Liu, Elaine M., Liu, Jin-Tan, Tseng, Tzu-Yin H. (2015) "The Impact of a Natural Disaster on the Incidence of Fetal
Losses and Pregnancy Outcomes", Draft, July 2015.
Loganovskaja, T.K., and K.N. Loganovsky (1999) "EEG, Cognitive and Psychopathological Abnormalities in Children
Irradiated In Utero", International Journal of Psychophysiology, Vol.34, No.3, pp.213-224.
Lozoff, B. (2007) "Iron Deficiency and Child Development", Food and Nutrition Bulletin, Vol.28, No.4 (Suppl),
pp.S560-s571.
Lozoff, B., E. Jimenez, J. Hagen, E. Mollen, and A.W. Wolf (2000) "Poorer Behavioral and Developmental Outcome
More Than 10 Years After Treatment for Iron Deficiency in Infancy", Pediatrics, Vol.105, No.4, E51
[electronic article].
Mihaila, C., J. Schramm, F.G. Strathmann, D.L. Lee, R.M. Gelein, A.E. Luebke, and M. Mayer-Pröschel (2011)
"Identifying a Window of Vulnerability during Fetal Development in a Maternal Iron Restriction Model",
PLoS One, Vol.6, No.3, E17483 [electronic article].
Myers, M. (1993) "A Medical Care Program for Ethiopian Jewish Migrants in Addis Ababa", Israel Journal of
Medical Science, Vol.29, No.6-7, pp.334-338.
Nahmias, J., Z. Greenberg, S.A. Berger, L. Hornstein, B. Bilgury, B. Abel, and S. Kutner (1993) "Health Profile of
Ethiopian Immigrants to Israel: An Overview", Israel Journal of Medical Sciences, Vol.29, No.6-7, pp.338343.
Neugebauer, R., H.W. Hoek, and E. Susser (1999) "Prenatal Exposure to Wartime Famine and Development of
Antisocial Personality Disorder in Early Adulthood", The Journal of the American Medical Association,
Vol.282, No.5, pp.455-462.
Nowakowski, R.S., and N.L. Hayes (2008) "Radiation, Retardation and the Developing Brain: Time is the Crucial
Variable", Acta Paediatrica, Vol.97, No.5, pp.527-531.

36

O'Donnell, K.J., M.A. Rakeman, D. Zhi-Hong, C. Xue-Yi, Z.Y. Mei, N. DeLong, G. Brenner, M. Tai, W. Dong, and G.R.
DeLong (2002) "Effects of Iodine Supplementation During Pregnancy on Child Growth and Development at
School Age", Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, Vol.44, No.2, pp.76-81.
Olson D.J., and A. Piller (2013) "Ethiopia: An Emerging Family Planning Successes Story", Studies in Family
Planning, Vol.44, No.4, pp.445-459.
Oreopoulos, P., M. Stabile, R. Walld, and L.L. Roos (2008) "Short-, Medium-, and Long-Term Consequences of
Poor Infant Health: An Analysis Using Siblings and Twins", The Journal of Human Resources, Vol.43, No.1,
pp.88-138.
Ovadia, Y.S, A.M. Troen, and D. Gefel (2013) "Seawater desalination and iodine deficiency: is there a link?" IDD
Newsletter, [http://ign.org/cm_data/idd_aug13_israel_1.pdf].
Persson, P., and M. Rossin-Slater, “Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental Health of the Next Generation”, Draft,
December 2015.
Preedy, V.R., G.N. Burrow, and R. Watson (2009) Comprehensive Handbook of Iodine, Elsevier.
Riggins, T., N.C. Miller, P.J. Bauer, M.K. Georgieff, and C.A. Nelson (2009) "Electrophysiological Indices of Memory
for Temporal Order in Early Childhood: Implications for The Development of Recollection", Developmental
Science, Vol.12, No.2, pp.209-219.
Roth, C., P. Magnus, S. Schjolberg, C. Stoltenberg, P. Suren, I.W. McKeague, G. Davey Smith, T. ReichbornKjennerud, and E. Susser (2011) "Folic Acid Supplements in Pregnancy and Severe Language Delay in
Children", The Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol.306, No.14, 1566-1573.
Schneider, M.L., E.C. Roughton, A.J. Koehler, and G.R. Lubach (1999) "Growth and Development Following
Prenatal Stress Exposure in Primates: An Examination of Ontogenetic Vulnerability", Child Development,
Vol.70, No.2, pp.263-274.
Scholder S.v.H.K., G. L.Wehby, S. Lewis, and L. Zuccolo (2014) "Alcohol Exposure in Utero and Child Academic
Achievement", The Economic Journal, Vol.124, No.576, pp.634-667.
Sedik D., S. Sotnikov, and D. Wiesmann (2003) "Food Security in the Russian Federation", FAO Economic and
Social Development Paper No.153, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Sgan-Cohen, H.D., D. Steinberg, S.P. Zusman, R. Naor, and M.N. Sela (1993) "Periodontal Status Among Adult
Immigrants From Rural Ethiopia", Israel Journal of Medical Science, Vol.29, No.6-7, pp.407-410.
Shrestha, R.M., and C.E. West (1994) “Role of Iodine in Mental and Psychomotor Development: An Overview",
Nutrition Paper of the Month, New York, UNICEF, pp.59-81.
Shtarkshall, R.A., F. Baynesan, and B.S. Feldman (2009) "A Socio-Ecological Analysis of Ethiopian Immigrants’
Interactions with the Israeli Healthcare System and its Policy and Service Implications", Ethnicity & Health,
Vol.14, No.5, 459-478.
Taye, A., and H. Argaw (1997) “Prevalence and Prominent Factors for Iodine Deficiency Disorders in Shebe Area,
Seka Chekorsa District, South Westers Ethiopia”, Ethiopian Journal of Health Sciences, Vol.7, No.1, pp.6376.
The World Bank Data Catalog 1991.

37

Van den Berg, G. J., Lundborg, P., Nystedt, P. and Rooth, D., (2012) "Critical Periods during Childhood and
Adolescence: A Study of Adult Height among Immigrant Siblings", WP No.23, Lund University, Department
of Economics.
Van der Haar, F., G. Gerasimov, V.Q. Tyler, and A. Timmer (2011) "Universal Salt Iodization in the Central and
Eastern Europe, Commonwealth of Independent States (CEE/CIS) Region during the Decade 2000-09:
Experiences, Achievements, and Lessons Learned", Food and Nutrition Bulletin, Vol.32, No.4(Suppl),
pp.S175-S294.
Villamor, E., S.L. Rifas-Shiman, M.W. Gillman, and E. Oken (2012) "Maternal Intake of Methyl-Donor Nutrients
and Child Cognition at 3 Years of Age", Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, Vol.26, No.4, pp.328-335.
Wachs, T.D., E. Pollitt, S. Cueto, E. Jacoby, and H. Creed-Kanashiro (2005) "Relation of Neonatal Iron Status to
Individual Variability in Neonatal Temperament", Development Psychobiology, Vol.46, No.2, pp.141-153.
World Health Organization (2004) "Iodine status worldwide; WHO Global Database of Iodine Deficiency”
[http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43010/1/9241592001.pdf]
World Health Organization (2008) "Worldwide prevalence of anaemia 1993-2005; WHO Global Database of
anaemia” [http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43894/1/9789241596657_eng.pdf]
World Health Organization, the World Food Programme and the United Nations Children’s Fund (2007)
"Preventing and controlling micronutrient deficiencies in populations affected by an emergency" Joint
statement, [http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/WHO_WFP_UNICEFstatement.pdf]
Yaphe, J., M. Schein, and P. Naveh (2001) "Ethiopian Parents' Perception of Their Children's Health: A Focus
Group Study of Immigrants to Israel", Israeli Medical Association Journal, Vol.3, No.12, pp.932-936.
Zohar, Y. (1994) "Endemic Goiter in a Non-Goitrogenic Country", Harefuah, Vol.127, No.3-4, pp.75-78
[in Hebrew].

38

Figure 1. Immigration of Ethiopians Jews from Ethiopia to Israel during the years 1975 - 2010

Source: Israel Central Bureau of Statistics.
Figure 2. Immigration Flow of the Ethiopians Jews from Ethiopia to Israel during May 1991

Source: Israel Central Bureau of Statistics.

39

Figure 3. Definition of the three trimester groups
Immigration Date
May 24th 1991

Feb 1992

Dec 1991

Oct 1991

Aug 1991

Jun 1991

Apr 1991

Feb 1991

Dec 1990

Oct 1990

3rd Trimester
Conception

3rd Trimester
Birth Dates
2nd Trimester
Conception

38 weeks

2nd Trimester
Birth Dates

1st Trimester
Conception

38 weeks

1st Trimester
Birth Dates

38 weeks

Figure 4. Birth Distribution of Main Sample and two comparison groups

40

0

.01

.02

.03

.04

.05

Figure 5. Share of births by gestational week on May 24 1991

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Week

Operation Salomon

24

26

Group A

41

28

30

32

34

36

Group B

38

40

Table 1. Descriptive statistics
Main Sample
"Operation Solomon"
Children
(1)

Comparison Samples - Ethiopian Origin
Israeli Born Children
Ethiopian Born Children
(parents immigrated
(parents immigrated after
before 1989)
1991)
(2)
(3)

A. Background Characteristics
Female

0.480
(0.500)

0.505
(0.501)

0.415
(0.494)

Mother's age at birth

30.73
(8.892)

28.88
(7.027)

27.540
(7.919)

Mother's age at first birth

23.10
(5.426)

21.37
(4.239)

21.05
(5.122)

Parents age gap

10.90
(7.315)

6.957
(5.777)

9.493
(6.256)

Number of siblings

5.345
(1.928)

4.391
(1.891)

4.933
(1.691)

Birth order

3.682
(2.200)

3.415
(1.910)

3.322
(1.925)

Birth-spacing (years to the next birth)

2.462
(2.201)

2.838
(2.805)

2.418
(1.820)

Father's years of schooling

1.272
(3.043)

3.997
(5.285)

1.440
(3.487)

Mother's years of schooling

1.412
(3.240)

3.789
(5.000)

1.192
(3.070)

SES of the mother's first locality of
residence upon immigration

-0.039
(0.546)

-0.004
(0.556)

0.115
(0.473)

16,397
(14274.3)

47,255
(33537.3)

6,896
(12238.9)

Did not repeat 6-12th grade

0.806
(0.395)

0.824
(0.382)

0.800
(0.401)

Did not drop out of high school
before completing 12th grade

0.848
(0.359)

0.873
(0.333)

0.859
(0.348)

Obtained a Baccalaureate diploma

0.305
(0.461)

0.351
(0.478)

0.319
(0.467)

Total Baccalaureate units

11.58
(11.14)

12.85
(10.84)

11.98
(11.12)

Math Baccalaureate units
(0 to 5)

1.276
(1.508)

1.465
(1.507)

1.289
(1.554)

English Baccalaureate units
(0 to 5)

1.978
(1.876)

2.374
(1.907)

1.944
(1.831)

Birth Weight (gr)

3068.2
(480.2)

3101.5
(566.7)

Low birth weight (<2500gr)

0.110
(0.313)

0.111
(0.314)

Very low birth weight (<1500gr)

0.005
(0.0715)

0.017
(0.131)

Child Mortality

0.020
(0.140)

0.010
(0.103)

594

465

Family income in 1995 (NIS)
B. Outcomes

Number of children

270

Notes: Standard deviations are presented in parenthesis. Children in all samples were born between 27th May 1991 and 15th
February 1992.

Female

Table 2. Summary Statistics for the Observable Characteristics broken down by Treatment Groups
Difference
Difference
Difference
First
Second
Third
between First
between First
between Second
Trimester
Trimester
Trimester
and Second
and Third
and Third
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.462
0.506
0.462
-0.044
0.001
0.045
(0.500)
(0.501)
(0.500)
(0.050)
(0.053)
(0.049)

Difference by
Week of
Gestation
(7)
-0.0004
(0.0015)

Mother's age at birth

31.29
(9.616)

30.51
(8.464)

30.47
(8.748)

0.779
(0.895)

0.816
(0.975)

0.038
(0.845)

-0.036
(0.035)

Mother's age at first birth

23.50
(5.954)

23.11
(5.295)

22.70
(5.058)

0.388
(0.557)

0.794
(0.585)

0.405
(0.511)

-0.036*
(0.021)

Parents age gap

9.965
(6.305)

11.53
(8.188)

10.96
(6.928)

-1.562**
(0.744)

-0.991
(0.704)

0.571
(0.755)

0.024
(0.023)

Number of siblings

5.422
(2.021)

5.301
(1.829)

5.330
(1.972)

0.121
(0.191)

0.092
(0.212)

-0.028
(0.186)

-0.001
(0.009)

Birth order

3.653
(2.222)

3.640
(2.159)

3.764
(2.243)

0.013
(0.218)

-0.111
(0.237)

-0.124
(0.216)

0.004
(0.010)

Birth-spacing (years to the next birth)

2.457
(2.167)

2.363
(2.152)

2.597
(2.299)

0.095
(0.215)

-0.139
(0.237)

-0.234
(0.218)

0.003
(0.011)

Father's years of schooling

1.190
(2.781)

1.476
(3.417)

1.082
(2.744)

-0.286
(0.316)

0.108
(0.293)

0.395
(0.309)

-0.005
(0.011)

Mother's years of schooling

1.173
(2.912)

1.744
(3.573)

1.203
(3.051)

-0.571*
(0.331)

-0.030
(0.317)

0.541
(0.330)

0.001
(0.014)

SES of the mother's first locality of
residence upon immigration

-0.091
(0.549)

-0.013
(0.598)

-0.023
(0.465)

-0.078
(0.058)

-0.068
(0.054)

0.010
(0.054)

0.003
(0.002)

Family income in 1995 (NIS)

17335
(14923)

15880
(14298)

16184
(13632)

1455
(1453)

1151
(1515)

-304
(1378)

-25.461
(60.338)

Median Week of Gestation on Arrival
to Israel

5

18

31

Number of days in trimester

73

97

93

Number of boys

93

118

98

Number of girls

80

121

84

Number of children

173

239

182

594

Notes: Standard deviations are presented in parenthesis. In column 7 standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy. First trimester includes children
born between December 4th 1991 and February 15th 1992, second trimester includes children born between August 28th 1991 and December 3th 1991 and third trimester includes
children born between May 27th 1991 and August 27th 1991.

Table 3. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes by Age 18 - Baseline Sample (OLS)
Did not repeat
6-12th grade
No
With
Controls Controls
(1)
(2)
First Trimester
Second Trimester
p-value: First Trimester = Second
Trimester
Number of children

0.103*** 0.118***
(0.036)
(0.038)

Did not drop out
before completing
12th grade
No
With
Controls Controls
(3)
(4)

Obtained a
Baccalaureate
diploma
No
With
Controls Controls
(5)
(6)

Total Baccalaureate
units
No
With
Controls Controls
(7)
(8)

Math Baccalaureate
units
No
With
Controls Controls
(9)
(10)

English
Baccalaureate units
No
With
Controls Controls
(11)
(12)

0.469*** 0.442***
(0.150)
(0.153)

0.566*** 0.517***
(0.177)
(0.170)

0.054
(0.038)

0.069*
(0.039)

0.134**
(0.054)

0.120**
(0.052)

3.620*** 3.270***
(1.090)
(1.047)

0.059
(0.039)

0.057
(0.038)

0.035
(0.040)

0.033
(0.037)

0.073
(0.053)

0.063
(0.056)

2.328**
(1.021)

2.141**
(1.034)

0.292*
(0.160)

0.267
(0.173)

0.383**
(0.153)

0.348**
(0.147)

0.163

0.062

0.507

0.250

0.267

0.256

0.214

0.228

0.199

0.197

0.244

0.231

594

594

594

594

594

594

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy. Each column is from a different regression. Controls includes both parents' years of schooling, gender
dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The Baseline sample includes the cohort born between May 27th 1991 and
February 15th 1992. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table 4. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes by Age 18 - Two Cohorts Sample (DID)

First Trimester
Second Trimester
p-value: First Trimester =
Second Trimester
Number of children

Did not repeat
6-12th grade
No
With
Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Did not drop out
before completing
12th grade
No
With
Controls Controls
(3)
(4)

Obtained a
Baccalaureate
diploma
No
With
Controls Controls
(5)
(6)

Total Baccalaureate
units
No
With
Controls Controls
(7)
(8)

Math Baccalaureate
units
No
With
Controls Controls
(9)
(10)

0.090*** 0.110***
(0.014)
(0.018)

0.051*
(0.027)

0.069**
(0.028)

0.070
(0.045)

0.077
(0.048)

2.273** 2.556***
(0.847)
(0.866)

0.382*** 0.422***
(0.104)
(0.113)

0.242
(0.172)

0.287*
(0.165)

English
Baccalaureate units
No
With
Controls Controls
(11)
(12)

0.041
(0.035)

0.030
(0.037)

0.024
(0.034)

0.012
(0.037)

0.022
(0.043)

0.008
(0.044)

1.399*
(0.802)

1.096
(0.806)

0.202**
(0.089)

0.169
(0.106)

0.188
(0.171)

0.147
(0.159)

0.161

0.028

0.357

0.051

0.346

0.159

0.295

0.059

0.063

0.010

0.705

0.295

2,389

2,389

2,389

2,389

2,389

2,389

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at month and year of birth. Each column is from a different regression that includes cohort and month of birth fixed
effects. Controls includes both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The
two years cohorts sample includes cohorts born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992 and cohorts born between May 27th 1990 and February 15th 1991. The baseline
category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Did not repeat 6-12th grade

Table 5. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes by Age 18 by Gender
Did not drop out before
Obtained a Baccalaureate
Total Baccalaureate units
completing 12th grade
diploma

Baseline
Sample
(OLS)
(1)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(2)

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(3)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(4)

Mean of Dependent variable

0.738

0.728

0.786

0.780

First Trimester

0.061
(0.072)

0.038
(0.045)

0.039
(0.063)

0.046
(0.051)

0.067
(0.053)

Second Trimester

-0.002
(0.068)

-0.019
(0.049)

0.001
(0.055)

-0.011
(0.039)

0.267

0.212

0.482

309

1224

0.881

First Trimester
Second Trimester

Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(5)
(6)
A. Boys
0.214
0.221

Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(7)
(8)

Math Baccalaureate units

English Baccalaureate units

Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(9)
(10)

Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(11)
(12)

9.052

8.971

1.042

1.020

1.553

1.572

-0.013
(0.062)

1.571
(1.303)

0.541
(0.963)

0.230
(0.193)

0.149
(0.152)

0.214
(0.211)

-0.107
(0.123)

0.020
(0.052)

-0.054*
(0.029)

0.708
(1.287)

-0.162
(0.656)

0.166
(0.208)

0.120
(0.103)

0.033
(0.167)

-0.167
(0.157)

0.151

0.358

0.499

0.413

0.500

0.720

0.829

0.349

0.645

309

1224

309

1224

309

1224

309

1224

309

1224

0.895

0.916

0.931

0.404

0.421

14.32

15.12

1.530

1.677

2.439

2.575

0.183***
(0.043)

0.202***
(0.027)

0.097**
(0.041)

0.100**
(0.044)

0.175*
(0.089)

0.185**
(0.087)

5.062***
(1.683)

5.049***
(1.358)

0.680***
(0.241)

0.765***
(0.223)

0.821***
(0.278)

0.778**
(0.281)

0.113**
(0.045)

0.086**
(0.035)

0.050
(0.043)

0.032
(0.048)

0.120
(0.095)

0.077
(0.089)

3.786**
(1.591)

2.710*
(1.443)

0.427*
(0.236)

0.256
(0.218)

0.688***
(0.231)

0.535*
(0.279)

0.045

0.007

0.206

0.170

0.457

0.168

0.392

0.066

0.218

0.007

0.593

0.235

285

1165

285

1165

285

1165

285

1165

285

1165

285

1165

First Trimester

0.180

0.022

0.431

0.010

0.143

0.065

0.072

0.007

Second trimester

0.176

0.040

0.447

0.090

0.352

0.625

0.024

0.047

p-value: First Trimester =
Second Trimester
Number of children

B. Girls
Mean of Dependent variable

p-value: First Trimester =
Second Trimester
Number of children

C. P-value for difference in the coefficient between boys and girls
0.490
0.279
0.113
0.083
0.418

0.324

0.210

0.121

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from different regression. Panel A reports estimates for boys and panel B
reports estimates for girls. Panel C reports p-values from F-tests that check the difference between coefficients of boys and girls. All specifications controls for both parents' years of schooling, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in
Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The two cohorts sample (reported in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12) includes controls also for cohort and month of birth fixed effects. The baseline sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and
February 15th 1992 and the two cohorts sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992 and children born between May 27th 1990 and February 15th 1991. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table 6. Estimated Effect of in-Utero Environment among FSU Immigrants
Did not drop out
Obtained a
Did not repeat 6before completing
Baccalaureate
Total Baccalaureate Math Baccalaureate
12th grade
12th grade
diploma
units
units

Mean of dependent variable

English
Baccalaureate units

No
Controls

With
Controls

No
Controls

With
Controls

No
Controls

With
Controls

No
Controls

With
Controls

No
Controls

With
Controls

No
Controls

With
Controls

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.885

0.704

0.368

20.14

2.538

3.363

First Trimester

0.003
(0.023)

0.002
(0.023)

0.004
(0.018)

0.004
(0.017)

0.011
(0.026)

0.016
(0.025)

0.126
(0.665)

0.270
(0.626)

0.049
(0.105)

0.078
(0.100)

0.011
(0.110)

0.038
(0.103)

Second Trimester

0.043*
(0.022)

0.044*
(0.023)

0.009
(0.017)

0.009
(0.017)

-0.002
(0.026)

-0.004
(0.025)

0.244
(0.656)

0.157
(0.618)

0.039
(0.104)

0.025
(0.098)

0.163
(0.109)

0.150
(0.102)

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

Number of children

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy. Each column is from a different regression. Controls includes both parents' years of schooling, gender
dummy, number of siblings, year and month of birth fixed effects. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table 7. Estimated Effect of in-Utero Environment among FSU Immigrants by Gender
Did not repeat 6-12th grade
Boys
Girls
(1)
(2)

Did not drop out before
completing 12th grade
Boys
Girls
(3)
(4)

Obtained a Baccalaureate
diploma
Boys
Girls
(5)
(6)

Total Baccalaureate units
Boys
Girls
(7)
(8)

Math Baccalaureate units
Boys
Girls
(9)
(10)

English Baccalaureate units
Boys
Girls
(11)
(12)

First Trimester

-0.015
(0.035)

0.024
(0.030)

0.014
(0.029)

-0.004
(0.020)

0.008
(0.036)

0.022
(0.035)

0.679
(0.972)

-0.177
(0.806)

0.048
(0.150)

0.092
(0.133)

0.097
(0.160)

-0.027
(0.133)

Second Trimester

0.053
(0.034)

0.035
(0.030)

0.020
(0.028)

-0.003
(0.020)

0.023
(0.035)

-0.024
(0.035)

0.943
(0.943)

-0.529
(0.808)

0.059
(0.145)

0.011
(0.134)

0.272*
(0.156)

0.051
(0.133)

1,012

1,027

1,012

1,027

1,012

1,027

1,012

1,027

1,012

1,027

1,012

1,027

Number of children

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy. Each Colum is from a different regression. Controls includes both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, year and month of birth
fixed effects. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy. Odd columns report estimates for boys and even columns report estimates for girls.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table 8. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Birth Weight
Birth weight (in grams)
Baseline Sample + 2nd
generation - "Operation
Moses" (DID)
Baseline Sample (OLS)
With
Controls
(2)

No Controls
(1)

No Controls
(3)

3,068

Mean of Dependent Variable

With
Controls
(4)

Low birth weight (<2500 gr)
Baseline Sample + 2nd
generation - "Operation
Moses" (DID)
Baseline Sample (OLS)
No Controls
(5)

3,082

With
Controls
(6)

No Controls
(7)

0.110

With
Controls
(8)

0.110

First Trimester

58.252
(63.469)

95.764**
(46.184)

36.840
(74.573)

41.377
(60.444)

0.022
(0.039)

-0.015
(0.032)

0.053
(0.048)

0.044
(0.035)

Second Trimester

101.398
(62.472)

102.006**
(50.008)

75.143
(83.742)

55.335
(70.861)

-0.024
(0.038)

-0.029
(0.027)

-0.036
(0.045)

-0.027
(0.037)

0.394

0.858

0.684

0.836

0.183

0.566

0.069

0.018

p-value: First Trimester = Second
Trimester
Number of children

584

1,045

584

1,045

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions.
Each column is from a different regression. All specifications controls for both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap,
SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The baseline sample (reported in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6) includes cohorts born between May 27th
1991 and February 15th 1992. The sample reported in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 includes also children from Ethiopian origin born in Israel during the same period
whose parents immigrated before 1989. The model for this extended sample controls also for month of birth fixed effects and includes dummy for 2nd generation
"Operation Moses". The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table 9. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Mortality before Age 12
All
Boys
Baseline Sample +
Baseline Sample +
2nd generation 2nd generation "Operation Moses"
"Operation Moses"
Baseline Sample (OLS)
Baseline Sample (OLS)
(DID)
(DID)
No
With
No
With
No
With
No
With
controls
controls
controls
controls
controls
controls
controls
controls
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.020

Mean of Dependent Variable

0.016

0.023

Girls

Baseline Sample (OLS)
No
controls
(9)

0.020

With
controls
(10)

Baseline Sample +
2nd generation "Operation Moses"
(DID)
No
With
controls
controls
(11)
(12)

0.018

0.012

First Trimester

-0.032*
(0.018)

-0.046***
(0.017)

-0.036
(0.024)

-0.041**
(0.019)

-0.040
(0.025)

-0.059**
(0.028)

-0.056
(0.035)

-0.082***
(0.030)

-0.023
(0.029)

-0.030
(0.019)

-0.013
(0.031)

-0.005
(0.021)

Second Trimester

-0.036**
(0.018)

-0.030**
(0.014)

-0.033
(0.022)

-0.025
(0.018)

-0.043*
(0.025)

-0.042*
(0.024)

-0.044
(0.029)

-0.050*
(0.025)

-0.027
(0.027)

-0.016
(0.015)

-0.018
(0.029)

-0.005
(0.022)

0.727

0.178

0.828

0.227

0.862

0.242

0.616

0.136

0.708

0.350

0.708

0.972

594

594

1059

1059

309

309

539

539

285

285

520

520

p-value: First Trimester = Second
Trimester
Number of children

P-value for difference in the coefficient between boys and girls:
First Trimester

0.352

0.141

0.141

0.014

Second Trimester

0.331

0.195

0.195

0.055

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from a different
regression. All specifications controls for both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The
baseline sample (reported in columns 1, 2, 5, 6, 9 and 10) includes cohorts born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992. The sample reported in columns 3, 4, 7, 8, 11 and 12 includes also
children from Ethiopian origin born in Israel during the same period whose parents immigrated before 1989. The model for this extended sample controls also for month of birth fixed effects and
includes dummy for 2nd generation "Operation Moses". The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table 10. Potential Longer Term Returns
All
Males
PostPostsecondary
secondary
education
University
Monthly
education University Monthly
enrollment enrollment
income
enrollment enrollment income
rate
rate
(2012)
rate
rate
(2012)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Mean of Dependent variable

Females
Postsecondary
education
enrollment
rate
(7)

University
enrollment
rate
(8)

Monthly
income
(2012)
(9)

0.632

0.056

4,838

0.622

0.026

5,367

0.642

0.087

4,283

Baccalaureate Diploma

0.263***
(0.025)

0.114***
(0.018)

578.09***
(177.45)

0.264***
(0.037)

0.040**
(0.018)

306.0
(300.7)

0.261***
(0.033)

0.181***
(0.027)

810.23**
(234.12)

Baccalaureate Units

0.014***
(0.001)

0.003***
(0.001)

36.577***
(7.923)

0.012***
(0.001)

0.001*
(0.001)

31.60***
(11.918)

0.017***
(0.002)

0.006***
(0.001)

42.258***
(9.136)

Number of Advanced Subjects

0.117***
(0.009)

0.047***
(0.008)

230.80***
(78.242)

0.104***
(0.013)

0.020**
(0.009)

-4.618
(125.87)

0.127***
(0.013)

0.074***
(0.011)

446.87***
90.514

Units in Advanced Science
Subjects

0.042***
(0.006)

0.028***
(0.008)

132.45
(83.724)

0.050***
(0.009)

0.017*
(0.009)

-110.19
(129.15)

0.037***
(0.006)

0.036***
(0.011)

285.94***
(95.387)

1,329

1,329

1,329

680

680

680

649

649

649

Number of observations

Notes: Standard errors clustered at month and year of birth are reported in parenthesis. Each column is from different regression that includes year of birth fixed effects.
All specifications controls also for both parents' years of schooling and number of siblings. Models in columns 1-3 controls also for gender.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

ONLINE APPENDIX

Week

Table A1. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes by Age 18 by Weeks of Exposure to the Israeli Environment
Did not drop out before
Obtained a Baccalaureate
Did not repeat 6-12th grade
completing 12th grade
diploma
Total Baccalaureate units
Math Baccalaureate units

English Baccalaureate units

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(1)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(2)

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(3)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(4)

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(5)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(6)

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(7)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(8)

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(9)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(10)

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(11)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(12)

-0.004***
(0.001)

-0.004***
(0.001)

-0.0026*
(0.0014)

-0.0029***
(0.0008)

-0.0035*
(0.0018)

-0.0022
(0.0019)

-0.0976**
(0.0374)

-0.0741**
(0.0335)

-0.0146***
(0.0053)

-0.0137***
(0.0040)

-0.0152**
(0.0067)

-0.0078
(0.0071)

594

2389

594

2389

594

2389

594

2389

594

2389

594

2389

Number of children
Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from a different regression. All specifications controls for both
parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The two cohorts sample (reported in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12) includes controls also for cohort
and month of birth fixed effects. The baseline sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992. The two years sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992 and children born
between May 27th 1990 and February 15th 1991. The main explanatory variable is week of gestation upon immigration to Israel (ranging from 2 to 40).
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A2. Balancing Tests for the FSU Sample
Father's years
of schooling
(1)

Mother's years
of schooling
(2)

Number of
siblings
(3)

Boy
(4)

Mean dependent variable

10.61
(5.933)

11.61
(5.086)

0.885
(0.950)

0.496
(0.500)

First Trimester

-0.386
(0.318)

-0.416
(0.273)

-0.051
(0.051)

-0.033
(0.027)

Second Trimester

-0.036
(0.317)

-0.014
(0.272)

0.056
(0.051)

-0.018
(0.027)

2,039

2,039

2,039

2,039

Number of children

Notes: The table reports differences in covariates between children born in the first or second trimester and
children born in the third trimester. Standard errors clustered at month and year of birth are reported in
parenthesis. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A3. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Birth Weight by Gender
Birth weight (in grams)

Low birth weight (<2500 gr)

Baseline Sample (OLS)

Baseline Sample + 2nd
generation - "Operation
Moses" (DID)

With
Controls
(2)

With
Controls
(4)

No Controls
(1)

No Controls
(3)
A. Boys

3,106

Mean of Dependent variable

Baseline Sample (OLS)
No Controls
(5)

3,112

With
Controls
(6)

Baseline Sample + 2nd
generation - "Operation
Moses" (DID)
No Controls
(7)

0.109

With
Controls
(8)

0.117

First Trimester

42.514
(91.565)

85.272
(73.234)

9.936
(109.826)

30.051
(105.843)

-0.002
(0.063)

-0.054
(0.049)

0.031
(0.065)

0.009
(0.052)

Second Trimester

168.467*
(91.447)

174.916**
(73.887)

222.399**
(95.143)

195.472**
(86.860)

-0.064
(0.061)

-0.075*
(0.043)

-0.092
(0.062)

-0.075
(0.055)

303

Number of children

531

303

531

0.110

0.103

B. Girls
3,026

Mean of Dependent variable

3,051

First Trimester

77.625
(62.655)

93.259
(72.517)

56.129
(89.307)

37.159
(92.840)

0.050
(0.049)

0.030
(0.049)

0.103*
(0.058)

0.096*
(0.057)

Second Trimester

42.799
(59.989)

32.064
(60.533)

-87.407
(96.132)

-114.295
(92.566)

0.020
(0.041)

0.017
(0.042)

0.050
(0.045)

0.052
(0.049)

281

Number of children

514

281

514

First Trimester

C. P-value for difference in the coefficient between boys and girls
0.967
0.651
0.830
0.924
0.700

0.251

0.621

0.276

Second trimester

0.104

0.109

0.086

0.140

0.035

0.006

0.029

0.262

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions.
Each column is from a different regression. Panel A reports estimates for boys and panel B reports estimates for girls. Panel C reports p-values from F-tests that check
the difference between coefficients of boys and girls. All specifications controls for both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents'
age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The baseline sample (reported in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6) includes cohorts born between May
27th 1991 and February 15th 1992. The sample reported in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 includes also children from Ethiopian origin born in Israel during the same period
whose parents immigrated before 1989. The model for this extended sample controls also for month of birth fixed effects and includes dummy for 2nd generation
"Operation Moses". The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A4. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes by Age 18 by Gender Excluding Children who Died
Did not drop out before
Obtained a Baccalaureate
Did not repeat 6-12th grade
Total Baccalaureate units
Math Baccalaureate units
completing 12th grade
diploma
Baseline
Sample
(OLS)
(1)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(2)

Baseline
Sample (OLS)
(3)

Two Cohorts
Sample (DID)
(4)

0.755

0.739

0.805

0.793

First Trimester

0.009
(0.065)

-0.008
(0.035)

-0.015
(0.055)

-0.002
(0.040)

0.045
(0.051)

Second Trimester

-0.040
(0.063)

-0.046
(0.041)

-0.038
(0.049)

-0.039
(0.031)

0.382

0.331

0.651

302

1205

0.896

First Trimester
Second Trimester

Mean of Dependent variable

Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(5)
(6)
A. Boys
0.219
0.224

Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(7)
(8)

Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(9)
(10)

English Baccalaureate units
Baseline
Two Cohorts
Sample (OLS) Sample (DID)
(11)
(12)

9.262

9.113

1.066

1.036

1.589

1.597

-0.036
(0.055)

0.705
(1.231)

-0.305
(0.871)

0.149
(0.198)

0.066
(0.144)

0.081
(0.209)

-0.248*
(0.129)

0.003
(0.051)

-0.068**
(0.028)

0.050
(1.214)

-0.659
(0.711)

0.106
(0.209)

0.072
(0.108)

-0.067
(0.158)

-0.249
(0.168)

0.254

0.405

0.580

0.553

0.718

0.817

0.958

0.461

0.998

302

1205

302

1205

302

1205

302

1205

302

1205

0.901

0.932

0.938

0.411

0.424

14.57

15.23

1.557

1.689

2.482

2.593

0.156***
(0.046)

0.181***
(0.023)

0.067
(0.041)

0.078*
(0.038)

0.168*
(0.092)

0.182**
(0.086)

4.595**
(1.708)

4.785***
(1.242)

0.648**
(0.250)

0.753***
(0.214)

0.741**
(0.284)

0.729**
(0.257)

0.098**
(0.046)

0.073**
(0.028)

0.035
(0.042)

0.018
(0.041)

0.114
(0.096)

0.073
(0.086)

3.527**
(1.560)

2.532*
(1.287)

0.399*
(0.237)

0.242
(0.204)

0.649***
(0.228)

0.504*
(0.250)

0.078

0.006

0.353

0.189

0.480

0.175

0.485

0.081

0.248

0.008

0.712

0.284

280

1157

280

1157

280

1157

280

1157

280

1157

280

1157

First Trimester

0.365

0.028

0.444

0.011

0.466

0.148

0.228

0.001

Second trimester

0.212

0.032

0.305

0.055

0.675

0.781

0.055

0.025

p-value: First Trimester =
Second Trimester
Number of children

B. Girls
Mean of Dependent variable

p-value: First Trimester =
Second Trimester
Number of children

C. P-value for difference in the coefficient between boys and girls
0.387
0.555
0.114
0.268
0.103

0.405

0.079

0.230

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from different regression. Panel A reports estimates for boys and panel B
reports estimates for girls. Panel C reports p-values from F-tests that check the difference between coefficients of boys and girls. All specifications controls for both parents' years of schooling, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in
Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The two cohorts sample (reported in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12) includes controls also for cohort and month of birth fixed effects. The baseline sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and
February 15th 1992 and the two cohorts sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992 and children born between May 27th 1990 and February 15th 1991. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A5. Estimated Effect of Mothers' Length of Stay in Israel before the Birth on Schooling Outcomes
Did not
repeat 6-12th
grade
(1)

Did not drop
out before
completing
12th grade
(2)

Obtained a
Baccalaureate
diploma
(3)

Total
Baccalaureate
units
(4)

Math
Baccalaureate
units
(5)

English
Baccalaureate
units
(6)

Birth Weight
(7)

A. All
Weeks in Israel

Number of children

Weeks in Israel

Number of children

-0.0003
(0.0004)

-0.0004
(0.0005)

-0.0001
(0.0005)

-0.0106
(0.0139)

-0.0003
(0.0021)

-0.0011
(0.0021)

-0.3214
(0.5443)

980

980

980

980

980

980

965

0.0002
(0.0006)

0.0002
(0.0007)

0.0092
(0.0170)

0.0024
(0.0028)

-0.0005
(0.0030)

-1.1908*
(0.6767)

495

495

495

495

495

488

B. Boys
0.0005
(0.0006)
495
C. Girls

Weeks in Israel

Number of children

-0.0009*
(0.0004)

-0.0010**
(0.0005)

0.0003
(0.0006)

-0.0214
(0.0162)

-0.0022
(0.0024)

-0.0010
(0.0025)

0.4828
(0.8218)

485

485

485

485

485

485

477

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at month and year of birth. Each column is from a different regression. All specifications controls for
both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The sample
includes children born between March 1992 and October 1994. The main explanatory variable is the number of weeks since the mother immigrated to Israel
(ranging from 43 to 127) when the child was born.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A6. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes by Age 18 - Splitting the First Trimester into Three Months

Did not repeat 6-12th grade
With
Controls
(2)

No Controls
(1)

Did not drop out of high
school before completing
12th grade
With
Controls
(4)

No Controls
(3)

Obtained a Baccalaureate
diploma
With
Controls
(6)

No Controls
(5)

Total Baccalaureate units

Math Baccalaureate units

English Baccalaureate units

No Controls
(7)

With
Controls
(8)

No Controls
(9)

With
Controls
(10)

No Controls
(11)

With
Controls
(12)

A. The Baseline Sample (OLS)
First Month

0.063
(0.038)

0.088
(0.057)

-0.002
(0.039)

0.033
(0.059)

0.032
(0.068)

0.227***
(0.039)

4.733***
(1.252)

3.253*
(1.624)

0.623***
(0.182)

0.525**
(0.214)

0.661***
(0.158)

0.514*
(0.256)

Second Month

0.105**
(0.043)

0.113**
(0.045)

0.054
(0.047)

0.062
(0.046)

0.123***
(0.032)

0.126***
(0.041)

3.803***
(1.076)

3.863***
(1.038)

0.537***
(0.133)

0.548***
(0.138)

0.677***
(0.218)

0.676***
(0.189)

Third Month

0.126**
(0.048)

0.142***
(0.043)

0.093**
(0.042)

0.101***
(0.037)

0.122**
(0.046)

0.079
(0.101)

2.603
(1.729)

2.517
(1.656)

0.275
(0.194)

0.253
(0.196)

0.356
(0.238)

0.313
(0.225)

Second Trimester

0.053
(0.038)

0.057
(0.038)

0.029
(0.038)

0.033
(0.037)

0.032
(0.049)

0.065
(0.053)

2.097**
(1.010)

2.144**
(1.036)

0.271
(0.161)

0.268
(0.173)

0.344**
(0.150)

0.349**
(0.148)

Number of students

594

594

594

594

594

594

B. Two Cohorts Sample (DID)
First Month

0.072***
(0.021)

0.114***
(0.035)

0.009
(0.029)

0.061
(0.042)

0.169***
(0.048)

0.174***
(0.046)

3.784***
(0.943)

3.491***
(1.005)

0.512***
(0.081)

0.553***
(0.109)

0.387
(0.258)

0.367
(0.267)

Second Month

0.104***
(0.016)

0.118***
(0.017)

0.055*
(0.027)

0.067**
(0.025)

0.077**
(0.028)

0.086**
(0.032)

2.549**
(1.059)

2.999**
(1.075)

0.501***
(0.112)

0.541***
(0.121)

0.434**
(0.154)

0.503***
(0.149)

Third Month

0.095***
(0.017)

0.098***
(0.020)

0.084***
(0.028)

0.078**
(0.030)

0.011
(0.031)

0.006
(0.032)

1.370**
(0.559)

1.444**
(0.541)

0.199***
(0.069)

0.199**
(0.073)

-0.014
(0.131)

-0.019
(0.130)

0.034
(0.034)

0.029
(0.037)

0.018
(0.034)

0.012
(0.037)

0.014
(0.042)

0.007
(0.045)

1.151
(0.789)

1.085
(0.809)

0.174*
(0.090)

0.167
(0.107)

0.146
(0.161)

0.144
(0.160)

Second Trimester
Number of children

2,389

2,389

2,389

2,389

2,389

2,389

Notes: Standard errors presented in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at year and month of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from a different regression. Controls includes both
parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order, and dummy for twins. The two cohorts sample (reported in Panel B) includes controls also for cohort and
month of birth fixed effects. The Baseline sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992. The two cohorts sample includes children born between May 27th 1991 and February 15th 1992 and cohort
born between May 27th 1990 and February 15th 1991. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A7. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes - Excluding First Two Weeks from each Trimester
Did not drop out of high
Did not repeat 6-12th
school before
Obtained a
Total Baccalaureate
Math Baccalaureate
grade
completing 12th grade
Baccalaureate diploma
units
units
Two
Two
Two
Two
Two
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

English Baccalaureate
units
Two
Baseline
Cohorts
Sample
Sample
(OLS)
(DID)
(11)
(12)

Panel A: Excluding first 2 weeks of 1st trimester
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

0.127***
(0.039)

0.117***
(0.022)

0.080**
(0.039)

0.079**
(0.031)

0.108*
(0.054)

0.065
(0.045)

3.252***
(1.064)

2.480**
(0.909)

0.460***
(0.158)

0.442***
(0.132)

0.500***
(0.173)

0.269
(0.171)

0.054
(0.038)

0.027
(0.037)

0.030
(0.037)

0.009
(0.036)

0.063
(0.056)

0.005
(0.045)

2.114**
(1.034)

1.036
(0.802)

0.267
(0.174)

0.164
(0.105)

0.343**
(0.147)

0.138
(0.159)

569

2364

569

2364

569

2364

569

2364

569

2364

569

2364

0.120***
(0.038)

0.111***
(0.019)

0.071*
(0.039)

0.071**
(0.028)

0.120**
(0.052)

0.078
(0.050)

3.285***
(1.054)

2.546**
(0.926)

0.441***
(0.154)

0.421***
(0.120)

0.523***
(0.170)

0.284
(0.176)

0.055
(0.041)

0.035
(0.041)

0.031
(0.039)

0.012
(0.039)

0.066
(0.059)

0.010
(0.049)

2.296**
(1.056)

1.319
(0.788)

0.263
(0.180)

0.175
(0.112)

0.341**
(0.152)

0.154
(0.156)

560

2355

560

2355

560

2355

560

2355

560

2355

560

2355

0.125***
(0.042)

0.115***
(0.017)

0.090**
(0.038)

0.093***
(0.017)

0.133**
(0.058)

0.096*
(0.048)

3.803***
(1.034)

3.178***
(0.849)

0.523***
(0.150)

0.502***
(0.106)

0.534***
(0.188)

0.331*
(0.183)

0.065
(0.042)

0.035
(0.037)

0.053
(0.036)

0.036
(0.029)

0.082
(0.062)

0.028
(0.043)

2.776***
(1.007)

1.749**
(0.768)

0.365**
(0.169)

0.255**
(0.089)

0.379**
(0.167)

0.194
(0.177)

563

2358

563

2358

563

2358

563

2358

563

2358

563

2358

0.132***
(0.042)

0.120***
(0.022)

0.100**
(0.039)

0.101***
(0.022)

0.117*
(0.060)

0.082*
(0.046)

3.714***
(1.057)

3.019***
(0.944)

0.531***
(0.159)

0.513***
(0.134)

0.512**
(0.190)

0.299
(0.197)

0.059
(0.044)

0.039
(0.040)

0.048
(0.038)

0.035
(0.031)

0.085
(0.065)

0.030
(0.049)

2.913***
(1.047)

1.959**
(0.755)

0.365**
(0.179)

0.260**
(0.098)

0.372**
(0.172)

0.201
(0.175)

504

2299

504

2299

504

2299

504

2299

504

2299

504

2299

Panel B: Excluding first 2 weeks of 2nd trimester
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

Panel C: Excluding first 2 weeks of 3rd trimester
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

Panel D: Excluding first 2 weeks of all trimesters
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from a different regression. All specifications
controls for both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The two cohorts sample (reported in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10
and 12) includes controls also for cohort and month of birth fixed effects. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A8. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes - Excluding Last Two Weeks from each Trimester
Did not drop out of high
Did not repeat 6-12th
Obtained a
Total Baccalaureate
Math Baccalaureate
school before
grade
Baccalaureate diploma
units
units
completing 12th grade
Two
Two
Two
Two
Two
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

English Baccalaureate
units
Two
Baseline
Cohorts
Sample
Sample
(OLS)
(DID)
(11)
(12)

Panel A: Excluding last 2 weeks of 1st trimester
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

0.108***
(0.039)

0.102***
(0.021)

0.056
(0.041)

0.058**
(0.027)

0.115**
(0.054)

0.069
(0.058)

3.140**
(1.164)

2.377**
(1.050)

0.468***
(0.164)

0.442***
(0.120)

0.499**
(0.190)

0.270
(0.200)

0.059
(0.039)

0.031
(0.037)

0.036
(0.037)

0.013
(0.037)

0.065
(0.056)

0.009
(0.044)

2.199**
(1.046)

1.122
(0.797)

0.268
(0.174)

0.170
(0.106)

0.357**
(0.149)

0.151
(0.158)

565

2360

565

2360

565

2360

565

2360

565

2360

565

2360

0.119***
(0.039)

0.110***
(0.018)

0.068*
(0.039)

0.069**
(0.028)

0.122**
(0.052)

0.078
(0.048)

3.322***
(1.043)

2.554***
(0.875)

0.448***
(0.153)

0.425***
(0.113)

0.526***
(0.167)

0.285
(0.166)

0.068*
(0.039)

0.041
(0.034)

0.045
(0.038)

0.023
(0.034)

0.066
(0.059)

0.010
(0.047)

2.310**
(1.075)

1.175
(0.846)

0.296
(0.179)

0.191*
(0.105)

0.358**
(0.152)

0.138
(0.162)

564

2359

564

2359

564

2359

564

2359

564

2359

564

2359

0.118***
(0.040)

0.110***
(0.020)

0.065
(0.040)

0.063**
(0.029)

0.126**
(0.053)

0.081
(0.048)

3.508***
(1.069)

2.801***
(0.872)

0.489***
(0.154)

0.474***
(0.115)

0.565***
(0.170)

0.324*
(0.160)

0.060
(0.040)

0.031
(0.038)

0.031
(0.039)

0.006
(0.038)

0.071
(0.057)

0.012
(0.045)

2.417**
(1.051)

1.352
(0.816)

0.324*
(0.174)

0.224*
(0.110)

0.404***
(0.147)

0.187
(0.153)

583

2378

583

2378

583

2378

583

2378

583

2378

583

2378

Panel B: Excluding last 2 weeks of 2nd trimester
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

Panel C: Excluding last 2 weeks of 3rd trimester
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

Panel D: Excluding last 2 weeks of all trimesters
First Trimester

0.111**
(0.041)

0.103***
(0.023)

0.052
(0.042)

0.051*
(0.028)

0.122**
(0.056)

0.073
(0.059)

3.407***
(1.182)

2.617**
(1.065)

0.516***
(0.166)

0.496***
(0.121)

0.552***
(0.188)

0.305
(0.196)

Second Trimester

0.074*
(0.041)

0.043
(0.035)

0.046
(0.039)

0.019
(0.035)

0.076
(0.060)

0.016
(0.048)

2.658**
(1.103)

1.468*
(0.844)

0.357*
(0.181)

0.249**
(0.106)

0.428***
(0.153)

0.183
(0.156)

524

2319

524

2319

524

2319

524

2319

524

2319

524

2319

Number of students

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from a different regression. All
specifications controls for both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The two cohorts sample (reported in
columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12) includes controls also for cohort and month of birth fixed effects. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

Table A9. Estimated Effect of In-Utero Environment on Schooling Outcomes - Re-assign the First or Last Two Weeks of each Trimester to the Previous or Next Trimester
Did not drop out of high
Did not repeat 6-12th
school before
Obtained a
Total Baccalaureate
Math Baccalaureate
English Baccalaureate
grade
completing 12th grade
Baccalaureate diploma
units
units
units
Two
Two
Two
Two
Two
Two
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Baseline
Cohorts
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
Sample
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(OLS)
(DID)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Panel A: Re-assign the first two weeks to the previous trimester
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Number of students

0.117***
(0.041)

0.093***
(0.022)

0.089**
(0.036)

0.086***
(0.018)

0.108*
(0.056)

0.068
(0.042)

3.295***
(1.035)

2.540**
(0.897)

0.495***
(0.151)

0.463***
(0.130)

0.484**
(0.181)

0.280
(0.207)

0.061
(0.041)

0.039
(0.036)

0.057
(0.037)

0.053*
(0.028)

0.090
(0.061)

0.047
(0.046)

3.010***
(0.979)

2.324***
(0.802)

0.388**
(0.171)

0.307***
(0.099)

0.346**
(0.166)

0.218
(0.167)

569

2382

569

2382

569

2382

569

2382

569

2382

569

2382

Panel B: Re-assign the last two weeks to the next trimester
First Trimester

0.106***
(0.038)

0.101***
(0.022)

0.060
(0.038)

0.061**
(0.026)

0.104**
(0.051)

0.071
(0.061)

2.889**
(1.105)

2.302**
(1.099)

0.450***
(0.152)

0.446***
(0.121)

0.447**
(0.183)

0.249
(0.202)

Second Trimester

0.078**
(0.036)

0.064**
(0.023)

0.059*
(0.034)

0.049*
(0.026)

0.068
(0.054)

0.024
(0.039)

2.274**
(0.954)

1.415**
(0.632)

0.275*
(0.157)

0.202**
(0.081)

0.328**
(0.138)

0.136
(0.122)

594

2407

594

2407

594

2407

594

2407

594

2407

594

2407

Number of students

Notes: Standard errors reported in parenthesis are clustered at week of pregnancy for the OLS regressions and at month and year of birth for the DID regressions. Each column is from a different regression. All specifications
controls for both parents' years of schooling, gender dummy, mother's age at birth, parents' age gap, SES of first locality in Israel, birth order and dummy for twins. The two cohorts sample (reported in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10
and 12) includes controls also for cohort and month of birth fixed effects. The baseline category is the third trimester of pregnancy.
*Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%

