                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE INFLUENCE OF ANCESTRAL LIFEWAYS ON INDIVIDUAL ECONOMIC
                    OUTCOMES IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

                                        Stelios Michalopoulos
                                           Louis Putterman
                                            David N. Weil

                                        Working Paper 21907
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21907


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2016




We are grateful to Daniel Prinz, Devin Streur, Young Min Kim, Philip Trammell, and especially Yunan
Ji for superlative research assistance. We are also grateful to Bill Easterly, Filipe Campante, Nico
Voigtlaender and seminar participants at Cambridge University, Oxford University, University of
Copenhagen and to participants at the “DeepRooted Factors in Comparative Economic Development”
at Brown University, the CESifo workshop on Demographic Change and Long Run Development, the
BCEP conference at Berkeley, the NYU DRI 2015 Annual Conference and the NBER Political Economy
group for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.




NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Stelios Michalopoulos, Louis Putterman, and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Influence of Ancestral Lifeways on Individual Economic Outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa
Stelios Michalopoulos, Louis Putterman, and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 21907
January 2016, Revised June 2016
JEL No. O0,O1,O13,O40,Z00,Z1

                                              ABSTRACT

Does a person’s historical lineage influence his or her current economic status? Motivated by a large
literature in social sciences stressing the effect of an early transition to agriculture on current economic
performance at the level of countries, we examine the relative contemporary status of individuals as a
function of how much their ancestors relied on agriculture during the preindustrial era. We focus on Africa,
where by combining anthropological records of groups with individuallevel survey data we can explore the
effect of the historical lifeways of one’s forefathers. Within enumeration areas and occupational groups, we
find that individuals from ethnicities that derived a larger share of subsistence from agriculture in the
precolonial era are today more educated and wealthy. A tentative exploration of channels suggests that
differences in attitudes and beliefs as well as differential treatment by others, including differential political
power, may contribute to these divergent outcomes.


Stelios Michalopoulos                                David N. Weil
Brown University                                     Department of Economics
Department of Economics                              Box B
64 Waterman Street                                   Brown University
Providence, RI 02912                                 Providence, RI 02912
and NBER                                             and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu                                   david_weil@brown.edu

Louis Putterman
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
Louis_Putterman@brown.edu
Introduction

Economists generally agree that history matters in explaining variations in the standards of
living among people. But what aspects of history should we be looking at? Two of the most
important are the history of the place where the individual lives and the history of his or her own
lineage.

Of these two branches, the study of how historical events in a given place shape economic
outcomes is the better developed. In large part, this is because it is relatively easy to map the
locations of historical events to modern­day territories. If we know that something happened in
one place and not another ­­ for example, on one side of a border but not the other ­­ we can
compare contemporary outcomes of these two places, and thus learn about the role of whatever
it was that differed. This strategy has been particularly fruitful in examining the role of
institutions, which have the nice property of tending to stay put in physical locations.1 A slight
variant on this literature on persistence in places allows for movements of large groups of
people from one place to another, recognizing that when these large­scale migrations take
place, people may bring with them much of whatever it is ­­ culture, institutions, etc. ­­ that was
found in their place of origin.2

Among the various place­based determinants of comparative development, the transition to
agriculture is often cited as being of paramount importance in fostering the development of
modern urban civilizations. This idea is at the heart of a venerable line of research among
anthropologists and historians embracing social evolutionary schema. Among economists Hibbs
and Olsson (2004), Putterman (2008) and Borcan et al. (2014) establish empirically a positive
influence of early agricultural transition on state formation and contemporary incomes across
countries. This place­centered perspective on history points naturally toward thinking about
aggregate or average incomes in a particular country or region in the modern world.

The other approach to quantifying the role of history looks at heterogeneity in outcomes within a
population. The focus here is on the lineage of an individual, and how this contributes to his or
her relative economic standing and cultural attributes today (Fenske, 2013; Alesina, Giuliano
and Nunn, 2014). Over periods of a few generations, the effects of one’s lineage on current
outcomes is addressed under the heading of intergenerational mobility. However, economists
are increasingly realizing that there are elements of lineage that are important beyond what can
be understood from, say, a one generational transition matrix. Recent attempts to lengthen the
intergenerational horizon include works by Clark (2015) and Guell et al. (2015) who use
surnames to track family­level economic performance over several generations, finding that
intergenerational mobility is rather low.



1
  Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002), Banerjee and Iyer (2005), Iyer (2010), Dell (2012), Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2013, 2014).
2
  Putterman and Weil (2010), Abramitzky et al. (2014).
                                                                                                        1
In this paper, our goal is to apply this second, lineage­based approach, in a context where we
can link lineages all the way back to variation in ancestral “lifeways,” that is, forms of economic
support before the advent of the modern industrial era. In particular, the question we ask is
whether tracing one’s lineage to predominantly farming communities in the pre­industrial period
is beneficial in the modern era, specifically the world of urban and rural sub­Saharan Africa.
Notably, since we are looking at variation in individual economic outcomes within specific
locations, the stories about how agricultural history shapes place­based differences in economic
performance, discussed above, are less applicable in our framework.

A well­known social evolutionary approach holds that human societies progressed from
hunter­gatherer origins to industrial modernity via the development of sedentary agriculture and
its maturation into state­level, partially urban societies. Although there is no evidence that
pastoralism predated agriculture chronologically, its less sedentary character often leads to its
characterization as if reflecting a regression backwards from settled society. As Krätli (2001)
writes, “At the core of the public representation of pastoralism is the idea that ‘pastoralism’ and
‘modern life’ are mutually exclusive, as two successive stages of human development in a
unique line that goes from nature to civilisation, passing from sedentary life and agriculture. This
frame offers no ground on which pastoralism and modern world could meet: one being thought
to begin where the other is supposed to end.” This view of herders as less civilized than
agriculturalists, or as a dead end branch line off the main path from agriculture to civilization,
echoes millennia­old Chinese, Persian, and Egyptian views of steppe and desert nomads.
Motivated by this sweeping narrative our paper explores whether a similar evolutionary
approach can also be traced in the current economic outcomes of descendants of groups that
practised different subsistence patterns during the pre­industrial era. Our study is the first of
which we are aware which explores the impact of economic culture, as identified by the primary
source of subsistence, at the individual level.3

We study Africa for several reasons. First, it is a place where the transition away from historical
lifeways took place only recently. On the eve of the “Scramble for Africa” in the late nineteenth
century, the continent was replete with examples of almost every kind of pre­industrial
subsistence economy, from hunter­gatherers, to nomadic pastoralists, to shifting and intensive
agriculturalists. Second, Africa presents a setting in which it is relatively easy to match
individuals with the economic lifeway of their pre­industrial ancestors. In brief, lifeways can be
associated with ethnic groups, and given the rather limited mating across ethnic lines, modern
individuals can usually be identified with a single tribe, and thus a particular historical lifeway.4
Finally, in the modern African setting, we can identify individuals with different ancestral lifeways


3
  For the role of economic culture (as reflected in the dependence on fishing) on regional economic
performance, see Dalgaard et al (2015).
4
  The limited degree of interethnic marriages is evident in our sample of households surveyed at the turn
of the 21st century. Within an average household in the Demographic and Health Surveys, there is a 71%
probability that the ethnic identity of the wife is identical to that of her husband, despite the considerable
ethnic heterogeneity of many of today’s urban centers. In absence of historical data, we believe that
intermarriage rates were far lower in previous generations.
                                                                                                                 2
living in the same location, thus allowing us to study lineage­based historical effects in isolation,
that is, purged from the effects of the place­based history.

The channels by which lineage ­­ and in particular the pre­modern economic lifeways of an
individual’s ancestors ­­ can affect modern outcomes are not the same as those channels that
would be operative at the level of locations. Most significantly, institutions are generally
associated with places, and thus are unlikely to explain heterogeneity of outcomes within a
region. Hence, culture is a natural suspect, as it is something that can vary among individuals in
a given location based on their lineage. As we discuss below, there are particular cultural traits
associated with increased dependence on agriculture that one would expect to yield differential
benefits in a modern economic setting. Our approach of identifying the effect of culture on
outcomes at the individual level by focusing on people with different origins living in the same
place follows what Fernandez (2011) calls the “epidemiological approach” to studying culture.
This has been implemented using international migrants to study culture’s effect on fertility
(Fernandez and Fogli, 2009) and saving rates (Caroll, Rhee, and Rhee, 1994), among other
things.

Pursuing our inquiry requires being able to associate individuals in a modern data set with
historical characteristics of the groups from which they are descended. The Demographic and
Health Surveys on which we mostly rely contain data on the ethnicity of individuals. We match
this data with information from Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas on historical characteristics
of ethnic groups as well as information from Murdock (1959) on the geographical regions
historically inhabited by these ethnicities. Matching these two data sets required the
construction of a concordance of ethnicities, the details of which are discussed below. We
expect that this concordance will have great usefulness beyond the current study.

Our main finding is that the higher the share of their subsistence a person’s ancestors obtained
from agriculture, the higher are his or her education and wealth levels today. This result holds
not only comparing the descendants of pastoralists to the descendants of agriculturalists, but
also comparing the descendants of non­pastoralist groups that varied in the degree to which
they relied on agriculture. Importantly, this pattern continues to hold even when we restrict our
attention to individuals living outside their group’s ancestral homelands, to residents within
urban places, and to individuals engaged in occupations other than agriculture and animal
husbandry.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature on the
historical determinants of modern economic and political outcomes, with an emphasis on Africa.
In Section 3, we introduce the ethnicity data from the DHS that we use, and discuss the
matching of modern ethnicity to historical groups, their ancestral locations, and pre­colonial
characteristics. In Section 4, we describe the data on the historical means of subsistence of
African groups and estimate empirical models linking education and wealth to the ancestral
lifeway characteristics of an individual’s group, controlling for the current location of residence.
We experiment with splitting the sample by occupation and urban/rural location, with inclusion of

                                                                                                        3
enumeration area fixed effects, and also assess the role of selection into migration. In Section 5,
we explore the determinants of ancestral lifeways themselves, in particular, the degree to which
dependence on agriculture is a function of land’s agricultural quality. We then use land quality as
an instrument for ancestral agricultural dependence in our basic regression setting, finding
broadly similar estimates. In Section 6, we investigate whether the identified pattern is robust to
exploiting variation in the mode of subsistence within linguistic or ethnic families. In Section 7,
we examine the potential channels at work, investigating how the inclusion of pre­colonial and
colonial­era variables influences our basic results. We also report exercises exploring the roles
of differential treatment by the central government, as well as whether personality traits related
to proclivity to violence, impatience, and cooperation, might help explain the less favorable
outcomes of descendants of communities relying less on agriculture in the pre­colonial era. We
bring to bear data from the Afrobarometer surveys, to supplement the DHS. While these
exercises yield some suggestive results, we emphasize their provisional nature and secondary
importance relative to our core finding that pre­modern lifeway is a robust correlate of economic
outcomes generations later. Section 8 concludes.



2.        Related Literature

A growing body of work examines the historical origins and political economy of African
development. Broadly speaking the main arguments that have been proposed in this literature
refer to three different periods in African history. In reverse chronological order, the first category
includes an influential body of research that stresses how the institutions established by
European powers during colonization persisted after independence and continue to shape
contemporary economic performance (e.g., La Porta et al. (1997, 1998); Acemoglu et al. (2001,
2002), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014)). The second set of studies focuses on events
that took place during the colonial period itself. Huillery (2009), Berger (2009), and Arbesu
(2011), for example, quantify the long­run effects of colonial investments and tax collection
systems whereas recent works shed light on the negative effects of the improper colonial border
design during the Scramble for Africa.5 Finally, several recent studies highlight the persistent
legacy of the pre­colonial era. Nunn (2008) and Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), for example,
stress the role of slave trades while Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) demonstrate the
beneficial role of ethnic political centralization on regional African development.

Our study belongs to the latter strand by establishing that descendants of predominantly
agricultural groups today outperform economically individuals from groups of different
pre­colonial occupational backgrounds. This finding contributes to our understanding of the
legacy of ethnicity in Africa and sheds light on the sources of ethnic inequality, a feature that has
been linked to underdevelopment, see Alesina, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016).

More generally, our work relates to the literature on the cultural origins of comparative

5
    Englebert, Tarango, and Carter (2002), and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (forthcoming).
                                                                                                          4
development, adding to a vibrant body of research that examines the within­country impact of
various historical legacies on economic performance. By utilizing individual­level variation we
overcome some of the identification problems inherent to cross­country or cross­regional
analyses. First, it allows us to quantify how much of the individual­level variation in economic
outcomes may be attributed to one’s ethnic identity. Second, we can account for
location­specific traits. This is feasible because we observe people from different ethnic groups
residing in the same enumeration areas.

The introduction of location fixed effects is crucial, since it allows us to absorb characteristics
related to the geographic, ecological and institutional environment of a given region that recent
studies have highlighted as important determinants of regional African development.6 Moreover,
it allows us to uncover the importance of portable ethnic­specific traits whose influence is not
limited to the ancestral homeland of a given group. This methodology is similar to Nunn and
Wantchekon (2011), who investigate the impact of slavery on individual trust among
respondents residing outside their ethnic enclaves.

Our finding that descendants of groups that in the pre­colonial era derived a larger share of
subsistence from agriculture are today more educated and more wealthy brings to the
foreground the persistent role of traits vertically transmitted within groups over time. In this
respect, our study contributes to an emerging body of work that emphasizes the importance of
cultural norms, historical persistence, and human and geographic traits for comparative
development (see Diamond (1997), Landes (1998), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006),
Easterly and Levine (1997, 2012), Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), Putterman and Weil (2010),
Ashraf and Galor (2013), and Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2012) among others).



3.     Ethnicity and Modern Outcomes

3.1    Ethnicity Data

Our starting point is data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) for 26 countries in
which an ethnicity variable was collected as part of the survey. We use the most recent DHS
wave for which both ethnicity information and location coordinates are available. This reduces
the sample to 21 countries since for 5 out of 26 countries we do not have coordinate information
from the DHS. The sample size with information on both ethnicity and enumeration area
coordinates ranges from 3,040 individuals for the Ivory Coast to 48,871 for Nigeria, totalling
337,382 respondents. In our final DHS sample, there are 492 ethnicity­country groups, where
the same ethnicity appearing in two different countries is counted as two different groups.7

6
 Alsan (2015), Fenske (2013).
7
  The survey rounds in the respective countries are: BF6(Burkina Faso), BJ4(Benin), CD5(Congo
Democratic Republic), CF3(Central African Republic), CM4(Cameroon), ET6(Ethiopia), GH5(Ghana),
GN4(Guinea), (CI3) Ivory Coast, KE5(Kenya), ML5(Mali), MW5(Malawi), MZ6(Mozambique),
NG5(Nigeria), NI3(Niger), NM4(Namibia), SL5(Sierra Leone), SN6(Senegal), TG4(Togo), UG6(Uganda),
                                                                                                      5
3.1.1 Matching Modern Ethnicities to Ancestral Groups, Historical Locations, and
Group­Specific Pre­Colonial Traits

The information on tribal pre­colonial traits comes from Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas
while the spatial information on the homeland of a group in the beginning of the colonial era
comes from Murdock’s (1959) Map. Note that these two lists of groups do not always coincide.
So, we linked the ethnicity as reported by each respondent in the DHS to both Murdock’s (1967)
list and Murdock’s (1959) Map. Whenever possible we used the concordance constructed by
Fenske (2013) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) to associate the groups in
Murdock’s Map (1959) to the groups in Murdock’s Atlas (1967).

A total of 287,433 individuals were matched to a Murdock Atlas group and assigned
characteristics of the corresponding ethnic group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A slightly larger
number, 292,942, were matched to groups included in the Murdock Map.

Our matching procedure was as follows. We constructed a series of ten possible methods for
matching ethnicities in the DHS to ethnicities in one of the Murdock datasets. These methods
were ordered from best to worst in terms of our assessment of their likely accuracy. We then
proceeded down the list, using for each DHS ethnicity the first method for which we were able to
achieve a match. Matching was done separately for the ethnicities included in the Atlas and
Map, respectively. In the text below we describe the most important methods. In Appendix Table
1 we describe all ten methods and give the fractions of cases matched using each one.

The method at the top of our list was “direct match,” in which the same name was used in the
DHS and the Murdock source. We were able to directly match 58.7% of observations to Atlas
ethnicities and 67.0% to the ethnicities on the Murdock Map. The second method on our list was
“Afrobarometer match”, in which we applied to the ethnicity names that appear in the DHS the
concordance constructed by Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) from ethnicity names that appear in
the Afrobarometer Round 3 dataset to ethnicities that appear in the Murdock dataset. This
matched a further 4.5% of observations to Atlas ethnicities and 10.0% of observations to the
Map’s ethnicities. The next three methods used data on alternate ethnicity names from the
Ethnologue or Joshua Project. The third method applied to cases where the DHS and Murdock
names were listed as alternates; the fourth where a name that appeared in the Murdock source
is listed as a superset of the ethnicity that appears in the DHS; and the fifth where the name that
appears in the DHS is listed as a subset of the ethnicity in the Murdock data. Together, these
three methods matched 19.1% of observations to Atlas ethnicities and 13.2% to Map ethnicities.




and ZM5(Zambia).


                                                                                                  6
3.1.2   Movers and Average Distance Moved

As described above, much of our interest in this paper is with the aspects of human capital
(broadly defined) that persist over generations and are portable across locations. Further, we
are interested in aspects of culture that have their origins in the conditions of particular
geographic locations. To the extent that people live in the regions traditionally associated with
their kin, it would not be possible to separately identify the effect of tribal characteristics from
geographical characteristics. Thus we have a particular interest in individuals who live outside
the territory associated with their group of origin. We follow Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) in
calling such individuals “movers,” even though they may not have moved in their own lifetimes.
A better name for such individuals might be “non­autochthonous.”8

The DHS reports coordinate information for a person’s current residence. We can thus classify
individuals as living inside or outside their ancestral homeland. For those living outside of their
homeland, we generated a variable measuring distance to their homeland. Specifically, this is
the distance from the coordinates of an individual’s current residence reported in the DHS
survey to the nearest border of his/her ancestral homeland (Murdock’s map).9

In the DHS data, 40% of individuals currently live within the boundaries of their ancestral
homelands. Of those who do not, 12% live more than 500 kilometers, 36% between 100 and
500 kilometers, 43% between 10 and 100 kilometers, and 9% within 10 kilometers of the border.
Given the imprecise nature of the borders in the Murdock map, the fact that ethnic group
locations may have some overlap and that DHS coordinates are perturbed by 5 or 10
kilometers, we are reluctant to assume that a member of this last group are in fact living away
from their ancestral lands. Hence, we do not include them in our definition of “movers” in the
empirical exercises below. Appendix Table 2 gives summary statistics for our DHS sample as a
whole.

3.2     Ethnicity and Modern Outcomes

We focus on two outcomes: education and wealth. Education is coded on a scale of 0­5, with
categories "no education", "incomplete primary", "complete primary", "incomplete secondary",
"complete secondary", and "higher.” Wealth is a measure of household wealth, and is coded on
a 1­5 scale that divides the sampled population within a country into quintiles of household
wealth for that specific country. Rutstein and Johnson (2004) provide a detailed description of


8
  The DHS reports whether an individual has moved in his/her lifetime for a subset of respondents. This
question does not distinguish between people that moved out of their homeland or from some other
location within their homeland.
9
  Out of the 285,155 respondents, we have distance to ancestral homeland for 258,284. In the remaining
cases, we have matched directly the DHS ethnicity of the respondent to an Atlas group so we have
information on its pre­colonial traits but we could not match this Atlas group to an ethnic group on the
Murdock Map. For cases where an individual is matched to more than one ancestral homeland, the
nearest homeland was picked to compute this distance.
                                                                                                       7
the construction of this index.10 The raw correlation between education and wealth in the full
sample is 0.45 and the correlations of these variables with an urban indicator are 0.36 and 0.60,
respectively.

Before turning to the role played by ancestral ethnic characteristics, we explore the predictive
power of ethnicity more generally in our data. Table 1 reports R2’s from regressions of our
education and wealth measures on different sets of dummy variables; namely, country fixed
effects, current ethnic homeland fixed effects, and ethnic identity fixed effects. The ethnic
homeland fixed effects are dummy variables corresponding to the current tribal location of the
individual according to the Murdock map. We also report the R2 from combining different groups
of dummy variables to gauge the additional explanatory power of different sets of dummies.

The regressions show, first of all, the role of ethnicity in determining outcomes. For example,
once country fixed effects are included in the regression, adding country­ethnicity constants
raises the R2 for education from .159 to .282, and for wealth from .013 to .164 (results for
movers are slightly larger).11 Current country­ethnic homeland has more predictive power than
does ethnic affiliation: for education, the difference is about 2 percentage points, while for wealth
the difference is 8.5 percentage points. However, what is more important for our analysis is that
even when dummies for current country­ethnic location are included in the regression, there is
still an improvement in fit (of about 2.3 ­ 4.2 percentage points in all the specifications) by
adding dummies for the ethnic identity of the respondent.


4.      The Influence of Ancestral Characteristics on Modern Outcomes

We now turn to our main line of inquiry, which is to examine how historical characteristics of an
individual’s group are related to her current outcomes. We begin by discussing the main
historical measure of interest, which is the group’s mode of pre­colonial subsistence. We then
relate contemporary individual economic status to the historical mode of subsistence of one’s
ancestors, and discuss the robustness of our findings.

4.1     Historical Mode of Subsistence

Having established a match between current ethnic identity and historical ethnicity, we can use
the latter’s characteristics as described in Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas. The central historical
characteristic on which we focus is an ethnic group’s pre­colonial mode of subsistence.



10
   The DHS wealth index is composed taking into account consumer durables, electricity, toilet facilities,
source of drinking water, dwelling characteristics, and some country­specific attributes such as whether
there is a domestic servant, for example. The measure is derived by the DHS using principal component
analysis to assign indicator weights resulting in a composite standardized index for each country.
11
   Note that the R2 for the country­fixed­effects regression on wealth is almost to zero because wealth is
standardized by country.
                                                                                                         8
As mentioned in our introduction, proponents of an evolutionary framework to technological,
social and economic development, including Sahlins and Service (1960), Service (1971), and
Johnson and Earle (2000), see rough continua of social complexity, scale and degree of
centralization of polity, and level of technological sophistication, running from “band­level”
societies subsisting on hunting and gathering to “state­level” societies subsisting on agriculture
and ultimately supporting the emergence of urban centers with more complex divisions of labor.
Although usually denying uniformity of path along such a continuum, lifeway steps from foraging
to shifting cultivation and horticulture and onwards to settled, plough­using agriculture are
frequently observed markers in this literature. The independent emergence of agriculture, its
gradual intensification, and the rise of cities and large­scale states in distant and largely
independent regions including the Near East, China, and Mesoamerica, suggests a natural
progression within which steps can be skipped, if at all, only when there are nearby models
being copied or imposed. Absent such borrowing opportunities, cities and states will emerge
only after a sufficient period of agricultural intensification and population growth.

Within Africa agriculture was spread to the regions of central and southern Africa that contain
modern countries such as Angola, D.R. Congo, Uganda, Kenya, Zimbabwe, and South Africa by
farming societies originally located around modern­day Nigeria and Cameroon. Linguistic and
archeological evidence supports the view that before the arrival of agriculture­­about 3,000
years ago in Congo, 1,800 years ago in Zambia and 1,000 years ago in Botswana­­these
regions were inhabited by considerably less populous foraging populations of whom today’s San
and Pygmy groups are probably remnants (Oliver and Fage, 1990; Diamond, 1997; Diamond
and Bellwood, 2005).

While not a tenet of the social evolutionists in itself, the tendency towards gradualism of
progressions just noted may have a correlate in cases of contact between cultures at different
stages of development: that when an industrial society offers “modernizing” opportunities to
pre­industrial societies via forms of contact including colonization, trade, and development
assistance programs, the receiving cultures may be able to absorb the new opportunities more
readily if situated on the agrarian side of the pre­industrial continuum than if reliant upon
horticulture and, even more so, foraging. Reasons for greater ease of adoption by agrarian
societies may include differences in work habits (longer and more intensive work hours are
more the norm in agrarian than in foraging societies [Sahlins, 1972]), and cultural norms
associated with large­scale, hierarchical and extra­familial organizations (such as states and
corporations).12 Of course, it may also be the case that “bearers of civilization” such as the
European missionaries who transmitted literacy and other technologies to many of the countries
concerned, had subjective biases about agriculturalists being more promising recipients of their
message, and that this in itself skewed transmission towards members of agricultural groups.

Richerson et al. (2000) note the challenge of situating pastoralism within evolutionary

12
  The idea that modern organizational forms are more easily taken up by those on the agrarian state than
those on the foraging band end of the social evolutionary continuum is discussed at length by Putterman
(2000).
                                                                                                           9
frameworks of the kind discussed here. Because they rely primarily on domesticated rather than
hunted animals, pastoralists must be located on the same side of the Neolithic divide as
members of agricultural societies. Their historical emergence is thus viewed as one of
specialization following the onset of both plant and animal domestication, not an independent
and early branching from foraging. While not therefore representing a stage lying between
foraging and agriculture on a temporal continuum, pastoralists nonetheless resemble foragers in
their less settled way of life. Richerson et al. (2000) highlight the more exaggerated sexual
division of labor, tighter bonds to immediate family, frequently observed propensity towards
violence, and more contested nature of property ­ “herd animals are relatively easy to rustle,
and pastoralists everywhere are in the habit of stealing from each other” ­ as features that might
make adoption of modern norms and practices more challenging for members of pastoral than
of agrarian societies.

Based on these considerations, it seems reasonable to treat pastoral societies as occupying a
place intermediate between agrarian and foraging societies in terms of proximity of lifeway to
that of the populous agrarian civilizations. If this is so, then the idea of more rapid adoption of
modern social and physical technologies by those closer to the urban industrial end of the
foraging to agrarian civilization continuum should imply that those from agricultural societies will
be found to have achieved better recent economic outcomes, on average, than those from
pastoral ones, who would in turn have achieved better outcomes than those from societies
practicing foraging when incorporated into colonial and postcolonial states.

It is perhaps important to note that, notwithstanding the narrative among anthropologists
regarding the apparent relationship between state centralization and agricultural intensification
worldwide, this nexus in the context of Africa is much more nuanced. In fact, across all African
groups (in Murdock’s Atlas) the correlation between dependence on agriculture and group’s
political centralization is negligible (0.05) whereas the correlation between centralization and the
share of subsistence derived from pastoralism is somewhat larger but still very small (0.12).
This suggests that the origins of centralization in Africa are not directly related to the underlying
mode of subsistence or pre­colonial population densities. This pattern is also shown by
Osafo­Kwaako and Robinson (2013), suggesting that our measures of pre­colonial mode of
subsistence do not reflect the legacy of political centralization of these groups. Below we will
formally explore whether the influence of ancestral modes of subsistence on individual
outcomes within a village are driven by variation in other pre­colonial traits.

The Ethnographic Atlas lists five activities­­gathering, hunting, fishing, animal husbandry, and
agriculture­­and classifies the share of subsistence obtained from each into 9 broad bands: 0 ­
5%, 6 ­ 15%, 16 ­ 25%, …., 85 ­ 100%. With the exception of 17 individuals belonging to a
single ethnic group, the Mbuti, in D.R.C. and located in the same enumeration area, our sample
contains no other individuals from groups that pre­colonially relied primarily on hunting and
gathering, activities that instead appear in our data as supplementary subsistence sources for
groups mainly engaged in agriculture. The Atlas also distinguishes between “extensive
agriculture” and “intensive agriculture.” However, explorations making use of that division found

                                                                                                   10
no clear distinctions between these two kinds of groups (see Appendix Table 3 below). To focus
on potential differences in outcomes attributable to differences in the extent of ancestral groups’
reliance on agriculture we count reported subsistence shares from both extensive and intensive
agriculture as belonging to a single activity, farming.

Of the 285,155 individuals in our sample for which Murdock includes information on pre­colonial
subsistence, 84.2% are members of ethnic groups for which agriculture was the most important
source of subsistence pre­colonially, according to the Atlas, 7.4% come from groups for which
animal husbandry was most important (pastoralists), 8.4% from groups for which agriculture and
animal husbandry (7.5%) or agriculture and fishing (0.9%) were equally important, and none
other than the seventeen Mbuti being from a group for which hunting and gathering were
leading activities in their own right. Assigning the Atlas’s subsistence share bands the
consecutive integer values 1 (for 0 ­ 5%), 2 (for 6 ­ 15%), etc., we find that individuals from
groups in which agriculture was most important according to the Ethnographic Atlas score an
average of 6.3 (standard deviation of 1.0), implying that agriculture provided about 60% of
overall subsistence. Animal husbandry, hunting, gathering and fishing together account for the
remaining roughly 40% of the traditional subsistence of agricultural groups, with each of the last
three categories providing less than 5% of subsistence on average, although fishing, in
particular, accounts for up to 35% of subsistence for a few small groups.

Individuals from groups for which pastoralism was the most important activity according to the
Ethnographic Atlas have virtually the same average band score for their leading activity (6.3,
with a standard deviation of 1.6). Among these groups, the mean of the agriculture variable is
2.3 (standard deviation of 1.6). In our regression analysis, we treat the share of subsistence
derived from pastoralism as the default activity and use as our focal independent variable the
integer indicator for the degree of traditional reliance on agriculture, with the summed integer
scores for reliance on hunting, gathering and fishing by the individual’s ethnic group among our
controls. In interpreting our regression coefficients, a convenient standard is to consider the
difference in reliance on agriculture between groups reporting agriculture as their most important
means of subsistence and those reporting that pastoralism plays this role. The difference is 4
points on the scale described above.



4.2    Benchmark Regressions

The first panel of Table 2 shows our basic results. We regress our education and wealth
measures on the subsistence shares of agriculture and hunt/gather/fish in an individual’s
ancestral group. The omitted category is the share of pre­colonial subsistence derived from
pastoralism. In all specifications we include controls for age and age­squared, a female dummy
and an indicator of whether the respondent resides outside her ancestral homeland (referred to
as “simple controls”). In columns 1 (for education) and 5 (for wealth) we include country fixed
effects. The coefficient on agriculture is positive and significant, implying that the more of its
subsistence an individual's ancestral group obtained from working the land, as opposed to

                                                                                                  11
herding animals, the more educated and the wealthier he or she is today. This accords with the
conjecture that agriculturalists and their descendants have on average obtained more
education, adopted more advanced technologies, and entered more modern sectors of their
economies than pastoralists and their lineages.

In this regression, as well as most of the specifications in this table, the coefficient on the
hunt/gather/fish measure is also positive and significant. If this were an indication that
descendants of hunter­gatherers such as the Twa of Rwanda, the Kung­San of Botswana and
Namibia, or the Mbuti of the Congo, have also modernized more rapidly than their pastoralist
counterparts, it would severely challenge the social evolutionist logic discussed above. Recall,
however, that hunting and gathering are primary sources of subsistence for the ancestors of
only a handful of individuals in our sample. It is common to see hunting and gathering account
for a minor share of traditional subsistence in primarily agricultural groups, according to our
sources, but only fishing is ever assigned parity with the lead subsistence source, and only in a
few small groups accounting for under 2,500 observations. Given the supplemental rather than
primary role of these activities, positive effects of a larger subsistence share from hunting,
gathering and fishing are thus more plausibly interpreted as suggesting lasting benefits of an
ancestral group’s occupation of an enriched environment, rather than signaling that the lifeway
of true hunter­gatherers conferred long­run advantages in its own right.

To make this point more precise in Appendix Table 3 we use as explanatory variables instead of
the shares from each mode of subsistence, indicator variables reflecting whether a respondent’s
ancestral group was mostly agricultural (distinguishing between mostly intensive, mostly
extensive and mostly unknown agriculture), or had two equally important subsistence sources
or was mostly depending on gather/hunt/fish (the omitted category being mostly pastoral). Using
this categorization indicates that descendants of hunter and gatherers clearly underperform vis
a vis the other subsistence modes. Again note that this dummy reflects the socioeconomic
status of 17 individuals which belong to the Mbuti group.13,14 Appendix Table 3 also reveals that

13
   For completeness, we note that there are two groups, the Herero and the Nam, both of Namibia, for
whom hunting and gathering are listed as important sources secondary to animal husbandry rather than
to farming. These exceptions to the rule that hunting and gathering appear as supplements to agriculture,
in our data, account for about a thousand observations. Moreover, in Appendix Table 4, we show alternate
versions of our main regressions in which the shares of hunting, gathering, and fishing are entered as
separate variables. In these specifications fishing and hunting each obtain positive and significant
coefficients, whereas gathering alternates sign and is insignificant. The positive role of ancestral
dependence on fishing is in line with the findings of Dalgaard et al. (2015).
14
   Scholars who embrace social evolutionary schema such as those of Boserup, Service, and Johnson
and Earl (see above) might also wonder whether our data are supportive of the proposition that past
practice of forms of agriculture that permit higher population density and longer­term food storage and
that require more intensive work effort, are associated with better modern outcomes than are more
“horticultural” practices. The Ethnographic Atlas data distinguish whether the main crops grown were
tubers, cereals, or tree crops. Entering dummy variables for each main crop in our benchmark
regressions, the respective estimated coefficients are not significant. However, an interesting observation
that lends some support to the evolutionists’ expectations is that when only those agricultural groups
whose main crops were cereals and tree crops are included, the agriculture share coefficient remains
highly significant, whereas when parallel versions of the benchmark regression are estimated using only
                                                                                                         12
lumping together societies practising intensive and extensive agriculture is justified since there
does not seem to be a differential legacy of each mode.

In the rest of the columns in Table 2, we replace the country fixed effect with a fixed effect for
the country­ethnic homeland in which the individual currently resides. To the extent that
ancestral lifeways predict current outcomes only because lifeways predict the current state of
development of different ethnic regions in a country, these fixed effects will capture such a
channel. However, in practice, the coefficient on agriculture in the regressions for education and
wealth is reduced by a third or less. This finding highlights that the importance of differences in
ancestral lifeways in shaping individual economic outcomes is not confined to the homeland of
origin of the specific group but is portable across different locations within the country.

In the third and seventh columns, we control for urban residence. Not surprisingly, this is
strongly predictive of both education and wealth levels. The coefficient on agriculture falls by
31% in the case of education and 46% in the case of wealth, but remains significant in both
cases. The fact that the coefficient declines suggests that one channel by which agricultural
heritage improves modern outcomes is by raising the probability of having moved to a city.
However, agricultural heritage evidently has an impact on current outcomes through other
channels as well.

Finally, in the fourth and eighth columns, we control for a set of occupation fixed effects.15 This
accounts for the possibility that the primary channel via which ancestral lifeway affects current
outcomes is through an individual’s choice of occupation. This allows us to rule out the
possibility that our estimates simply reflect descendents of farmers still being farmers and
descendents of pastoralists still being herders. Surprisingly, although the occupation dummies
significantly improve the R2 of our education and wealth regressions, they only slightly change
the coefficient on agriculture, implying that within broadly defined occupations today,
pre­colonial dependence on agriculture influences positively individual outcomes.



4.2.1   Including Enumeration Area Fixed Effects

The regressions presented above include location fixed effects at the level of the Murdock map
region within a country in which an individual currently lives. The justification for this approach is
that these tribal regions may have characteristics that directly influence modern outcomes ­­
indeed, these may be the same characteristics that determine traditional lifeways. We now go


observations for groups whose main crop was tubers (albeit in a much reduced sample), the coefficient
on agriculture is positive but statistically insignificant (results available upon request).
15
   Occupational categories are: not working, professional/technical/managerial, clerical, sales, agriculture
self employed, agriculture employee, household & domestic, services, skilled manual, unskilled manual,
and other. In addition, there is a category for agriculture/breeding/fishing/forest that is found in two
countries (Guinea and Mali). We create a separate dummy variable for this combination category in
these two countries.
                                                                                                           13
further in controlling for location­specific traits. In particular, we use the location information in
the DHS, creating a dummy for every set of coordinates. This leads to a very large number of
geographic fixed effects: 8,236. Correspondingly, the units within which we are exploiting
variation have just a handful of households: on average around 35 respondents. The DHS
sampling clusters are sufficiently small that there is no doubt that these fixed effects represent a
perfect control for the economic environment that individuals face such as labor market
opportunities, ethnic diversity, as well as geographic influences.

Table 3 reports the results. Compared to our regression with country­ethnic homeland fixed
effects (shown in columns 1 and 4 of the table), the coefficient on agriculture falls by about
one­third in the education regression and by two­thirds in the wealth regression. However, the
coefficient remains statistically significant in both cases. There is some danger that the inclusion
of location fixed effects represents over­controlling. The most important reason is that there is a
good deal of endogeneity in the exact location of the respondents, particularly in cities where
there are several sampling clusters. This sorting seems particularly salient in the case of wealth.
Adding these detailed location fixed effects raises the R2 of the wealth regression from .488 to
.676, while in the case of education the rise in the R2 is from .418 to .506. Despite this potential
concern, in the rest of the paper we take these regressions with enumeration­area fixed effects
as our benchmark, although in some cases we also look at the regression with country­ethnic
homeland constants.

The magnitude of the key coefficients can be interpreted as follows. As mentioned above, for
ethnic groups for which agriculture is the primary form of subsistence according to the Murdock
Atlas, the mean of our agriculture variable is 6.3 (recall that this is on a scale of 0­9). For groups
that have pastoralism as their primary source of subsistence, the mean for the agriculture
variable is 2.3. Thus moving between these two groups, agriculture rises by 4 points. The
coefficient in column two, 0.073, thus implies that shifting from pastoralism to agriculture as the
primary form of subsistence would raise education by 0.28 points. Since education is in turn
measured on a scale where each point corresponds to roughly 3 years, this would be 0.8 years
of education. The wealth coefficient in column 5, 0.039, implies that a shift from agriculture to
pastoralism as the primary form of subsistence (of one’s ancestors) raises the wealth index by
0.16 points. Since the wealth index corresponds to quintiles, this would be roughly equivalent to
raising an individual’s rank by three percentiles.

One question raised by these results is whether the coefficient on agriculture in our regressions
simply reflects the numerical dominance of agriculturally descended people in modern societies.
Specifically, we might expect that based on their numbers, such groups would be politically
dominant, and that there there would be discrimination against groups whose ancestors were
not agriculturalists. Below we show that this political discrimination story may indeed partly
explain some of the observed association. However, two auxiliary pieces of evidence suggest
that political discrimination is not the only mechanism at work.

The first piece of evidence comes from looking at how individuals tracing their ancestry to

                                                                                                    14
predominantly pastoral groups fare in countries where they are the absolute majority. In our
sample it is only Ethiopia where this is the case. The pre­colonially pastoral groups Tigre, Afar,
Arusi, Hamar, Nuer, Shebelle, Suri and Reshiat today constitute 52% of the sampled DHS
individuals in Ethiopia. Despite pastoralists being in the majority, however, the coefficient on
agriculture in our basic regression remains positive and significant (see Appendix Table 5).

As an alternative way to see that our evidence is not only driven by comparing descendants of
pastoralists to descendants of agriculturalists we may focus on countries where none of the
sampled individuals belongs to a pre­colonially predominantly pastoral group. In fact this is true
for 14 countries. Appendix Table 6 Panel A replicates the specifications of Table 3 over these 14
countries. Even when there are no descendants of pastoralists present in a given country, the
coefficient on agricultural dependence remains positive, significant, and indeed larger than in
our baseline specification.

Even in this case, one might conceivably worry that among non­pastoral groups, those more
dependent on agriculture pre­colonially may still be over­represented in the modern population,
thus hold political power, which may help explain the superior economic economic performance
of their members. To address this concern, we look at a subset of countries in which not only
there are no descendants of pastoralists, but also among the descendants of agriculturalists, it
is those whose ancestors were less dependent on agriculture who are the majority today. For
example, in Benin, 70% of the sampled individuals belong to either the Fon, the Futajalonke, or
the Songhai. These ethnicities derived roughly 50% of their subsistence from farming according
to Murdock (1967). The other 3 sampled groups, which are the minority, namely the Gurma, the
Yoruba and the Somba derived on average 70% of their livelihood from agriculture. This pattern
is true for six countries in our sample.16 In Appendix table 6 Panel B, we show that our
benchmark pattern established in Table 3 remains intact for these six countries. The results
suggest that irrespective of their current representation in the population, members of groups
that pre­colonially practised more agriculture are more wealthy and more educated.17




16
  The six countries in this latter group are Benin, Burkina Faso, Togo, Malawi, Guinea and Central African
Republic. The other eight countries in which none of the sampled individuals were descendants of
pastoralists are Cote D’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, and Zambia.

17
   The estimates in Table 3 are purely cross sectional. In an attempt to explore whether the legacy of
agricultural ancestry has been evolving over time, we estimated versions of the education and wealth
regressions similar to the ones reported in this table, separately for each five­year birth cohort groups
between 1935 and 1996. Appendix Figures 1a and 1b plot the estimates. The coefficients remain positive
and statistically significant except for when the dependent variable is the level of wealth among the very
oldest birth cohorts, which have very few members. Moreover, there is no clear evidence of a trend in the
coefficients by age, as would be consistent, for example, with convergence over time between groups
with different ancestral lifeways. However, the standard errors are large enough that we cannot be sure
that such a trend is not present.


                                                                                                        15
4.3     Heterogeneity by Occupation, Urban Status, and Country

To assess the sensitivity of our results as well as provide some evidence on the possible
channels via which ancestral lifeways affect current outcomes, we split the sample along various
dimensions.

We start by splitting the sample by occupation into two broad categories: farming­related and
non­farming related.18 This allows us to assess the extent to which the effect of ancestral
lifeways operate in the traditional or in the modern sectors of the economy. The results are
presented in Table 4. For education, agriculture remains significantly positive in both
sub­samples. The coefficient on agriculture in the non­farming group (0.0727) is larger than the
coefficient in the farming­related group (0.0515). This implies that agricultural ancestry has more
import outside of agriculture than within it. In the case of wealth, the coefficient on agriculture
also remains significant when the sample is split, with the coefficient being higher in the farming
related group, although the difference is very small.

Splitting the sample into urban versus rural residence, we find an interesting difference in the
results for education compared to wealth. For education, the coefficients in the two sub­samples
are very similar to each other and to the corresponding coefficient in Table 3. In the wealth
regression the coefficients are again significant in the sub­samples, but in this case, the
coefficient on agriculture for individuals living in rural areas is three times as large as that in
urban areas. (Some part of the difference is explained by the fact that the variance of wealth in
rural areas is 30% larger than in urban while the variances of the agriculture measure are
almost equal in the two areas.)

Finally, we re­run our benchmark regressions separately for each country in our sample. These
results are shown in Appendix Table 5 (panels A and B). Depending on the specification, the
coefficient on agriculture is positive and significant at the 10% level in between 10 and 14
countries. It is only negative and significant in one country. This suggests that the benchmark
pattern is not driven by a handful of countries but reflects a more generalized phenomenon of
the African landscape. Agricultural descent is a reliable positive predictor of contemporary
individual well­being.

4.4     Selection into Migration

As discussed above, we are able to identify the portable component of ancestral influence on
current outcomes only because we have in our sample a substantial number of people who live
outside of their ancestral homelands. Using our criterion of calling someone a “mover” if they
live more than 10 kilometers outside of the homeland associated with their ethnic group, this
comes to 54 percent of our sample. A natural worry with our inference strategy is that people

18
  Farming­related includes: agriculture self employed, agriculture employee and animal breeding, fishing,
and forestry. Non­farming related include all the rest (except for not working).
                                                                                                            16
who live outside their ancestral homelands are not randomly selected, and in particular, that the
manner in which selection operates may differ according to the ancestral lifeway associated with
his/her group.

As a first step in assessing whether selection into migration biases our results, we look at the
extent to which ancestral lifeway itself predicts migration. We use two different measures of
migration: first, the “mover” definition used above, and second, a variable from the DHS that
indicates whether an individual has moved during his/her life (this latter measure is only
available for a subset of respondents). The results are shown in Table 5. The first two columns
show that within enumeration areas, individuals from ethnicities that historically depended more
on agriculture are less likely to be classified as “movers”. A person descending from a mostly
agricultural group is roughly 19 percentage points less likely to be a mover than someone from
a group that relied mostly on pastoralism, and this result is robust to the inclusion of occupation
fixed effects. The probable explanation is that areas in which agriculture was practiced were
more likely to develop cities, which in turn attracted migrants, although another possibility is that
the locations of the ethnic homelands of pastoral people are not as precisely measured as that
of agriculturalists, mechanically producing the observed correlations. In columns 3 and 4 of
Table 5 the dependent variable is our other migration measure. Having an agricultural
background is positively but insignificantly associated with the probability having moved in one’s
own life.19 Similarly, the correlation between having moved in life and wealth and education
levels is 0.18 and 0.12, respectively.

The finding that there is strong predictive power of ancestral lifeway for being a “mover”
suggests that there could also be differential selection into migration across lifeway groups. To
assess the potential effect of this selection, we repeat our benchmark regression, where besides
including a “mover” dummy we also interact it with our two ancestral lifeway categories:
agriculture and hunting/fishing/gathering. A finding that there is a differential impact of being a
mover for people with different ancestral lifeways has two possible interpretations. One is that
there is indeed differential selection into migration ­­ that is, that migrants from, say, homelands
with agricultural lifeways differ more from those who remain behind than do migrants from
homelands with pastoral lifeways. The alternative interpretation is that there is differential
portability of lifeway­specific skills outside of one’s own homeland (and in particular in cities,
where we expect a good fraction of movers to be located). This second channel would still be
consistent with the idea that ancestral lifeway is an important determinant of modern outcomes,
although via a slightly different channel than the one that we have stressed above.

The results shown in Table 6 suggest that bias from differential selection into migration is not
driving our main results. When education or wealth is used as the dependent variable, the
interaction of agriculture (the variable of greatest interest to us) and the “mover” dummy is

19
  In Appendix Table 7 we show that flexibly controlling for how long the respondent has been in his
current residence (information which is available for roughly half the sample) in the benchmark
specification does not alter the results. This suggests that differences in the length of integration in the
current communities is unlikely to be driving the observed pattern.
                                                                                                          17
insignificant, while the coefficient on agriculture itself remains significant. This suggests that
movers from agricultural areas are not systematically different than movers from historically
pastoral areas.

The last split of the sample we attempted is motivated by the destination of the “movers.”
Naturally, for those of agricultural ancestry, currently residing in some other ethnic homeland
which also used to be mostly agricultural in the pre­colonial times may not entail a significant
loss in the ethnic­specific knowledge set compared to a “mover” of pastoral background. What
would be more surprising is to find that descendants of agricultural groups perform better than
those of pastoral descent even within enumeration areas in ethnic homelands that used to be
mostly pastoral historically, where if anything those of pastoral background would have a natural
advantage. Appendix Table 8 presents the results. Overall, respondents of groups that
historically derived a larger share of subsistence from pastoralism are performing worse in both
historically agricultural and historically pastoral regions, suggesting that differential portability of
ethnic­specific skills across different ecological areas is unlikely to be the main driver of the
uncovered relationship.

5.      Origins of Lifeways

So far we have focused our attention on the question of how ancestral lifeways are related to
individual outcomes today. A natural question is how ancestral lifeways themselves are
determined. This is potentially important for several reasons. Most significantly, one might worry
that the same factors that determine lifeways also determine individual outcomes. For example,
certain cultures might be more inclined to undertake long­term investments that would be
required in farming, and so members of these groups would be more likely to farm and to be
economically successful, but farming itself would not be relevant. A second reason for studying
the determinants of lifeways is to put more flesh on the social evolutionary narrative presented
above.

The most natural determinant of whether a group has historically practiced agriculture is the
quality of the land itself. It would not be surprising if agriculture were more common in areas
where it was more feasible. Figure 1a portrays the degree of pre­colonial dependence on
agriculture (from the Murdock Atlas) and Figure 1b maps the underlying suitability of land for
agriculture across tribal regions (constructed by Ramankutty et al., 2001). Table 7 shows
regressions of ancestral subsistence on agriculture, pastoralism, and hunt/gather/fish,
respectively, on land quality. As expected, the coefficient on land quality is significantly positive
in the regression for agriculture and significantly negative in the regression for pastoralism. It is
insignificant in the regression for gather/hunt/fish.

5.1     Instrumental Variables Regressions

Tables 8 presents instrumental variables regressions with education and wealth as dependent
variables, using land suitability to instrument for the share of agriculture. In addition to dealing

                                                                                                      18
with the possible endogeneity of agriculture mentioned above, the IV procedure also corrects for
measurement error in agriculture as a share of traditional subsistence, which is presumably
non­negligible.20 Columns 1 and 4 include country­ethnic­homeland fixed effects whereas the
rest of the columns include enumeration area constants. It is useful to keep in mind that looking
within the latter absorbs a significant fraction of variation of both the instrument and the
instrumented variable. Across all specifications the coefficient on agriculture is positive and
statistically significant and the IV coefficients are moderately smaller compared to the respective
OLS shown on Table 3.

The uncovered evidence supports a story in which ethnic groups which found themselves on
land that was suitable for agriculture were more likely to take this up as a means of subsistence,
and that engaging in agriculture then conferred portable characteristics on individuals from
these ethnic groups that made them more prone to succeed after they migrated away from their
homelands.



6       Ethnic and Linguistic Families

A threat to our identification of a channel whereby participating in agriculture endows ethnic
groups with characteristics that lead to success in the modern economy would be if pre­existing
ethnic characteristics drove both the likelihood that a group took up agriculture and economic
outcomes in the modern world. An example would be if some groups were naturally more
acquisitive, and were able to push less acquisitive groups onto marginal land.21 Unfortunately,
we do not have direct measures of these potential characteristics (although some of these are
likely to be reflected in the other pre­colonial traits recorded in the Ethnographic Atlas, whose
variation, as we show below, does not seem to explain away our findings). As a partial fix for
this concern, we repeat our benchmark regressions including fixed effects for linguistic families
and subfamilies as well as ethnic clusters. Groups in the same family will, we presume, have
broadly comparable cultural origins, and thus it seems more likely that variation in agriculture as
a source of livelihood within an ethnic/linguistic category will be more likely due to variation in

20
   The peculiar geography of Africa in terms of its suitability for the Tsetse fly also circumscribed the use of
animals in specific parts of the continent and shaped the locations where pastoralism was a viable mode
of production, see Alsan (2015).
21
    There is a large literature in linguistics and anthropology arguing that the spread zones of
agriculturalists and pastoralists and their languages following the Neolithic Revolution trace closely land
endowments that were amenable to agricultural and herding activities, respectively. Hence, pastoralism is
viewed as an adaptation to ecological niches unable to support much agricultural production (Richerson
et al.; Bellwood (2001)). This observation might raise the possibility that pastoralists attain lower
outcomes today due to some genetic inferiority that consigned their ancestors to marginal environments
centuries or even millennia ago. We think it unlikely that any differences predating ancestral sorting into
lifeways has strong effects on capabilities today given than both cultural and genetic forces have been at
work for many intervening centuries. For example, even if it had been the case that pastoralists are
descended from lineages that lost the struggle for good agricultural land due to lack of physical strength
or toughness, casual empiricism casts doubt on the proposition that the pastoralists of recent times are
lacking in those respects­­consider the repeated historical conquests of agrarian by pastoralist armies.
                                                                                                              19
opportunity to practice agriculture than to variation in broad cultural characteristics.

We consider 3 different levels of linguistic and ethnic aggregation. In particular, the 187 groups
in our dataset correspond to 6 language phylums as defined in the Murdock Atlas entry (v98),
13 linguistic subfamilies (entry v99 in Murdock Atlas) and 36 ethnic clusters which correspond to
Murdock’s (1959) heading of the respective chapters. It is important to keep in mind that for the
construction of ethnic clusters Murdock relied on agricultural features, among other things
(Murdock p.42­43 “common cultigens”). This implies that the latter classification absorbs most of
the variation in our explanatory variable imposing a rather stringent test for our thesis.

To give some examples of the various groupings, in Kenya, the Kikuyu, Meru, and Kamba are
all part of the Kenya Highland Bantu ethnic family, the Niger­Congo language phylum, and the
Niger Congo: Bantoid or Central language sub­family, while the Luo and Kipsigi are part of the
Nilotes ethnic family, the Chari­Nile language family and the Eastern Nilotic or Sudanic language
sub­family. However, ethnic and linguistic categories do not always line up so neatly. For
example, the Kissi, Kpelle and Bete in Guinea are all in the ethnic cluster Kru and Peripheral
Mande, but this ethnic cluster spans 3 linguistic subfamilies, namely: Niger­Congo: Atlantic or
West Atlantic (Kissi), Niger­Congo: Kwa (Bete), and Niger­Congo: Mande (Kpelle). Similarly,
ethnicities in different ethnic clusters may be linguistically related. In Burkina Faso, the Bisa,
Bobo, Gurma, Lobi, and Senufo all belong to the Niger­Congo Gur or Voltaic language
sub­family, but the first of these groups belongs to the Central Bantu ethnic cluster while the
other four groups belong to the Voltaic ethnic cluster.

As one would expect, these groupings by themselves explain a good deal of the variation in
agriculture as a source of livelihood. The R2 from regressing agricultural dependence on the set
of linguistic sub­family dummies is .37, and from regressing it on the set of ethnic dummies the
R­squared is .67.

Tables 9 shows the effect of including these dummies in our benchmark regressions. Adding the
six linguistic family dummies has no effect on either the size or significance of the coefficient on
agriculture in either the education or the wealth regressions. By contrast, when we use the 13
linguistic sub­family dummies, the coefficient on agriculture in the education regression falls by a
little less than half and remains significant at the 5% level, while in the case of the wealth
regression, the coefficient does not change much and remains highly significant. Surprisingly,
when we use 36 dummies for the respective ethnic clusters, there is, once again, very little
change in the coefficients on agriculture in either the education or wealth regressions, and they
remain highly significant. Hence, even within ethnic families, whose constituent groups are
presumably broadly comparable along several dimensions, tracing one’s ancestry to an ethnicity
that practised more agriculture historically translates robustly into better economic outcomes
today. Overall, the evidence suggests that unobserved heterogeneity across large groupings is
unlikely to be driving the bulk of our results.




                                                                                                  20
7.      Possible Channels: Why is An Agricultural Past Advantageous?

We finally turn to investigating the possible channels through which ancestral lifeway affects
present individual outcomes. Our exploration starts by looking at other pre­colonial traits and
continues by investigating possible influences on agricultural ethnic groups that might have
taken place during the colonial era. We also explore whether the observed pattern is driven by
the unequal treatment of descendants of pastoral groups by the central government, finding
some support. Finally, using alternative survey data we find differences in attitudes and
demeanor between descendants of pastoralists and agriculturalists that help account for
differences in wealth and educational outcomes.

7.1     Pre­Colonial Characteristics

The Murdock Atlas provides a wealth of information on ethnic­specific traits besides their means
of subsistence. In this section, we experiment by adding a number of these to the right hand
side of our benchmark regressions for education and wealth. While this is in part an attempt to
identify the channels of causation from ancestral lifeways to modern outcomes, it can also be
seen as an additional test of the robustness of the findings above. We would expect that a
society’s means of feeding itself would determine a great many other societal characteristics.22
Alternatively, it might be that ethnic groups that take up agriculture already had certain
characteristics. In either of these cases, it may be these characteristics that affect outcomes of
individuals once they leave their traditional occupations and homelands. Finding that accounting
for such a characteristic significantly reduced the coefficient on agriculture would be evidence
for this story.

The pre­colonial characteristics that we examine are the following: polygyny is a dichotomous
indicator for the practice of men marrying multiple wives; clans is a dichotomous variable
assigned a value of 1 if community marriage organization is coded as characterized by clan
communities or clan barrios and not segmented communities, exogamous communities, or
segmented communities without local exogamy; settlements refers to position on a spectrum
ranging from 1 for fully migratory and nomadic to 8 for complex settlements, with permanence
and density of settlement increasing with the value assigned; local jurisdiction indicates the
degree of jurisdictional hierarchy (existence of governance structures) at the local level (e.g.,
village); political centralization indicates jurisdictionary hierarchy above the level of the local
community, coded 1 (no supra­community hierarchy) to 5 (four levels of hierarchy above the
local community); class stratification is a dichotomous indicator equal to 0 if no class
stratification exists “among freemen,” and 1 if the Atlas records class stratification, wealth
distinctions, elite class, dual classes, or “complex” class structure; elections takes value 1 if
succession to the office of local headman was by election or other formal consensus, otherwise
zero; slavery refers to presence of an internal institution of slave ownership (as opposed to the

22
  The notion that culture is a “superstructure” determined by a society’s “mode of production” or material
base, was famously proposed by Karl Marx and championed in the field of anthropology by Marvin Harris
(1997), among others.
                                                                                                         21
external slave trade, which is considered in the subsequent exercise)23; and property, set to 0 if
“inheritance rule for real property (land)” is coded “absence of individual property rights,” and to
1 if response code is “matrilineal,” “patrilineal” or “other heirs.” We refer to these characteristics
as “pre­colonial,” since we believe that they are measuring aspects of a tribal society that
pre­date European interference. In addition to assessing how these characteristics affect the
coefficient on agriculture, it is also of interest to look at their own effects.

The results are shown in Table 10 (Panels A and B). Each column shows results from two
regressions that use the same sample. The top line shows the coefficient on the agriculture
share in a regression in which the only right hand side variables are the agriculture and
hunt/gather/fish shares as well as our “simple controls” and coordinate fixed effects. The bottom
part of the table shows coefficients from a regression that adds to these one or more of the
pre­colonial control variables. We follow this procedure because missing observations in the
Atlas differ across pre­colonial variables which means that the sample varies significantly across
specifications (and, as seen in the last column, is greatly reduced when we use all of the
pre­colonial characteristics together).

The first finding in this table is that controlling for pre­colonial characteristics, either one at a
time or all together, has little effect on the coefficient on agriculture when looking at the effect on
education in Panel A. The coefficient always remains statistically significant, and does not
change in magnitude much when characteristics are entered one at a time. Even when all of the
pre­colonial characteristics are entered in the regression together, the drop in the coefficient is
negligible (from 0.089 to 0.085), and it remains significant at the 1% level.

In the regressions with wealth as the dependent variable in Panel B, it is once again the case
that entering pre­colonial characteristics one at a time has little bearing on the magnitude of the
coefficient on agriculture, which is always highly significant. However, when all of the
pre­colonial characteristics are entered jointly, the coefficient on agriculture becomes statistically
insignificant. In this specification, none of the pre­colonial characteristic variables is individually
significant. Similarly, when these pre­colonial characteristics are added one at a time into the
education and wealth regressions, none of them obtains significant coefficients in both of them.
24
   We take these findings as an indication that within villages among movers there is not one
pre­colonial trait with stronger influence than ancestral dependence on agriculture in explaining
present individual­level variation in economic performance.




23
   It is not clear the degree to which the practise of indigenous slavery in the pre­colonial period was
shaped by the incidence of slave raids in the context of the European slave trades.
24
   Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) show that regional development is higher in ethnic homelands
of politically complex societies in the pre­colonial era. We complement their finding by uncovering that
individuals tracing their ancestry to politically centralized/stratified groups and residing outside their
ancestral homelands also enjoy higher levels of wealth (although they are no more educated).
                                                                                                         22
7.2     Colonial Roots

In Table 11, we account for variables reflecting factors from the colonial and early postcolonial
period that might influence economic outcomes of descendants today. We include two
measures intended to capture the impact of the slave trade: slaves taken per square kilometer
of the ancestral ethnic homeland and distance from the centroid of the ancestral homeland to
the sea. We also include two variables that are intended to measure other influences of
Europeans: missions per square kilometer of the ancestral ethnic homeland, and distance of the
homeland’s centroid to the capital city. Finally, we include measures of religion at the individual
level. The reference group in this case is Christian, with the two other categories being Muslim
and other/no religion.25

Unlike the pre­colonial measures, inclusion of the new variables in Table 11 has relatively little
effect on the size of our sample, and in no case does their inclusion alter the significance of the
coefficient on agriculture. Including all of them together, the coefficient on agriculture in the
education regression falls by one fifth, and that in the wealth regression hardly changes. Of the
additional variables, the most notable effects are from religion. Non­Christians have lower levels
of educational attainment, while for wealth, being other/no religion has a negative effect, but this
is not the case for Muslims. There are also indications that presence of Christian missions
(established during the colonial era in the ancestral group’s homeland) improves descendants’
current outcomes. In contrast, contact with Europeans engendered by proximity to the capital
city shows a negative effect, if any. We find little sign of an effect of the slave trade in these
specifications. We return to the impact of missions in section 7.4.

7.3 Cultural Roots: Attitudes Towards Violence, Perceptions of Survey Enumerators

A natural theory explaining persistent effect of ancestral lifeways on modern outcomes is that
there is cultural transmission of traits related to lifeways that impact behavior today. The range
of potentially relevant traits is enormous, and measurement of any particular cultural trait is
difficult. For example, Galor and Ozak (forthcoming) establish a positive link between
geographic endowments conducive to agriculture and patience as measured in contemporary
populations.

Why the different lifeways of farming and herding may give rise to differences in traits such as
patience, attitudes towards violence, and differences in views of gender relations, is a question
that lies beyond the scope of our data and analysis. Some have suggested that pastoralists
cultivate attitudes of greater vigilance and readiness to resort to use of force because their main
source of livelihood and store of wealth is easily movable. Physically closer, longer term
settlement may favor more cooperative cultures among agricultural groups. The fact that women

25
   The DHS religion variable (v130) is coded differently for each country. For some countries, we
collapsed several groups to form the “Christian” category. All the countries provided enough information
for us to put individuals into one of our three categories, except for Namibia, which does not have a
unique category for "Muslim". But considering that Namibia is overwhelmingly Christian (only 25
observations are non­Christian), this should not be a big problem.
                                                                                                      23
perform most agricultural labor might combine with the lesser importance of the male advantage
in warfare and defense to give women less status disadvantage in agricultural societies,
although women’s traditional status in rural Africa is frequently judged to be low. Moving further
from the differences we have been able to document, agriculturalists may develop greater
tolerance for repetitive effort than do pastoralists due to the different demands of their ways of
wresting a living from nature. A “work ethic” more ready for urban modernity might therefore
mark agriculturalists on average, which could further contribute to greater success in schooling
and in wealth­generating activities.

Data availability leads us to focus our exploratory exercises on two features sometimes
attributed to pastoralist cultures and seeming at first blush to have the potential to reduce the
success of individuals in modernizing societies. They are: a reputed proclivity to violence, in
men (Nisbett and Cohen, 1996; Pinker, 2011; Grosjean, (2014), and alleged low status of
women (Bodley, 2011; Krätli, 2001).26 The first trait might disadvantage men as candidates for
occupations requiring cooperative interaction with those from other cultures, and the second
might, among other things, cause greater gender disparities, lower investment in education and
health of women, and lead to lower female participation in the labor force. Unfortunately, our
data do not permit us either to disentangle the two factors or to determine exactly how­­i.e., in
one of the manners just mentioned, or in some other way or ways­­they influence outcomes.

In the DHS there is a set of attitudinal measures that reflect some combination of men’s
attitudes towards both violence and women. Specifically, five questions in the DHS ask
respondents about the circumstances under which it would be acceptable for a man to beat his
wife.27 As our dependent variable, we use the first principal component of these five measures,
which on average explains 59.9% of the variation in each of them. The standard deviation of the
dependent variable is 1.73. This measure reflects a mix of attitudes toward women and
proclivity toward violence.

Table 12 shows the results. We include our standard set of controls, and also experiment with
including a control for being Muslim, since Muslims are somewhat overrepresented among
pastoralists and reduced freedom or lower status for women is sometimes attributed to Muslim
cultures. Being from an ethnicity that was traditionally dependent on agriculture has a negative
and significant effect on the reported acceptability of violence towards women when the Muslim
control is not included, and is significant at the 10% level when the control is included.

26
   In a laboratory experiment involving university student subjects in five culturally and institutionally
distinct countries on three continents, Ahn et al. (2015) find subjects in Mongolia substantially less
successful than those in Austria, the U.S., Mexico and South Korea, at foregoing theft from fellow group
members to foster socially efficient production. Unlike the other countries, the ancestors of the Mongolian
students were overwhelmingly practitioners of pastoralism a few generations ago. However, it lies beyond
the scope of our investigation to draw conclusions regarding the claims concerning either proclivity to
violence or low status of women; among the sources referenced, both Bodley and Krätli view the claim of
low status of women as being oversimplified.
27
    The variables are MV744A­MV744E. The circumstances are: wife goes out without telling him; wife
neglects the children; wife argues with him; wife refuses to have sex with him; wife burns the food.
                                                                                                         24
We also checked whether the likelihood of sending a girl to school relative to that of sending a
boy differed in households according to the DHS data depending on the degree of ancestral
reliance of agriculture of the household head. We found no significant difference here. This
suggests that variation in the acceptability of violence toward women discussed above may be
more informative about differences in attitudes towards violence than about differences in
attitudes towards women, but strong conclusions are probably unwarranted in the absence of
further evidence.

In addition to this result from our DHS data, we also find evidence suggestive of difference in
interpersonal interaction style from a set of questions that enumerators of the Afrobarometer 4
survey are asked to complete following each interview. The enumerator codes (a) whether the
respondent seemed hostile, (b) whether the respondent appeared bored, (c) whether the
respondent was uncooperative, (d) whether the respondent appeared impatient, (e) whether the
respondent seemed suspicious, and (f) whether the respondent struck the enumerator as
dishonest in his or her responses. The Afrobarometer survey includes information on the
ethnicity of each respondent, so we are able to link the coded data of more than 25,500
surveyed individuals in 19 countries to ancestral ethnicity and thus to the same Ethnographic
Atlas lifeway shares used in the rest of our analysis. See the summary statistics in Appendix
Table 9.

Columns two through seven of Table 13 show the results of OLS regressions of the enumerator
codings for respondent characteristics (a) ­ (f) on our agriculture and hunting/fishing/gathering
share variables plus age, age squared, a female dummy, location fixed effects, a mover dummy,
and 724 enumerator fixed effects, with errors clustered at the ethnic identity of each respondent.
The estimated coefficients indicate that relative to the omitted ancestral lifeway of animal
husbandry, greater ancestral reliance on agriculture significantly reduces impressions of
boredom, impatience and dishonesty, and reduces with marginal (in)significance impressions
that the respondent is uncooperative and suspicious. Thus the same enumerator finds
descendants of pastoralists decidedly less easy to interact with than descendants of
agriculturalists. This suggests a difference in disposition to which the ancestral lifeway may
originally have contributed, and that may potentially affect the economic success of these
descendents even in quite different modern environments. But we cannot rule out that nearly all
enumerators are descendants of non­pastoralists and that their judgments are influenced by
cultural presuppositions and not objectively warranted.

To get a sense of how much of the effect of lifeway on education and wealth might be explained
by the differences documented in Table 13, we estimate regressions paralleling our benchmark
regressions (Table 3) using observations from the Afrobarometer Round 4 Surveys rather than
the DHS. The first column of Table 14 presents this baseline specification which reassuringly
confirms our finding about the significant positive impact of ancestral reliance on agriculture on
education (there is not a wealth variable in the Afrobarometer comparable to the DHS measure).
Exploiting variation within the 3,748 enumeration areas in the Afrobarometer 4, effectively

                                                                                                25
comparing the education outcomes across roughly 6 respondents per village, those of
agricultural ancestry are more educated. In columns 2 ­ 5 we introduce interviewer­specific
constants whereas in column 3 we add controls for the enumerators’ judgments of the surveyed
individuals. We find that adding the enumerator scores on the respondent's personality
characteristics modestly reduces the coefficient on agriculture by a little under 12%, from 0.018
to 0.0159 which suggests that a moderate share of the influence of agricultural ancestry may
operate through the channel of such personality traits.28



7.4 Institutional Roots: Treatment by Europeans and Political Influence

Although the findings in section 7.3 suggest that culture, personality traits and/or attitudes that
members of pastoralist groups have handed down over the generations, may negatively affect
their economic outcomes today, we cannot rule out that the treatment that they and their
ancestors received at the hands of colonizers and post­colonial political elites also play a part in
explaining their outcomes. For example, if European administrators, settlers and missionaries
treated pastoralists less favorably than agriculturalists, whether out of prejudice that the former
were more “culturally backward” or less like themselves, or due simply to logistical constraints
on interaction with diffuse and mobile populations, and if postcolonial African elites also dealt
less favorably with pastoralists, then it might be the inferior treatment by others, rather than
internalized disadvantageous traits, that explain today’s less favorable outcomes.

A first hint of such differential treatment builds on the finding in Table 11 that past presence of
Christian missions has been economically advantageous to groups in whose midst they were
situated. If there were fewer missions in pastoralist homelands, this could have proven
disadvantageous, perhaps because members of pastoralist groups would have had less
exposure to “modernizing” influences, including suggestions of the value of literacy. The
correlations between the extent of reliance on animal husbandry by an Atlas ethnic group and
number of missions in the homeland, the number of missions per square kilometer of homeland
area, and a dummy variable for presence of any mission in the homeland, are all negative and
significant. Since there were fewer missions among pastoralists and past mission presence
predicts better contemporary outcomes, we see one possible pathway for pastoralism to have
disadvantaged groups’ descendants via an influence on treatment by Europeans. While
statistically significant, however, the economically insubstantial change in the estimated
coefficient on agriculture when the control for missions is added in Table 11 implies that this
specific factor is not quantitatively important in its own right.

We also find evidence that those of pastoralist descent have, or at least perceive themselves to
have, less political influence than those of agricultural background, in contemporary Africa. The
literature on African political economy provides abundant evidence of the role played by ethnic


28
  Compared to the DHS education estimates the difference in the coefficient magnitude is driven by the
fact that in the Afrobarometer Surveys the education variable is more detailed and takes 10 distinct values
corresponding to different educational levels. We take the log to reduce the skewness in the distribution.
                                                                                                         26
favoritism in determining access to employment and government services; see, for example,
Franck and Rainer (2012) and Kudamatsu (2009). Hence, a natural candidate for explaining the
observed differences in the socioeconomic status between pastoral and agricultural groups is
their difference in political power. We attempted to shed light on this issue performing the
following three tests.

First, in an attempt to gauge the political representation of a group we followed Michalopoulos
and Papaioannou (forthcoming) and linked the groups in the Ethnic Power Relationship dataset
(EPR) to the Murdock Atlas groups. The former dataset created by Wimmer, Cederman, and
Min (2009) records periods/years of ethnic­based discrimination. Using this direct measure as
the outcome of interest (more precisely using a dummy indicating whether a group has even
been discriminated between 1960­2010) we find that groups more dependent on pastoralism
pre­colonially have experienced during the postcolonial era a 4% increase in the likelihood of
discrimination (with a sample mean of 16%). This association albeit marginally insignificant (p <
.15) is suggestive of the disadvantage that descendants of pastoral groups face in the political
sphere (table is available upon request).

Second, motivated by the finding of Francois, Rainer and Trebbi (2014) that across roughly 15
democratic African countries ruling coalitions are surprisingly large and that political power is
allocated proportionally to population shares across ethnic groups, we added as a control in the
benchmark regressions the log of the number of individuals belonging to the respondent’s ethnic
group within country (we also tried the share of the group in the country’s sampled population,
finding similar results). This variable is meant to capture the de facto influence of that group in
the political arena. We find that adding the population size (share) of the ethnic group in the
main Table 3 does not affect the quantitative significance of our estimates.

Third, data from the Afrobarometer indicate that those whose ancestors relied more on animal
husbandry than agriculture perceive their ethnic group to be less politically influential. This is
shown in column (1) of Table 13 where the dependent variable is the respondent's’ perception of
his group’s political influence. Because the dependent variable’s coding assigns a smaller value
for greater perceived influence, the negative significant coefficient on agriculture means that the
more did the respondent’s ancestral group relied on agriculture, the greater the perceived
political influence of her group.

Although it is possible that the reported self­perception of less influence on the parts of
respondents having pastoralist ethnic backgrounds simply reflect some personality trait that
perhaps correlates with impatience, suspicion, and other characteristics judged present by the
enumerators, it is also possible that the groups in question are in fact less influential (on
average) in their nations’ political scenes, and that this is indeed one of the pathways explaining
the inferior economic outcomes of current members of those groups. With respect to
magnitudes, comparison of regressions (2) and (4) of Table 14 indicate that controlling for
differences in perceived political influence lowers the magnitude of the coefficient on agriculture
by 8%, suggesting that the factor has non­negligible importance, but is relatively less important
than the personality traits that the same table’s exercises suggest can account for about 12% of

                                                                                                  27
the estimated coefficient on agriculture. In column 5 of Table 14 accounting for both differences
in perceived personality traits as well as perceived political influence of the group reduces the
coefficient on ancestral dependence on agriculture by 19%, leaving it marginally significant at
the 10% level.

8.     Conclusion

On the eve of the “Scramble for Africa” the continent was replete with examples of almost every
kind of pre­industrial subsistence economy, from hunter­gatherers, to nomadic pastoralists, to
shifting and intensive agriculturalists. Today, five generations later, the descendants of these
groups are often intermingled within urban settings. Does one’s lineage in terms of pre­colonial
lifeways matter for today’s individual outcomes?

In this paper, we have looked at agriculture and pastoralism not as current occupations but as
ancestral ones, investigating whether the pre­colonial lifeways of contemporary Africans’ ethnic
groups predict the current economic outcomes of their members. In survey data from 21
sub­Saharan countries, we find that the greater was one’s ancestral group’s reliance on
agriculture, the better one’s outcomes are today, even when controlling for a large number of
potentially relevant factors and when focusing on those living at some remove from the
ancestral homeland, those in cities, and those engaged in non­agriculture and non­animal
raising occupations. We confirmed our main result also in a second substantial data set,
reproduced it using land suitability to instrument for reliance on agriculture, determined that it is
not attributable to the shared heritages of linguistic or ethnic family groupings, and identified
possible channels through which an ancestry reliant on animal husbandry contributes to inferior
contemporary outcomes. Among the traits in question, we found provisional evidence relating to
violence and impatience, but dimensions of culture for which we presently lack measures, such
as attitudes towards work, might be as or more important. Possibly economic lifeway in past
centuries selected for cultural and attitudinal traits that served useful functions under the
conditions then extant but that, transmitted to more recent generations in the course of their
upbringing and socialization, confer a handicap on those of one background relative to those of
the other.

These findings leave open the question of whether what accounts for the outcomes observed is
in fact the portable traits which those of pastoral ethnicity have carried with them into agrarian
and urban environments, traits that in and of themselves disadvantage their bearers, or whether
instead the prejudices and unfavorable treatment of them by, first, European missionaries and
colonial officials and, subsequently, African elites and even their neighbors of non­pastoralist
ancestry, are to blame. We find some evidence consistent with a prejudicial or at least
differential treatment pathway in the facts that presence of missions is found to be economically
helpful and that missions were significantly less common among pastoralists. Additional
evidence comes from pastoralist descendants’ self­reported perception that their groups have
less influence than others in their countries’ politics today. Although we controlled for
enumerator effects, the survey enumerators’ reports of impatience and uncooperativeness on

                                                                                                   28
the parts of respondents of pastoralist background might still partly reflect prejudices against
pastoralists, if the vast majority of enumerators have agriculturalist roots.

While we are unable to fully separate the “inherent trait” from the “treatment by others” type
explanations, it seems likely that at least part of the disadvantage exhibited by those of
non­agricultural ancestry does reflect deep cultural factors, and that our results therefore stand
as evidence of the persistent impact of history on current economic outcomes. Our findings bear
comparison with cross­country evidence that earlier and more extended agrarian state
development confers economic advantages today at the national level, but they may constitute
the first of this kind that document the influence of historical way of life at the individual level. It
suggests an arrow of causality running from environmental factors through economic adaptation
and thence to culture and persistent traits, with those traits exerting an influence for some
generations past removal of the culture­bearers from the originating environment. It joins in this
respect a growing literature on culture and the economy, a literature whose relevance to future
policy­making begins with offering a better understanding of the factors that lie behind the
challenges facing economically disadvantaged groups.




                                                                                                      29
References

Abramitzky Ran, Leah Boustan and Katherine Eriksson, 2014, “A Nation of Immigrants:
Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration,” Journal of Political
Economy, 122 (3), 467­717.

Ahn, T.K., Loukas Balafoutas, Mongoljin Batsaikhan, Francisco Campos­Ortiz, Louis Putterman
and Matthias Sutter, 2015, “Security of Property as a Public Good: Institutions, Socio­Political
Environment and Experimental Behavior in Five Countries,” Brown University Working Paper
2012­18, revised.


Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano and Nathan Nunn, 2013, “On the Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2): 469­530.

Alesina, Alberto, Stelios Michalopoulos Stelios, Elias Papaioannou, 2016, “Ethnic Inequality”
Journal of Political Economy, 124 (2): 428­488.

Alsan, Marcella. 2015. "The Effect of the TseTse Fly on African Development." American
Economic Review, 105(1): 382­410.

Bellwood, Peter, “Early Agriculturalist Population Diasporas? Farming, Languages, and
Genes,” Annual Review of Anthropology, 2001, 30, 181—207.

Bockstette Valerie, Areendam Chanda, Louis Putterman, 2002, “States and Markets: The
Advantage of an Early Start”, Journal of Economic Growth, 7(4): 347­369.


Bodley, John, 2011, Cultural Anthropology: Tribes, States, and the Global System. Lanham, MD:
AltaMira Press.
Borcan Oana, Ola Olsson, and Louis Putterman, 2014, “State History and Economic
Development: Evidence from Six Millennia”, Brown University Working Paper.

Carneiro, Robert L., 2003, Evolutionism in Cultural Anthropology: A Critical History. Boulder,
CO: Westview Press.

Carroll, C., Rhee, B. and Rhee, C. 1994. Are there cultural effects on saving? Some
cross­sectional evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 685–99.

Clark Gregory, 2015 “The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of Social Mobility,”
Princeton University Press

Dalgaard, Carl­Johan, Beck Knudsen, Anne Sofie, Pablo Selaya, 2015, “The Bounty of the Sea


                                                                                              30
and Long­Run Development”, mimeo University of Copenhagen.


Diamond, Jared, 1997, Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York:
W.W.Norton.

Diamond, Jared and Peter Bellwood, 2003, “Farmers and Their Languages: The First
Expansions,” Science 300, 597 ­ 603.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 2012, “The European Origins of Economic Development,”
No. w18162. NBER.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 1997, “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (4): 1203­1250.

Fenske, James, 2013, “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions?” The Economic
Journal, 123 (573), 1363–1390.

Fernandez, Raquel, “Does Culture Matter?” in J. Benhabib, M. O. Jackson and A. Bisin, editors,
Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1A, North­Holland, 2011

Fernandez, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1), 146­177, 2009.

Franck Raphael, and Ilia Rainer, 2012, “Does the leader's ethnicity matter? Ethnic favoritism,
education and health in sub­Saharan Africa, American Political Science Review, 106(2),
294­325.


Francois, Patrick, Ilia Rainer, and Francesco Trebbi, 2015, “How is Power Shared in Africa?”,
Econometrica, 83 (2), 465–503.


Galor, Oded, and Omer Ozak, 2016, “The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference,” American
Economic Review, forthcoming.

Giuliano, Paola, and Nathan Nunn, 2013, “The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to
the Nation­State,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 103 (3): 86 – 92.

Grosjean, Pauline, 2014, “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the U.S.
South,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 12 (5), 1285–1316.

Guell, Maia, Jose Rodriguez Mora, and Chris Telmer, “The Informational Content of Surnames,
the Evolution of Intergenerational Mobility and Assortative Mating,” Review of Economic Studies
82 (2): 693­735.

                                                                                             31
Harris, Marvin, 1997, “Culture, People, Nature: An Introduction to General Anthropology” (7th
Edition). Pearson.

Johnson, Allen and Timothy Earle, eds., 2000, “The Evolution of Human Societies: From
Foraging Group to Agrarian State,” 2nd edition. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Krätli, Saverio, 2001, “Educating Nomadic Herders Out of Poverty? Culture, Education and
Pastoral Livelihood in Turkana and Karamoja.” Sussex, UK: Institute of Development Studies,
University of Sussex.

Kudamatsu Masayuki, 2009, “Ethnic Favoritism: Micro Evidence from Guinea”, working paper
IIES.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, Alireza Naghavi and Giovanni Prarolo, 2012, “Trade and Geography in
the Origins and Spread of Islam,” NBER Working Paper No. 18438.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, 2012, “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
Review, 2012, 102(4): 1508–1539.

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou, 2013, “Pre­colonial Ethnic Institutions and
Contemporary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1): 113–152.

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou, 2014, “National Institutions and Subnational
Development in Africa,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1): 151­213.

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou, 2015, “The Long­Run Effects of the Scramble
for Africa,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Murdock, George P. 1959. Africa: its peoples and their culture history. New York: McGraw­Hill.

Murdock, George Peter, 1967, “Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary.” Pittsburgh, PA: University of
Pittsburgh Press.

Nisbett, Richard and Dov Cohen, 1996, “Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the
South.” Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Nunn N, 2014, “Historical Development”. Aghion P, Durlauf S Handbook of Economic Growth.
Vol. 2. North­Holland, pp. 347­402.

Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon, 2011, "The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
Africa." American Economic Review, 101(7): 3221­52.

Oliver, Roland and J.D. Fage, A Short History of Africa, 6th Edition. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

                                                                                                 32
Osafo­Kwaako, Philip, and James A Robinson, 2013, “Political Centralization in Pre­Colonial
Africa.” Journal of Comparative Economics 41 (1): 534­564

Pinker, Steven, 2011. “The Better Angels of our Nature.” New York: Viking.

Putterman, Louis, 2008, “Agriculture, Diffusion and Development: Ripple Effects of the Neolithic
Revolution” Economica, 75 (300): 729–748.

Putterman, Louis, David Weil, 2010, “Post­1500 Population Flows and The Long­Run
Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4):
1627­1682.

Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman, and Kevin McSweeney, 2002 “The Global
Distribution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate Change.”
Global Ecology and Biogeography 11 (5): 377–92.

Richerson, Peter J., Monique Mulder and Bryan Vila, 2001, ”Principles of Human Ecology.
University of California ­ Davis,”
http://www.des.ucdavis.edu/faculty/Richerson/BooksOnline/101text.htm.

Rutstein, Shea O. and Kiersten Johnson, 2004, ”The DHS Wealth Index. DHS Comparative
Reports No. 6.” Calverton, Maryland: ORC Macro.
http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/CR6/CR6.pdf

Sahlins, Marshall, 1972, ”Stone Age Economics.” Chicago: Aldine­Atherton.

Sahlins, Marshall, and Elman R. Service, eds., 1960, ”Evolution and Culture.” Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.

Service, Elman R., 1971. ”Cultural Evolutionism: Theory and Practice.” NY: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.

Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg, “How Deep are the Roots of Economic Development?”
Journal of Economic Literature 2013, 51(2), 325–369.

Wimmer, Cederman, and Min “Ethnic politics and armed conflict. A configurational analysis of a
new global dataset.” American Sociological Review, 74(2), 2009.




                                                                                              33
Figures 1a, 1b:
Pre­Colonial Dependence on Agriculture and Land Suitability for Agriculture Across Ethnic
Groups




                                                                                       34
Table 1: Explanatory Power of Various Fixed Effects Models


 2                             All         All         Movers       Movers
R from FE Regressions
                            Education     Wealth      Education     Wealth
     Country FE               0.159        0.013        0.147        0.035
    Homeland FE               0.293        0.233        0.292        0.298
     Ethnicity FE             0.265        0.142        0.258        0.188
 Country-Ethnicity FE         0.282        0.164        0.283        0.215
 Country-Homeland FE          0.303        0.249        0.306        0.320
Country-Homeland FE &
                              0.325        0.283        0.338        0.362
 Country-Ethnicity FE
      Observations          285,218      269,992       154725      146,158
Ethnicity: ethnic identity of the respondent as matched to Murdock's (1967) classification
Ethnic Homeland: current ethnic location of each respondent based on Murdock's 1959 location of groups



Table 2. Benchmark - DHS Regressions within Ethnic Homelands
                         1         2          3         4                         5             6          7         8
VARIABLES             Education Education Education Education                   Wealth        Wealth     Wealth    Wealth

agriculture                0.2337***    0.1498***    0.1034***    0.1011*** 0.2271***        0.1808*** 0.0980*** 0.0984***
                            (0.0432)     (0.0259)     (0.0212)     (0.0191) (0.0459)          (0.0338)  (0.0230)  (0.0228)
gather/hunt/fish           0.2095***    0.1026***    0.0918***    0.0911*** 0.1585***        0.0655*** 0.0470*** 0.0512***
                            (0.0547)     (0.0214)     (0.0200)     (0.0185) (0.0495)          (0.0250)  (0.0159)  (0.0156)
urban                                                0.9199***    0.7079***                            1.6290*** 1.4284***
                                                      (0.0357)     (0.0292)                             (0.0474)  (0.0486)
Simple Controls                Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes              Yes       Yes       Yes
Country FE                     Yes          No           No           No       Yes               No        No        No
Country-Ethnic
                               No           Yes          Yes          Yes         No           Yes        Yes       Yes
Homeland FE
Occupation FE                  No           No           No           Yes         No            No         No       Yes

Observations                285,155      285,155      285,155      285,155      269,929       269,929    269,929   269,929
 2
R                          0.239        0.350        0.418       0.493       0.056        0.266       0.488        0.515
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; simple controls include age, age squared, a female
dummy, and a mover dummy; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 3 - Panel A. Benchmark: DHS Regressions within Villages/Towns
                          1         2         3                  4            5           6
VARIABLES              Education Education Education           Wealth       Wealth      Wealth

agriculture            0.1034*** 0.0731*** 0.0694*** 0.0980*** 0.0394*** 0.0384***
                        (0.0212)  (0.0147)  (0.0128)  (0.0230)  (0.0073)  (0.0071)
gather/hunt/fish       0.0918*** 0.0708*** 0.0681*** 0.0470*** 0.0179** 0.0193***
                        (0.0200)  (0.0155)  (0.0140)  (0.0159)  (0.0073)  (0.0070)
urban                  0.9199***                     1.6290***
                        (0.0357)                      (0.0474)
Simple Controls           Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Country-Ethnic
                          Yes           No          No           Yes          No           No
Homeland FE
Coordinates FE             No          Yes          Yes          No          Yes          Yes
Occupation FE              No          No           Yes          No          No           Yes

Observations            285,155      285,155      285,155     269,929      269,929      269,929
 2
R                        0.418        0.506        0.559         0.488       0.676        0.681
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; simple controls include age,
age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 4: Heterogeneity by Occupation and Location
                       1             2            3                4              5              6               7             8
                  Education      Education    Education         Education      Wealth         Wealth           Wealth        Wealth
                   Farming-    Non-Farming                                    Farming-      Non-Farming
VARIABLES                                       Urban             Rural                                        Urban         Rural
                    Related       Related                                      Related        Related

agriculture         0.0515***       0.0727***      0.0764*** 0.0703***        0.0431***       0.0390***      0.0206***     0.0645***
                     (0.0106)        (0.0233)       (0.0196)  (0.0114)         (0.0098)        (0.0077)       (0.0055)      (0.0109)
gather/hunt/fish    0.0416***       0.0791***      0.0849*** 0.0550***         0.0219**       0.0222***        0.0095      0.0278***
                     (0.0113)        (0.0224)       (0.0208)  (0.0116)         (0.0101)        (0.0074)       (0.0066)      (0.0096)
Simple Controls        Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Coordinates FE         Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

Observations          97,599         101,565         97,702      187,453        92,156          94,685         92,726       177,203
R2                     0.460          0.463           0.370       0.486          0.443           0.693          0.600        0.460

Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the ethnicity level. Simple controls include age, age squared, a female dummy, and a mover
dummy; Farming-related industries include self-employed agriculture, agricultural employee, forest, breeding, hunting and fishing. Non-
farming related industries include professional, technical, managerial positions, clerical positions, sales, household and domestic,
services, skilled manual, and unskilled manual. Not working individuals are excluded.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 5. Determinants of Migration
                         1                 2                  3                 4
VARIABLES               Mover             Mover           Moved in life     Moved in life

agriculture           -0.0465**          -0.0464**           0.0052             0.0049

                       (0.0212)          (0.0211)           (0.0052)           (0.0050)
gather/hunt/fish     -0.1179***         -0.1177***           -0.0062           -0.0061
                       (0.0254)          (0.0253)           (0.0053)           (0.0051)
Simple Controls
                         Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
Coorrdinates FE          Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
Occupation FE
                          No                Yes                No                Yes

Observations           285,163           285,163            188,268            188,268
 2
R                       0.768              0.768              0.229             0.233
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; Simple controls include
age, age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy in columns 3 & 4;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 6. Effect of Differential Selection into Migration
                         (1)                (2)           (3)                    (4)
VARIABLES             Education         Education        Wealth                 Wealth

agriculture           0.2808***          0.2711***         0.2408***          0.2351***
                       (0.0607)           (0.0543)          (0.0570)           (0.0494)
gather/hunt/fish      0.2817***          0.2748***         0.1723***          0.1793***
                       (0.0683)           (0.0638)          (0.0586)           (0.0500)
mover                 0.7465**           0.7812**            0.4978            0.5583*
                       (0.3505)           (0.3282)          (0.3454)           (0.3087)
mover X agric           -0.0571            -0.0731           -0.0184            -0.0400
                       (0.0515)           (0.0482)          (0.0445)           (0.0398)
mover X ghf           -0.1087**         -0.1156***           -0.0202            -0.0370
                       (0.0482)           (0.0442)          (0.0553)           (0.0473)
Simple Controls           Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Occupation FE             No                 Yes               No                 Yes
Country FE                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Observations           285,155            285,155           269,929            269,929
R2                        0.241             0.38               0.056             0.219
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; Simple controls include
age, age squared and a female dummy. Mover is a dummy variable that equals one if an
individual is at least 10 kilometers away from her ancestral homeland; *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 7: Land Quality For Agriculture and Modes of Pre-Colonial
             Subsistence across Ethnic Homelands

                        (1)             (2)              (3)
VARIABLES           agriculture     pastoralism    gather/hunt/fish

Suitablity for      0.6525***       -0.7053***          0.0468
Agriculture)         (0.1576)         (0.1726)         (0.1010)

Observations            187             187              187
R2                     .137             .149            -0.004
Robust standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<


Table 8. IV for Full Sample
                       (1)              (2)              (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)
VARIABLES           Education        Education        Education       Wealth     Wealth     Wealth

agriculture          0.1215**         0.0567*          0.0513*        0.1191**   0.0267**   0.0233**
                     (0.0551)         (0.0335)         (0.0297)       (0.0599)   (0.0118)   (0.0115)
gather/hunt/fish     0.0883**        0.0629***        0.0593***        0.0327     0.0114     0.0115
                     (0.0349)         (0.0209)         (0.0185)       (0.0353)   (0.0079)   (0.0073)
Simple Controls         Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
Country-Ethnic
                        Yes              No               No            Yes        No         No
Homeland FE
Coordinates FE          No              Yes              Yes            No         Yes        Yes
Occupation FE           No              No               Yes            No         No         Yes

First Stage F-
                       22.29           31.33            31.35          24.37      35.92      35.96
Statistic

Observations          285,139         285,072          285,072        269,912 269,845 269,845
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the Atlas levels. Simple controls include age, age
squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 9. Variation from Within Linguistic and Ethnic Families
                          1             2             3               4            5             6
VARIABLES              Education     Education     Education        Wealth       Wealth        Wealth
                      Panel A: Exploiting Within-Linguistic-Family Variation

agriculture           0.0735***      0.0768***     0.0734***      0.0393***     0.0381*** 0.0373***
                       (0.0148)       (0.0164)      (0.0147)       (0.0074)      (0.0076)  (0.0074)
gather/hunt/fish      0.0712***      0.0683***     0.0658***       0.0178**      0.0182** 0.0195***
                       (0.0156)       (0.0148)      (0.0135)       (0.0073)      (0.0070)  (0.0067)
Linguistic
                          No            Yes            Yes            No           Yes          Yes
Family(v98) FE

Observations            280,557       280,557       280,557        265,331       265,331      265,331
R2                       0.508         0.509          0.561          0.671        0.671         0.677
                    Panel B: Exploiting Within-Linguistic-Sub-Family Variation

agriculture           0.0731***      0.0414**       0.0406**      0.0398***     0.0341*** 0.0326***
                       (0.0147)      (0.0203)       (0.0174)       (0.0077)      (0.0095)  (0.0087)
gather/hunt/fish      0.0708***       0.0295         0.0277        0.0177**     0.0239*** 0.0233***
                       (0.0155)      (0.0220)       (0.0193)       (0.0076)      (0.0077)  (0.0071)
Linguistic
                          No            Yes            Yes            No           Yes          Yes
Subfamily(v99) FE

Observations            285,155       271,781       271,781        256,555       256,555      256,555
    2
R                        0.506         0.511          0.563          0.669        0.670         0.675

                       Panel C: Exploiting Within-Ethnic-Cluster Variation

agriculture           0.0731***      0.0711***     0.0645***      0.0394***     0.0367**      0.0372**
                       (0.0147)       (0.0146)      (0.0125)       (0.0073)     (0.0154)      (0.0167)
gather/hunt/fish      0.0708***      0.0732***     0.0670***       0.0179**      0.0257*       0.0281*
                       (0.0155)       (0.0147)      (0.0131)       (0.0073)     (0.0145)      (0.0160)

Ethnic Cluster FE         No            Yes            Yes            No           Yes          Yes
Observations            285,155       285,155        285,155        269,929      269,929       269,929
R2                       0.506         0.509          0.561          0.676        0.676         0.682
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; All specifications include age, age
squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy (simple controls) as well as enumeration area fixed
effects; Columns 3 & 6 also include a vector of occupational dummies.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 10 - Panel A. Pre-Colonial Characteristics. Education
                       1           2              3          4                5            6            7            8            9         10
VARIABLES         Education Education       Education     Education        Education    Education    Education    Education    Education Education
agriculture            0.0733***   0.0870***   0.0741***     0.0746***     0.0746***    0.0760*** 0.0666*** 0.0748***       0.0710*** 0.0889**
                        (0.0147)    (0.0165)    (0.0155)      (0.0155)      (0.0155)     (0.0143)  (0.0234)  (0.0135)        (0.0158) (0.0385)
agriculture            0.0821***   0.0862***   0.0782***     0.0760***     0.0743***    0.0760*** 0.0622*** 0.0674***       0.0735*** 0.0846***
                        (0.0171)    (0.0165)    (0.0146)      (0.0156)      (0.0154)     (0.0143)  (0.0226)  (0.0126)        (0.0161) (0.0287)
gather/hunt/fish       0.0784***   0.0607***   0.0672***     0.0781***     0.0717***    0.0651*** 0.0639** 0.0643***        0.0607*** 0.0487*
                        (0.0163)    (0.0160)    (0.0174)      (0.0170)      (0.0163)     (0.0161)  (0.0296)  (0.0143)        (0.0157) (0.0275)
polygyny                0.0537*                                                                                                          0.1058
                        (0.0322)                                                                                                       (0.0749)
clans                              -0.0415                                                                                              -0.0469
                                   (0.0445)                                                                                            (0.0621)
settlement pattern                              -0.0182*                                                                                -0.0158
                                                (0.0108)                                                                               (0.0177)
local jurisdictional hierarchy                                0.0514*                                                                  0.1039**
                                                              (0.0274)                                                                 (0.0497)
Political Centralization                                                     0.0109                                                     -0.0248
                                                                            (0.0204)                                                   (0.0359)
class stratification                                                                      0.0120                                         0.0420
                                                                                         (0.0394)                                      (0.0656)
elections                                                                                             -0.1021                           -0.1424
                                                                                                      (0.0884)                         (0.1022)
slavery                                                                                                          -0.1885***           -0.1254**
                                                                                                                  (0.0363)             (0.0547)
property                                                                                                                    -0.1633** -0.1913**
                                                                                                                             (0.0699) (0.0922)
Coordinates FE            Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes
Observations            281,005     260,798     268,649       269,443       269,443      258,246      217,898      269,953   256,542   175,604
 2
R                       .508         .514           .511            .511          .511         .513         .516        .512         .508       .529
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the ethnicity level. Simple controls always included. These are age, age squared, a female dummy, and a
mover dummy; In each column there are two estimates of agriculture. The first estimate (above the undelined line) corresponds to a regression where
we do not control for the other pre-colonial characteristic focusing on the same sample. The second estimate (below the underlined line) corresponds
to the estimate of the regression when we add the pre-colonial trait under consideration. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 10 - Panel B. Pre-Colonial Characteristics. Wealth
                       1           2             3               4             5            6            7            8            9          10
VARIABLES           Wealth       Wealth       Wealth           Wealth        Wealth       Wealth       Wealth       Wealth       Wealth      Wealth
agriculture            0.0395***   0.0410***   0.0407***     0.0408***     0.0408***    0.0422*** 0.0218*** 0.0386***          0.0340*** 0.0214**
                        (0.0074)    (0.0077)    (0.0078)      (0.0078)      (0.0078)     (0.0075)  (0.0083)  (0.0074)           (0.0073) (0.0086)
agriculture            0.0391***   0.0405***   0.0419***     0.0406***     0.0400***    0.0424*** 0.0232*** 0.0378***          0.0344*** 0.0134
                        (0.0085)    (0.0079)    (0.0074)      (0.0078)      (0.0077)     (0.0072)  (0.0084)  (0.0072)           (0.0073) (0.0145)
gather/hunt/fish       0.0177**     0.0151*    0.0157**      0.0158**      0.0186**     0.0216***   0.0028   0.0195**           0.0147*   -0.0187
                        (0.0086)    (0.0085)    (0.0076)      (0.0077)      (0.0076)     (0.0078)  (0.0119)  (0.0077)           (0.0082) (0.0173)
polygyny                 -0.0026                                                                                                          -0.0547
                        (0.0178)                                                                                                         (0.0424)
clans                               -0.0217                                                                                               -0.0460
                                   (0.0264)                                                                                              (0.0443)
settlement pattern                               -0.0052                                                                                  0.0029
                                                (0.0051)                                                                                 (0.0077)
local jurisdictional hierarchy                                 -0.0085                                                                    0.0110
                                                              (0.0127)                                                                   (0.0251)
Political Centralization                                                    0.0280**                                                      0.0146
                                                                            (0.0113)                                                     (0.0182)
class stratification                                                                    0.0597***                                         0.0666*
                                                                                         (0.0201)                                        (0.0375)
elections                                                                                              0.0278                             -0.0402
                                                                                                      (0.0310)                           (0.0482)
slavery                                                                                                             -0.0202               0.0154
                                                                                                                   (0.0211)              (0.0313)
property                                                                                                                         -0.0267  -0.0315
                                                                                                                                (0.0381) (0.0713)
Coordinates FE           Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes      Yes
Observations            265,779     245,572     253,423       254,217       254,217       244,512      207,903     254,727      243,557     167,621
 2
R                      .672           .675          .678           .677          .677          .669        .675         .669        .672       .678
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the Atlas level. Simple controls included are: age, age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy; In
each column there are two estimates of agriculture. The first estimate (above the undelined line) corresponds to a regression where we do not control
for the other pre-colonial characteristic focusing on the same sample. The second estimate (below the underlined line) corresponds to the estimate of
the regression when we add the pre-colonial trait under consideration. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 11. Colonial Roots
                        (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)
VARIABLES           Education       Education    Education      Education    Education    Wealth      Wealth     Wealth      Wealth      Wealth

agriculture             0.0731***   0.0745***    0.0738***     0.0575*** 0.0565*** 0.0394*** 0.0362*** 0.0359***           0.0364***   0.0363***
                         (0.0147)    (0.0152)     (0.0148)      (0.0127)  (0.0118) (0.00732) (0.00808) (0.00805)           (0.00818)   (0.00812)
gather/hunt/fish        0.0708***   0.0711***    0.0676***     0.0493*** 0.0482*** 0.0179** 0.0166** 0.0152**               0.0163**    0.0143*
                         (0.0155)    (0.0156)     (0.0151)      (0.0122)  (0.0119) (0.00725) (0.00749) (0.00757)           (0.00763)   (0.00734)
                  2
ln(1+slaves per km )                -0.00258     -0.00426       -0.000876    -0.00320                0.00506 0.00453 0.00468 0.00359
                                    (0.00512)    (0.00515)      (0.00403)    (0.00379)              (0.00383) (0.00376) (0.00379) (0.00376)
ln(1+ Christian missions per km2)                 0.212**          0.145       0.0903                         0.0845** 0.0817** 0.0570*
                                                  (0.103)        (0.0896)     (0.0910)                         (0.0341) (0.0345) (0.0340)
Muslim                                                          -0.418***    -0.410***                                      0.00501      0.00785
                                                                 (0.0278)     (0.0279)                                      (0.0238)     (0.0236)
Other Religions                                                 -0.416***    -0.413***                                     -0.168***    -0.168***
                                                                 (0.0388)     (0.0391)                                      (0.0184)     (0.0188)
distance to the capital city                                                  -0.0963*                                                  -0.101***
                                                                              (0.0577)                                                   (0.0310)
distance to the coast                                                       -0.000163**                                                 -0.0000291
                                                                            (0.0000707)                                               (0.0000384)
Simple Controls            Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Coordinates FE             Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes

Observations             285,155     284,654      284,654        284,208      283,264     269,929    269,428     269,428    268,987     268,043
    2
R                          .506        .507         .507           .513         .514       .676        .676        .676       .676        .676
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the ethnicity level. Simple controls include age, age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy;
The default group in columns 4 and 9 are Christians. Distance to capital is the distance from one's ancestral homeland to the capital of the
country, distance to coast is the distance from one's ancestral homeland to the nearest coast, ln(1+slaves per km2) is calculated using the total
number of slaves per square kilometer in one's ancestral homeland, and similarly ln(1+ missions per km2) is computed using the total number of
missions per square kilometer in one's ancestral homeland; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 12. Violence Toward Women
                                 1                 2                3
                         First Principal Component of Whether it is Justified
VARIABLES
                                          to Beat One's Wife

agriculture                -0.0285**          -0.0265**          -0.0229*
                            (0.0135)           (0.0124)          (0.0116)
gather/hunt/fish             -0.016             -0.0135           -0.0087
                            (0.0125)           (0.0122)          (0.0120)
Muslim                                                          0.1113***
                                                                 (0.0217)
Other Religions                                                 0.1401***
                                                                 (0.0355)
Simple Controls               Yes                Yes                Yes
Coordinates FE                No                 Yes                Yes
Occupation FE                 Yes                Yes                Yes

Observations                 61,495             61,495            61,433
 2
R                             0.250                .254              .254
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the Atlas level; The sample
consists of males only. Simple controls include age, age squared, and a
mover indicator; The dep. Var. is the first principal component on a series of
questions on whether it is justified to beat one's wife; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1
Table 13. Political Perceptions and Attitudes
                          1            2          3          4           5             6             7
                       Group's                          Respondent
                                  Respondent Respondent             Respondent Respondent Respondent
VARIABLES              Political                          is Non-
                                   is Hostile is Bored              is Impatient is Suspicious is Dishonest
                      Influence                         Cooperative

agriculture           -0.0885***      -0.0054     -0.0167**      -0.0137*     -0.0177**       -0.0106       ‐0.0147**
                       (0.0279)      (0.0040)      (0.0066)      (0.0076)      (0.0086)      (0.0070)        (0.0057)
gather/hunt/fish        0.0170        -0.0017       -0.0096       -0.0024      -0.0136*       0.0035          ‐0.0011
                       (0.0264)      (0.0037)      (0.0060)      (0.0056)      (0.0075)      (0.0061)        (0.0042)
Simple Controls           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Coordinates FE            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Interviewer FE            No            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
R2                       0.339         0.368         0.363          0.349         0.354        0.397           0.43
Observations             19480         20851         20863         20867         20865         20869          20867
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the Atlas level; Simple controls include age, age squared, a female
dummy and a mover indicator; Group's political influence variable captures the respondents perception whether
his/her own group has more influence politically compared to other groups. Higher values indicate lesser influence;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Table 14: Ancestral Lifeways Education, Political Representation and Attitudes
                         1          2             3           4            5
VARIABLES           Education Education Education Education Education

agriculture            0.0164**      0.0180**      0.0159**     0.0165**       0.0145*
                       (0.0077)      (0.0078)      (0.0077)     (0.0076)       (0.0076)
gather/hunt/fish        0.0101        0.0099        0.0097       0.0101          0.01
                       (0.0076)      (0.0073)      (0.0072)     (0.0071)       (0.0070)
Simple Controls           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Coordinates FE            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Interviewer FE            No            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Personality Traits        No            No           Yes            No           Yes
Group's Political
Influence                 No            No            No           Yes           Yes
 2
R                         0.55         0.576        0.582         0.576         0.582
Observations             19422         19422        19422         19422         19422

Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the Atlas level; Simple controls include age, age
squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy; In Columns 2-5 we add interviewer fixed effects; in
column 3 we control for the respondent's perception of own ethnic influence in politics as well as the
attitudes of each respondent as recorded by the interviewer regarding whether the respondent is bored,
non-cooperative, suspicious, impatient and dishonest. In Column 4 we control for the respondent's
perception of own ethnic influence in politics. In column 5 we control for both political influence and
personality traits. The education variable is the log(1+educational category). The latter takes 10 values
corresponding to: 0=No formal schooling, 1=Informal schooling (including Koranic schooling),
2=Some primary schooling, 3=Primary school completed, 4=Some secondary school/ High school,
5=Secondary school completed/High school, 6=Post-secondary qualifications, other than university
e.g. a diploma or degree from a technical/polytechnic/college, 7=Some university, 8=University
completed, 9=Post-graduate. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix Figures 1a and 1b
The Role of Pre­Colonial Agricultural Dependence on Education and Wealth by 5­Year Birth
Cohorts

1a




1b




                                                                                      35
Appendix Table 1: Matching Ethnicities in the DHS to Murdock Map and Atlas

 Method                            Atlas         Atlas   Cum. Map                Map     Cum.
                                   Percent       Percent      Percent            Percent

 Direct Match                      58.41         58.41              66.7          66.7

 Afrobarometer                     4.43          62.84              10.92         77.61

 Ethnologue/Joshua     Alternate 11.44           74.28               6.33         83.95
 Name

 Ethnologue/Joshua superset        2.53          76.81              2.27          86.21

 Ethnologue/Joshua subset          5.05          81.86              4.49          90.7

 Other Source (e.g. Wikipedia)     0.53          82.40              0.82          91.53

 Other Source, not sure            5.47          87.87              0.28          91.8

 Ethnologue/Joshua related         0.08          87.95              0.08          91.88

 Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)        2.55          90.50              0.78          92.66

 Michalopoulos               and 0.81            91.31              0.95          93.61
 Papaioannou (2013)

 Not Matched                       8.69          100.00             6.39          100



Description of the Matching Methodologies:

1) Direct match: the DHS ethnicity name is the same as the name used in the Murdock source
(Atlas or Map).

2) Afrobarometer match: Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) create matches between the
Afrobarometer Round 3 ethnicities (http://www.afrobarometer.org) and the Murdock names.
Using the Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) data, we were able to match more DHS ethnicities to
Murdock names through Afrobarometer names.

3) Ethnologue/Joshua Alternate Name: the DHS ethnicity name and the Atlas name
are “alternative names” according to either Ethnologue (http://www.ethnologue.com/) or Joshua
Project (http://joshuaproject.net/ ).

4) Ethnologue/Joshua superset: In Joshua or Ethnologue, we find a matching Atlas or Map name
that appears as a superset (i.e., containing set) of our target DHS ethnicity. For example, if the
group “American English” appears in the DHS and Ethnologue describes this group as a subset
of “English,” which appears in the Murdock data.
5) Ethnologue/Joshua subset: In Joshua or Ethnologue we find a matching Atlas or Map name
that appears as a subset of the DHS ethnicity that we want to match. For example, if
“Chinese”appeared in the DHS and “Mandarin” appeared in the Murdock data, and if Ethnologue
informed us the latter was a subset of the former.

6) Other source (e.g., Wikipedia)

7) Other source (e.g., Wikipedia) not sure: used in cases where the information from other sources
left questions about the quality of the match.

8) Ethnologue/joshua related: we find a group that is related to our target ethnic group, according
to either Ethnologue or Joshua Project.

9) Nunn and Wantchekon (2011): we referred to a do file used in this paper that resolves the
discrepancies in the Map and Atlas names of the same ethnicity

10) Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013)
Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics in the DHS - All Individuals

Variable                                          Obs      Mean     Std. Dev.   Min    Max

agriculture                                      285,163   5.861     1.511       0      9
pastoralism                                      285,163   2.338     1.718       0      9
fishing                                          285,163   0.764     0.814       0      4
hunting                                          285,163   0.707     0.733       0      7
gathering                                        285,163   0.325     0.543       0      3
gather/hunt/fish                                 285,163   1.796     1.329       0     10
education                                        285,218   1.356     1.472       0      5
wealth                                           269,992   3.119     1.437       1      5
Christian                                        284,780   0.527     0.499       0      1
Muslim                                           284,780   0.412     0.492       0      1
                   2
ln(1+slaves per km )                             284,725   4.339     3.457       0    10.540
                       2
ln(1+missions per km )                           284,725   0.105     0.182       0    1.287
polygyny                                         281,013   0.488     0.500       0      1
clans                                            260,806   0.213     0.409       0      1
jurisdictional hierarchy at the local level      269,451   3.158     0.638       2      4
jurisdictional hierarchy above the local level   269,451   2.719     0.903       1      5
class stratification dummy                       258,254   0.685     0.464       0      1
elections                                        217,906   0.188     0.391       0      1
slavery                                          269,961   0.812     0.390       0      1
property                                         256,549   0.947     0.224       0      1
     Appendix Table 3. Benchmark: DHS Regressions within Villages/Towns with Mostly
                               Categories Disaggregated
                          1         2               3              4             5             6
VARIABLES              Education Education       Education       Wealth        Wealth        Wealth

Mostly Intensive        0.3059** 0.1590**        0.1516**       0.2838**     0.1102***     0.1045***
Agriculture             (0.1182) (0.0738)        (0.0589)       (0.1245)      (0.0413)      (0.0383)
Mostly Extensive        0.2844** 0.1422**        0.1438**      0.3311***     0.1265***     0.1226***
Agriculture             (0.1158) (0.0713)        (0.0585)       (0.1181)      (0.0407)      (0.0382)
Mostly Agriculture     0.3225*** 0.1536*         0.1576**      0.4353***      0.1262**     0.1180**
unknown Source          (0.1231) (0.0811)        (0.0670)       (0.1240)      (0.0570)      (0.0527)
Mixed Dependence         0.0654  (0.0099)        (0.0125)        0.1374        0.0590       0.0489
                        (0.1147) (0.0717)        (0.0588)       (0.1221)      (0.0422)      (0.0395)
Mostly Hunting        -1.5689***                              -1.7784***
                       (0.1194)                                (0.1176)
urban                  0.9295***                               1.6464***

                        (0.0351)                                (0.0473)
Simple Controls           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Ethnic Homeland-
                          Yes          No            No           Yes            No            No
Country FE
Coordinates FE             No          Yes          Yes            No            Yes           Yes

Occupation FE              No          No           Yes            No            No            Yes

Observations            285,155      285,155      285,155       269,929        269,929       269,929
 2
R                         0.42         0.51         0.56          0.49          0.68           0.68
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level, simple controls include age, age
squared and a female dummy. Omitted category mostly pastoralism.

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix Table 4. Benchmark: DHS Regressions within Villages/Towns
                           1         2         3                  4            5            6
VARIABLES               Education Education Education           Wealth       Wealth       Wealth

agriculture            0.1036*** 0.0763*** 0.0725*** 0.0983*** 0.0406*** 0.0397***
                        (0.0216)  (0.0157)  (0.0140)  (0.0236)  (0.0079)  (0.0078)
gathering               0.0526*       0.0166       0.0167      -0.0143      -0.0071      -0.0042
                        (0.0311)     (0.0227)     (0.0197)     (0.0284)     (0.0107)     (0.0102)
hunting                0.1058*** 0.0953*** 0.0922***           0.0683**     0.0268*      0.0294**
                        (0.0326)  (0.0263)  (0.0243)           (0.0320)     (0.0152)     (0.0149)
fishing                0.1041*** 0.0889*** 0.0846*** 0.0666*** 0.0276*** 0.0275***
                        (0.0260)     (0.0215)     (0.0193)     (0.0220)     (0.0088)     (0.0083)
urban                  0.9201***                              1.6292***
                        (0.0358)                               (0.0474)
Simple Controls            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Ethnic Homeland-
                           Yes          No           No           Yes          No           No
Country FE
Coordinates FE             No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes
Occupation FE              No           No           Yes          No           No           Yes


Observations             285,155      285,155      285,155     269,929      269,929      269,929
R2                        0.418        0.507        0.559        0.489        0.676        0.681
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level, simple controls include age,
age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix Table 5 - Panel A. Wealth
                    (1)         (2)                (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)       (11)
                                                              Central
                    Burkina                                                 Cote
COUNTRIES                          Benin      Congo, DR      African                  Cameroon       Ethiopia     Ghana       Guinea       Kenya      Mali
                     Faso                                                  d'Ivoire
                                                             Republic

agriculture        0.0961***      0.1250**     0.0382**        -0.1166             -0.0747***        0.0607***   0.0521***    -0.0740     0.0299**   0.0290**
                    (0.0283)      (0.0370)     (0.0067)       (0.0707)              (0.0200)          (0.0191)    (0.0119)    (0.0490)    (0.0124)   (0.0088)
gather/hunt/fish   0.0882***     0.2629***                   -0.1645**    0.1589** -0.0576***        -0.1279**   0.0579***    0.0154*      -0.0278    0.0025
                    (0.0231)      (0.0585)                    (0.0688)    (0.0372)  (0.0165)          (0.0513)    (0.0090)    (0.0069)    (0.0153)   (0.0104)
Coordinates FE        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes

Observations        20,770         8,550         2,186         7,435        2,343       13,672        27,327       8,512       3,092       11,030     17,191
 2
R                    0.607          0.695          0.783         0.642       0.779        0.715        0.732       0.771       0.740       0.723      0.648
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level;*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Appendix Table 5 - Panel A. Wealth (Continued)
                   (12)        (13)         (14)                (15)         (16)         (17)         (18)        (19)         (20)        (21)
                    Malawi     Mozambique       Nigeria        Niger      Namibia Sierra Leone        Senegal      Togo       Uganda      Zambia
COUNTRIES

agriculture         0.0265         0.0191      0.0936**      0.0248**       -0.0595    0.0556**      0.0808**    0.4055**    0.0805*** 0.0373***
                   (0.0456)       (0.0209)     (0.0324)      (0.0106)      (0.0774)    (0.0139)      (0.0306)    (0.0841)     (0.0240) (0.0124)
gather/hunt/fish    -0.0059        0.0066       0.0718*      0.0329**       -0.0925     0.0849        -0.0011     0.3957*     0.0723*   0.0232*
                   (0.0364)       (0.0152)     (0.0332)      (0.0126)      (0.1333)    (0.0436)      (0.0167)    (0.1436)     (0.0373) (0.0135)
Coordinates FE        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes

Observations        28,378        15,249         34,647        10,822       8,011        7,344        18,485       3,435       8,492       12,958
 2
R                    0.345          0.712          0.786         0.630        0.718        0.697         0.720         0.689     0.649       0.762
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; simple controls include age, age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix Table 5 - Panel B. Education
                      (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)      (11)
                                                              Central
                    Burkina                                                 Cote
COUNTRIES                          Benin       Congo, DR     African                   Cameroon       Ethiopia     Ghana       Guinea      Kenya      Mali
                     Faso                                                  d'Ivoire
                                                             Republic

agriculture        0.2267***       0.1005       -0.0902       0.2255*                  0.1679***       0.0356     0.3238***   0.1727***   0.1377**    0.0293
                    (0.0481)      (0.0567)      (0.0344)      (0.1036)                  (0.0452)      (0.0468)     (0.0501)    (0.0218)   (0.0566)   (0.0361)
gather/hunt/fish     0.0448       0.1764*                     0.1886*       0.2393     0.1847***      -0.0131     0.3900***    -0.0274     -0.0490    0.0304
                    (0.0399)      (0.0807)                    (0.0961)     (0.1963)     (0.0249)      (0.1400)     (0.0549)    (0.0185)   (0.0384)   (0.0229)
Coordinates FE        Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes

Observations        20,763         8,550          2,186        7,435        2,343        13,672        27,327       8,512      10,847      11,030    17,191
  2
R                    0.361          0.366          0.432         0.412        0.274       0.510         0.442       0.402       0.357       0.367     0.303
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Appendix Table 5 - Panel B. Education (Continued)
                      (12)          (13)          (14)          (15)         (16)         (17)          (18)        (19)        (20)         (21)
COUNTRIES           Malawi      Mozambique       Nigeria       Niger       Namibia Sierra Leone        Senegal      Togo       Uganda      Zambia

agriculture         -0.0053        0.0338      0.2578***     0.0377**      -0.0210     0.4686***       -0.0742    0.2219*      0.0654      0.0154
                   (0.0712)       (0.0336)      (0.0590)     (0.0117)      (0.0870)     (0.0643)       (0.0641)   (0.0878)    (0.0407)    (0.0492)
gather/hunt/fish    -0.0440       0.0796*      0.2210***      0.0606*      -0.0444      0.3953*       0.0846***   0.2913*      0.0334     -0.0213
                   (0.0678)       (0.0346)      (0.0655)     (0.0317)      (0.1679)     (0.1355)       (0.0162)   (0.0917)    (0.0727)    (0.0240)
Coordinates FE        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

Observations        28,378         15,249        34,647        10,822       8,011         7,344        18,485      10,913       8,492      12,958
R2                   0.252          0.390          0.615         0.347        0.305         0.373        0.371        0.408      0.338       0.364
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; simple controls include age, age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix Table 6: Benchmark at Various Subsets
                      1         2           3                    4             5             6
VARIABLES         Education Education Education                Wealth        Wealth        Wealth

                        Panel A: Countries without Any Predominantly Pastoral Ethnicity

agriculture          0.1562*** 0.1066*** 0.1009***           0.1453***     0.0672***     0.0661***
                      (0.0268)  (0.0226)  (0.0208)            (0.0211)      (0.0106)      (0.0107)
gather/hunt/fish     0.1292*** 0.0945*** 0.0908***           0.0913***     0.0356***     0.0377***
                      (0.0306)  (0.0249)  (0.0232)            (0.0204)      (0.0125)      (0.0122)

Observations           189000       189000       189000        173000        173000        173000
    2
R                       0.421        0.510        0.558         0.470         0.663         0.669

                     Panel B: Focus on Countries in which Groups with Larger Pre-colonial
                              Dependence on Agriculture are Less Populous Today

agriculture          0.1199*** 0.0993*** 0.0897***           0.1113***     0.0781***     0.0800***
                      (0.0202)  (0.0187)  (0.0162)            (0.0277)      (0.0233)      (0.0237)
gather/hunt/fish     0.0731*** 0.0686*** 0.0655***            0.0795**       0.0452       0.0532*
                      (0.0213)  (0.0227)  (0.0209)            (0.0302)      (0.0285)      (0.0277)

Simple Controls         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Country-Ethnic
                        Yes           No           No            Yes           No            No
Homeland FE
Coordinates FE           No           Yes          Yes           No            Yes          Yes
Occupation FE            No           No           Yes           No            No           Yes

Observations           86886         86886        86886         71660         71660        71660
    2
R                       0.299        0.381        0.453         0.357         0.528         0.539
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; simple controls include age, age
squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix Table 7: DHS Regressions within Villages/Towns Controlling Flexibly for How
               Long Each Individual Resides in her Current Location
                          1         2         3                   4           5            6
VARIABLES              Education Education Education            Wealth      Wealth       Wealth

agriculture            0.1307*** 0.0899*** 0.0889*** 0.0771*** 0.0211*** 0.0204***
                        (0.0199)  (0.0158)  (0.0145)  (0.0164)  (0.0080)  (0.0077)
gather/hunt/fish       0.1138*** 0.0781*** 0.0786*** 0.0490***   0.0059    0.0071
                        (0.0212)  (0.0196)  (0.0185)  (0.0156)  (0.0093)  (0.0086)
urban                  0.8363***                     1.5770***
                        (0.0322)                      (0.0629)
Simple Controls            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Ethnic Homeland-
                           Yes          No           No          Yes           No           No
Country FE
Coordinates FE             No          Yes          Yes           No          Yes          Yes
Occupation FE              No           No          Yes           No           No          Yes


Observations           192,367     192,367      192,367      177,176      177,176      177,176
    2
R                         0.441       0.525        0.568        0.482        0.665        0.670
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level, simple controls include age,
age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy; We add a dummy for each entry in the
mv104 variable which reflects "The years lived in place of residence". It ranges from 0 years to
having always lived in the same residence; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Appendix Table 8: Heterogeneity by Dominant Lifeway of Current Homeland
                        1          2         3           4         5                       6
Dep. Variables      Education Education Education     Wealth    Wealth                   Wealth
Historical Lifeway   Mostly
                                 Mostly               Mostly    Mostly
of the Current     Agricultur              Mixed                                          Mixed
                                Pastoral            Agriculture Pastoral
Homeland                e

agriculture            0.0900***      0.0520      0.0116      0.0487***    0.0472**     0.0637**
                        (0.0144)     (0.0335)    (0.0313)      (0.0076)    (0.0199)     (0.0252)
gather/hunt/fish       0.0807***      0.1003     0.0525**     0.0255***    0.0758**      0.0114
                        (0.0163)     (0.0621)    (0.0211)      (0.0078)    (0.0359)     (0.0207)
Simple Controls           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Coordinates FE             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

Observations            215,196       9,726        7,319       205,681       9,726        5,166
    2
R                        0.501        0.536         0.634        0.658        0.748        0.787
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the ethnicity level; simple controls include age,
age squared, a female dummy, and a mover dummy; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix Table 9: Summary Statistics for the Afrobarometer Round 4 Variables

Variable                             Obs          Mean        Std. Dev.        Min          Max

education                           21578          3.18          2.01           0             9
group's political influence         20139          3.11          1.05           1             5
respondent hostile                  21570          1.12          0.34           1             3
respondent bored                    21582          1.22          0.46           1             3
respondent non‐cooperative          21586          1.17          0.40           1             3
respondent impatient                21582          1.23          0.49           1             3
respondent suspicious               21588          1.29          0.55           1             3
respondent dishonest                21584          1.23          0.46           1             3
agriculture                         21608          5.74          1.32           0             9
hunter/gather/fish                  21608          1.96          1.21           0            10
female                              21608          1.50          0.50           1             2
rural                               21608          1.64          0.48           1             2
age                                 21608         36.27         14.41          18            99
The education variable takes 10 values corresponding to: 0=No formal schooling, 1=Informal schooling
(including Koranic schooling), 2=Some primary schooling, 3=Primary school completed, 4=Some secondary
school/ High school, 5=Secondary school completed/High school, 6=Post‐secondary qualifications, other
than university e.g. a diploma or degree from a technical/polytechnic/college, 7=Some university,
8=University completed, 9=Post‐graduate.
