NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LACK OF SELECTION AND LIMITS TO DELEGATION:
FIRM DYNAMICS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Ufuk Akcigit
Harun Alp
Michael Peters
Working Paper 21905
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21905

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2016, Revised April 2018

This is a heavily revised version of Akcigit, Alp, and Peters (2016). We thank the seminar
and conference participants at Harvard, MIT, University of Chicago, Stanford, Princeton,
Yale, USC, LSE, the Productivity, Development & Entrepreneurship, and Macroeconomics
Within and Across Borders Meetings at the NBER Summer Institute, the NBER
Development Program and EFG Meeting, Stanford CID/IGC Conference, AEA Meetings,
OECD/NBER Conference on Productivity and Innovation, Minnesota Macro, NYU, Penn
State, Einaudi, University of Houston, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Kauffman
Entrepreneurship Conference, London Macroeconomics Conference, CAED 2015 Conference,
Cologne Workshop on Macroeconomics, SKEMA Growth Conference, UPenn Growth Reading
Group, and UPenn Macro Lunch for helpful comments. In particular we would like to thank
our discussants Francesco Caselli, John Haltiwanger, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Rasmus Lentz, and
Yongs Shin. We furthermore received very valuable feedback from Abhijit Banerjee, Nick
Bloom, Matthew Cook, Jeremy Greenwood, Bill Kerr, Pete Klenow, Chad Jones, Sam
Kortum, Robert E. Lucas, Giuseppe Moscarini, Luis Serven, Andrei Shleifer, and Nancy Stokey.
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Pete Klenow have kindly shared some of their data with us. Jeremy Pearce
provided excellent research assistance. Akcigit gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the World Bank, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Ewing Marion Kauffman
Foundation, and the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, and Michael Peters. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation: Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries
Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, and Michael Peters
NBER Working Paper No. 21905
January 2016, Revised April 2018
JEL No. O31,O38,O40
ABSTRACT
Managerial delegation is essential for firm growth. While firms in poor countries often shun
outside managers and instead recruit among family members, the pattern is quite the opposite for
firms in rich countries. In this paper, we ask whether these differences in managerial delegation
have important aggregate effects. We construct a model of firm growth where entrepreneurs have
fixed-time endowments to run their daily operations. As firms grow larger, the need to delegate
decision-making authority increases. Firms in poor countries might therefore decide to remain
small if delegating managerial tasks is difficult. We calibrate the model to firm-level data from
the U.S. and India. We show that the model is quantitatively consistent with the experimental
micro evidence on managerial efficiency and firm growth reported in Bloom et al. (2013). Our
quantitative analysis shows that the low efficiency of delegation in India can account for 5% of
productivity and 15% of income differences between the U.S. and India in steady state. We also
show that such inefficient delegation possibilities reduce the size of Indian firms, but would cause
substantially more harm for U.S. firms. This is because there are important complementarities
between the ease of delegation and other factors affecting firm growth.
Ufuk Akcigit
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Saieh Hall, Office 403
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
Harun Alp
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil 160
Philadelphia, PA, 19104
aharun@sas.upenn.edu

Michael Peters
Department of Economics
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
m.peters@yale.edu

1

Introduction

Managerial delegation is essential for firm growth. In the developed world, many family-owned
industrial giants, such as Walmart, The Lego Group, or Ford Motor Co., have managed to expand to
hundreds of thousands of employees by relying on non-family managers to run their key operations.
In contrast, in developing economies there seem to be serious obstacles to managerial delegation,
which make firm owners often shun outside managers and recruit managers exclusively among
family members. This is arguably one of the reasons why the number of sons in the family is a
strong predictor of firm size in India (Bloom et al., 2013). These observations lead to the following
important questions: How do cross-country differences in the ease of managerial delegation affect
the process of firm growth and selection? What are the implications for the aggregate economy? In
this paper, we answer these questions both theoretically and quantitatively.
In this paper, our aim is to understand the link between the microeconomics of managerial delegation and firm growth and their macroeconomic implications. While we try to go from micro to
macro, we inform our theoretical setup using micro data on millions of establishments in India and
the U.S. More specifically, we introduce the need for managerial delegation into a Schumpeterian
growth model, which we then calibrate to the Indian and U.S. micro data. We show that our framework is quantitatively consistent with various out-of-sample moments in the data and we compare
the implications of our model to the well-known experimental evidence on managerial efficiency
and firm growth by Bloom et al. (2013). Finally, once we establish enough confidence in the validity
of our model, we conduct various counterfactual exercises to quantify the importance of managerial
delegation and firm selection for the aggregate economy and its transitional dynamics. In particular, our framework stresses the role of catch-up growth, whereby improvements in the process of
firm dynamics help a developing country converge to the frontier faster. This is arguably the most
relevant growth margin for a non-frontier country, such as India.
The central piece of our theory is that firms’ expansion incentives respond to the underlying
delegation environment (and other factors as described below). As the entrepreneur’s own managerial time is a fixed factor, production features decreasing returns and marginal profits decrease
in firm size. This reduces the incentive to expand to a large firm. Entrepreneurs can overcome such
declining marginal returns by delegating decision power to outside managers as their firms expand.
If the economy’s delegation efficiency is low (for instance due to imperfect contractual enforcement
or a lack of trust), entrepreneurs have little incentive to adopt new technologies as they anticipate to
not be able to efficiently delegate decision-making power as they grow. Improvements in delegation
efficiency therefore raise the returns to growing large, induce more creative destruction, increase
the extent of catch-up growth, and reduce long-run productivity differences.
To analyze the quantitative importance of this delegation mechanism, we explicitly allow the
key structural parameters of our model to be country specific and calibrate them to micro data
from India and the U.S. independently. This calibration strategy is important because it prevents
us from loading all the differences between the U.S. and India onto our mechanism of interest –
differences in the efficiency of delegation. The key empirical moment to infer such differences in the
delegation environment between the U.S. and India is the aggregate employment share of outside,
i.e. non-family, managers. In our model, this share is of course an equilibrium outcome and depends
1

explicitly on three components:
1. Delegation Efficiency: Firms’ demand for outside managers depends on the delegation efficiency. If delegation is easier (e.g., due to a stronger rule of law or higher trust in non-family
managers), entrepreneurs are more likely to delegate managerial tasks. Quantifying the extent
to which differences in delegation efficiency can explain the observed differences in firmdynamics and aggregate economic performance, is the main focus of this paper.
2. Firm Growth due to Non-managerial Factors: Because firm size and managerial hiring are complements, countries with larger firms will have more managerial employment in equilibrium. Our
model, for example, explicitly recognizes the fact that firms differ in their growth potential,
i.e. that some entrepreneurs are transformative and have the necessary skills to expand, while
others are subsistence entrepreneurs, who may simply lack the ability to grow their firms beyond a certain size (Schoar, 2010; Decker et al., 2014). If the share of subsistence entrepreneurs
or the costs of expansion are lower in the U.S. (e.g. due to more efficient capital markets or
less distortionary regulation, lower payroll taxes or better infrastructure), firms would grow
more and demand more managers.
3. Managerial Human Capital: Naturally, the extent of managerial hiring depends directly on the
supply of managerial human capital. If managerial skills are relatively abundant in the U.S.,
everything else equal, the equilibrium share of managers in the workforce would be higher.
Empirically, outside managers account for only 1.7% of the labor force in India. In the U.S.,
this number amounts to 12.4%. To distinguish the relative importance of the above three channels
to explain such differences and to identify the direct effect of differences in delegation efficiency,
we rely on different sources of information. First, we use establishment-level information from
the manufacturing sector in India and the U.S. to measure establishments’ life-cycle growth, and
entry and exit patterns. These moments are informative about the initial importance of subsistence
entrepreneurs and other non-managerial determinants of firm growth (i.e., item #2 in the above
list). Second, we rely on data about managerial employment patterns and managerial wages from
the Indian and the U.S. Census, to distinguish the effects of delegation efficiency and managerial
human capital. In particular, we exploit information on pre- and post-migration outcomes of Indian
immigrants to the U.S., also taking into account the selection among immigrants from India.
In addition to the targeted moments, we show that our model is consistent with various nontargeted moments. Among others, one such moment comes from the well-known field experiment
by Bloom et al. (2013). In that study, the authors provided a randomly selected group of Indian
textile companies with management consulting to introduce them to American-style frontier management practices and measured impact on subsequent output growth. Motivated by that study,
we replicate this experiment in our estimated model. In particular, we treat a subset of firms in our
estimated Indian economy with the U.S.-level delegation efficiency and follow that subset of firms
over a 100-week period. We show that this exercise can be mapped to our framework and that our
model implies output responses which are in the same ballpark as the experimental results. Hence,
our model generates the right microeconomic responses to the experimental "management" intervention. Since our model is consistent with this "identified moment" (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018),
2

it is arguably an attractive laboratory to quantify the aggregate effects of cross-country differences
in delegation efficiency.
Our cross-country analysis yields three main conclusions. First, we find that the Indian economy suffers from a significant lack of selection, whereby subsistence producers with little growth
potential survive for a long time. While this is partly due to a high initial share of subsistence firms
at the time of entry, the main culprit of this lack of selection is the low rate of creative destruction,
which allows even small firms to survive. This result is important because it provides a somewhat
different way to think about firms in developing countries: The glut of small firms in India is not
a reflection of frictions that those small firms face, but rather an indication of a lack of competition
coming from larger firms, which helps subsistence producers survive. Policies aimed at supporting
small firms, e.g., micro-finance programs, while potentially desirable for their redistributive properties, could be harmful to the economy by reducing the reallocation of resources from small stagnant
firms to firms with growth potential. This is consistent with the dual economic view of development by La Porta and Shleifer (2008, 2014), who argue that the decline in informality associated
with economic growth "is the result of a replacement of inefficient informal firms by efficient formal
ones" (La Porta and Shleifer, 2014, p. 121).
Second, we show that India’s delegation efficiency, which we estimate to be substantially smaller
than in the U.S., is partly responsible for this lack of creative destruction and therefore has important implications for aggregate economic performance. In our model, both economies grow at the
same rate in the long run. Differences in creative destruction therefore affect the speed of catch-up
growth and long-run levels of economic development. Our estimates imply that the Indian economy
achieves today’s U.S.-level of output per capita in about 45 years. If firms in India had access to the
U.S.-level of delegation efficiency, this duration would decline by 10% to 41 years. In the long-run,
the lower delegation efficiency in India can plausibly account for 5% of the steady-state productivity
and 15% of the steady-state income differences between the U.S. and India.
Finally, there are important complementarities between the returns to delegation and other differences between India and the U.S. While the process of firm-dynamics in India does depend on the
delegation environment, the implications are modest. We find that an increase of delegation quality
to U.S. standards would increase average firm size by 1.5% and reduce the employment share of
small firms by a similar amount. If, in contrast, U.S. firms had to operate within the underdeveloped
delegation environment of India, the implications would be much more pronounced. The reason is
that delegation frictions and other non-managerial factors that determine firm expansion naturally
interact. Hence other frictions, such as credit market imperfections or distortions to market entry,
not only hamper firm growth directly, but also reduce the effect of improvements in the delegation
environment on firms’ expansion incentives.
Related Literature: That managerial delegation might be a key aspect to firm dynamics goes back
to the early work of Penrose (1959), who argues not only that managerial resources are essential
for firms to expand, but that this scarcity of managerial inputs prevents the weeding out of small
firms as “bigger firms have not got around to mopping them up” (Penrose, 1959, p. 221). Recently,
empirical evidence for this managerial margin has accumulated. Using data across countries, there is
also evidence that managerial practices differ across countries (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007, 2010),
3

that firms in developed countries are both larger and delegate more managerial tasks to outside
(non-family) managers (Fukuyama, 1996; La Porta et al., 1997; Bloom et al., 2012), and that both
human capital and contractual imperfections are important in explaining the lack of managerial
delegation in poor countries (Laeven and Woodruff, 2007; Bloom et al., 2009). The importance of
managerial and entrepreneurial human capital for economic development is also stressed in the
empirical work by Gennaioli et al. (2013).
We formalize and quantify the macroeconomic importance of such managerial considerations
by providing a new theory of firm dynamics, and the resulting firm size distribution in developing
countries.1 While many recent papers have attempted to measure and explain the static differences
in allocative efficiency across firms (e.g., Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009,
and more recently Gopinath et al. 2017, among many others2 ), there has been less theoretical work
explaining why firm dynamics differ across countries. A notable exception is the work by Cole
et al. (2016), which argues that cross-country differences in the financial system affect the type of
technologies that can be implemented. Like them, we let the productivity process take center stage.
However, we turn to the recent generation of micro-founded models of Schumpeterian growth,
following Klette and Kortum (2004), who have been shown to provide a tractable and empirically
successful theory of firm dynamics (see for instance, Acemoglu et al., 2017; Akcigit and Kerr, 2017;
Garcia-Macia et al., 2015; Lentz and Mortensen, 2005, 2008).3
Importantly, we explicitly allow for heterogeneity in firms’ growth potential. This heterogeneity
is not only important for our mechanism, but also empirically required to match the micro-data.
There is ample empirical evidence for the importance of such heterogeneity. Besides the contributions of Schoar (2010) and Decker et al. (2014) cited above, Hurst and Pugsley (2012), for example,
show that there are heterogeneous types of entrepreneurs in the U.S. economy, a majority of whom
intentionally choose to remain small. In the context of developing countries, Banerjee et al. (2015)
present experimental evidence on persistent differences in growth potential. Similar findings are
also reported in De Mel et al. (2008). Additionally, a recent theoretical literature argues that models
without such heterogeneity in growth potential are unable to explain the very rapid growth of a
subset of the U.S. firms (see e.g. Luttmer (2011) or Lentz and Mortensen (2016)). Recently, Gabaix
et al. (2016) generalized this logic to the debate on inequality.
We focus on inefficiencies in the interaction between outside managers and owners of firms to
explain the differences in firms’ demand for expansion. Caselli and Gennaioli (2013) also stress the
negative consequences of inefficient management, but focus on static misallocation. Powell (2012),
Bertrand and Schoar (2006), and Grobvosek (2015) study within-firm considerations where firms
(“owners”) need to hire managers subject to contractual frictions. In contrast to our theory, all these
papers assume that firm productivity is constant, i.e., there is no interaction between the delegation
1 An

overview of some regularities of the firm size distributions in India, Indonesia, and Mexico is contained in Hsieh
and Olken (2014).
2 As far as theories are concerned, there is now a sizable literature on credit market frictions (Buera et al., 2011; Moll,
2014; Midrigan and Xu, 2014), size-dependent policies (Guner et al., 2008), monopolistic market power (Peters, 2016) and
adjustment costs (Collard-Wexler et al., 2011). A synthesis of the literature is also contained in Hopenhayn (2012) and
Jones (2013).
3 As in Aghion and Howitt (1992), firm dynamics are determined through creative destruction, whereby successful
firms expand through replacing other producers. See Aghion et al. (2014) for a survey of the Schumpeterian growth
literature and Akcigit (2017) for the importance of firm dynamics in economic growth.

4

environment and firms’ endogenous growth incentives. Guner et al. (2015) and Roys and Seshadri
(2014) present recent dynamic models of (managerial) human capital accumulation and economic
development, but do not focus on the implications of creative destruction for the resulting process of
selection and firm dynamics. Finally, there is a large literature on management and the hierarchical
structure of the internal organization of the firm; see Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2015) for a
survey. This literature has a much richer micro structure of firms’ delegation environment, but does
not focus on the resulting properties of firm dynamics.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we describe the theoretical
model, where we explicitly derive the interaction between firms’ delegation decisions and their
incentives to grow. Section 3 summarizes the data that we use in our quantitative analysis and
discusses the identification of the model. In Section 4, we present the calibration results for India
and the U.S., and assess the model fit based on various out-of-sample moments. In Section 5 and
6, we provide our main analysis to quantify the importance of the delegation environment on firm
dynamics and the aggregate economy. Section 7 provides various robustness checks of the main
quantitative results. Section 8 concludes. All proofs and additional details are contained in the
Appendix. The Online Appendix contains further results.

2

Theory

We consider a continuous time economy, where a representative household maximizes the sum
of per period utilities U (Ct ) = ln(Ct ) and discounts the future at rate ρ. The members of the
household can work as either managers or production workers. Household optimization delivers
the usual Euler equation where the interest rate rt is equal to the sum of the discount rate ρ and the
growth rate of consumption of the final good gt,C , which we take as the numeraire:
rt = ρ + gt,C .

(1)

The final good Yt is used for consumption Ct and investment in productivity growth by incumbents
Rt and entrants R E,t . Therefore the resource constraint is simply:
Yt = Ct + Rt + R E,t .

(2)

To save on notation we will drop the time subscript t whenever it does not cause any confusion.

2.1

Technology

The final good Y is a Cobb-Douglas composite of intermediate varieties: ln Y =

R1
0

ln y j dj, where

y j denotes the amount of variety j. A firm is a collection of varieties as we explain below. The
production of such varieties requires both production workers and managers. In particular, we
assume that managers increase the efficiency of production workers so that firm f can produce
good j according to

yj f = qj f µ ej f lj f ,

5

(3)

where q j f is the firm-product specific efficiency, l j f is the number of production workers employed
for producing intermediate good j, e j f denotes the amount of managerial services firm f allocates

toward the production of good j, and µ e j f ≥ 1 is an increasing function translating managerial
services into productivity units. As in Klette and Kortum (2004), firm productivity in each variety
q j f is endogenous and the result of past innovation decisions. Also, note that the technology in (3)
implies that the labor cost of producing one unit y j f is given by MCj =

wP
,
q j f µ(e j f )

where w P is the

equilibrium wage for production workers.
Because firms’ outputs within product variety j are perfect substitutes, in equilibrium each variety j is produced by a single firm f , which has the highest productivity q j f . We will therefore refer
to this firm as the producer of product j and denote the producer’s productivity for variety j by q j .
Note that a given firm can produce multiple varieties if it was successful in innovating in the past
and hence has the highest efficiency in multiple markets.
In order to focus on the interaction between managerial delegation and the resulting equilibrium
process of firm dynamics, we keep the static market structure as tractable as possible. To do so, we
assume that in each market j there is a competitive fringe of potential producers that can produce
variety j at marginal costs w P /q j .4 Because the market leader faces a demand function with unitary
elasticity it will engage in limit pricing, i.e., set its price equal to the marginal costs of the competitive
fringe. The gross profits after paying for production workers l j (but before paying for the managers)
are therefore given by:

µ(e) − 1
π j (e) = [ p j − MCj ]y j =
Y.
µ(e)


(4)

Expression (4) stresses that firm f ’s profits on variety j depend only on the amount of managerial
services that it allocates toward the production of the jth variety. Because managerial inputs increase
physical productivity, more managerial inputs allow firms to increase their profitability.
For analytical convenience, we assume that µ(e) =
that firm f ’s profit in variety j is given by:

1
1− e σ ,

where e ∈ [0, 1) and σ < 1. This implies

π (e j ) = eσj Y,

(5)

i.e., profits are a simple power function of managerial effort parameterized by the elasticity σ. Note
that if the producing firm has no managerial services at its disposal, it is unable to outcompete the
competitive fringe and hence earns no profits.
Finally, we can also characterize the aggregate variables of the economy. In particular (see
Section OA-1.1 in the Online Appendix), aggregate output Y is given by:
Y = QM L P ,

(6)

R1
l j dj denotes the mass of production workers, ln Q = 0 ln q j dj is an index of aggre
 −1
R1
gate physical productivity and M = 1 − 0 eσj dj
summarizes the static effect of the available
where L P =

R1
0

4 This assumption allows us to abstract from strategic pricing decisions of firms who compete with firms of different
productivity. A related model with strategic pricing behavior is analyzed in Peters (2016). In terms of primitives, the
fringe firms have access to the same technology as the leading firm and to a level of managerial services µ f ringe , which
we normalize to unity.

6

managerial resources on aggregate productivity. In particular, M is increasing in e j , reflecting the
positive effect of managerial inputs on labor productivity at the firm-level.

2.2

Delegation and Managerial Services

Managerial services e can be provided both internally by the entrepreneur herself who owns the
firm, and by outside managers. Each individual can work either as a production worker or as an
outside manager, and is endowed with a single efficiency unit of production labor and h M units of
managerial human capital. For simplicity, we assume that h M is drawn from a Pareto distribution,
ϑ
1
i.e., P (h M > h) = ϑ−
× h−ϑ . Here E (h M ) = µ M parametrizes the average level of managerial
ϑ µM

skills relative to workers and ϑ governs the heterogeneity in managerial talent.

Given the production worker wage w P and the managerial wage w M , the individual decides to
be a manager if and only if h M w M ≥ w P . Hence, the total supply of managerial efficiency units is
given by:

H

M



=

ϑ−1
µM
ϑ

ϑ 

wM
wP

 ϑ −1

ϑ
,
ϑ−1

(7)

i.e. is increasing in the relative wage, with an elasticity of ϑ − 1.5 Moreover, holding relative wages
fixed, managerial skill supplies are increasing in the average level of managerial human capital µ M .
Delegation and the Demand for Outside Managers
Each entrepreneur has a fixed endowment of T managerial efficiency units, which she provides
inelastically to her firm. If an entrepreneur is the current producer in n markets and decides to run
her firm alone, then she will have e j = T/n units of managerial services per variety.6 Equation (5)
then implies that the total profits of the firm producing n varieties are simply:
n

 
T
= T σ n1−σ Y.
Π(n) = ∑ π (e j ) = n × π
n
j =1
This expression has a simple but important implication: While the profits of the firm are increasing
in the number of varieties n, they do so at a decreasing rate. The reason is that the owner has a fixed
endowment T and hence runs into span of control problem as in Lucas (1978). In particular, firm
size n and entrepreneur’s managerial endowment T are complements in that the marginal return to
a unit of additional managerial resources is larger for larger firms
∂2 Π ( n )
> 0.
∂n∂T
Hence, entrepreneurs with larger firms consider their fixed time endowment more of a bottleneck.
To counteract these decreasing returns, the entrepreneur can hire outside managers to augment
her own endowment of managerial resources. In particular, suppose that the entrepreneur’s and
the manager’s time are perfect substitutes, but that the relative productivity the manager’s human
capital is given by α. Hence, if an owner of a firm with n varieties hires m j units of managerial
5 Note

that ϑ must be greater than 1 for average managerial human capital to be finite.
she will want to spread her T units of managerial time equally across all product lines follows directly from the
concavity of π in (5).
6 That

7

human capital for the production of variety j, the total amount of managerial services e j is given by:
e j = T/n + α × m j .

(8)

The parameter α, which we refer to as the delegation efficiency, is the key parameter for our analysis.
We think of α as being country-specific and dependent on various fundamentals. First, α could
depend on the contractual environment. If contractual imperfections are severe, entrepreneurs might
need to spend substantial amounts of their own time monitoring their managerial personnel. This
reduces the net time gain each outside manager adds to the firm. Second, α could depend on
the level of technology available to the firm. If managerial efficiency is complementary with IT
equipment, for example, technological differences across countries will be a source of variation in α.
Third, α could capture cultural factors like trust or social norms, which facilitate the delegation of
decision power. Finally, α might depend on the level of financial development, since more developed
financial markets might give the entrepreneur the opportunity to incentivize her managers better.
In this paper we are agnostic about the exact determinants of α and rather take it as a countryspecific parameter, which we calibrate directly within our model. However, in Section (OA-1.2)
in the Online Appendix, we provide a simple micro-founded example, where a contractual game
between the owner and outside managers leads to equation (8) and α is a combination of explicit
structural parameters.
Because managers are hired on a spot market, the delegation problem is static and the owner
simply maximizes the total profits of the firm by choosing the optimal amount of managerial inputs.
Using (5) and (8), total profits of a firm who is producing n varieties are therefore given by:
Π(n) ≡

n

∑ max
m ≥0

j =1

j



T
+ αm j
n

σ


Y − wM mj ,

(9)

where w M is the managerial wage.
The maximization problem in (9) defines both firms’ demand for managerial inputs and their
final profit function. Two properties are noteworthy. First of all, the entrepreneur’s inelastically
supplied managerial input T generates a well-defined extensive margin for managerial hiring. In
particular, the firm only hires outside managers if the size of the firm, in the number of varieties,
exceeds the endogenous delegation cutoff n∗ (α), which is given by
n∗ (α) = T ×

 ω  1−1 σ
M

σα

,

(10)

where ω M = w M /Y is the normalized managerial wage. Hence, small firms rely purely on the time
of the owner and only start delegating once they reach a size n > n∗ (α). Note that the cutoff n∗ (α)
is decreasing in α and increasing in ω M . Hence, the more efficient the outside managers, the more
likely is it that even small firms utilize outside managers. Conversely, if managers are expensive
(relative to the size of the market Y), the critical size at which firms start to delegate increases.
Second, it is easy to verify that the optimal managerial demand per variety m(n), conditional on
  1−1 σ σ
hiring, is given by m(n) = ωσM
α 1−σ − α1 Tn , i.e. is increasing in n. This reflects the complemen8

tarity between managerial hiring and firm size. As for the extensive margin, managerial demand is
increasing in α and decreasing in ω M .
Substituting firms’ optimal delegation policies into (9) implies the following endogenous profit
function:
Π(n; α) = π̃ (n; α) × Y

where

π̃ (n; α) =



 T ωM
α

T σ n 1− σ
if n < n∗ (α)
  1−σ σ
.
+ (1 − σ) ωσαM
n if n ≥ n∗ (α)

(11)

This profit function in (11) is a crucial object in our analysis, because it determines firms’ marginal
return to increase the number of markets in which they are active. Most importantly, firms’ profits
directly depend on the delegation efficiency α.
To see this, consider Figure 1 where we depict the profit function π̃ (n; α) for two different levels
of delegation efficiency α L < α H holding the managerial wage ω M fixed. Small firms are run only by
their owner and are subject to diminishing returns: As long as they do not delegate, the marginal
profit from an additional market is declining, i.e., π̃ (n; α) is concave in n. Once firms reach the
critical size n∗ and start hiring outside managers, however, the profit function becomes linear in
the number of markets n. Hence, entrepreneurs can overcome the decreasing returns to scale by
delegating managerial tasks to outside managers.7 Moreover, conditional on delegating, an increase
in delegation efficiency α increases the slope of the profit function. If there are frictions to delegation,
i.e. α is low, the delegation cutoff is large, few firms delegate and the marginal profits for large firms
are low. If delegation becomes more efficient, both the delegation cutoff declines and the slope of
the profit function increases. These comparative statics already suggest the relationship between the
delegation environment and the process of firm-dynamics: A higher delegation efficiency α raises
the returns to being large and therefore affects firms’ expansion decisions. This is where we turn
now.

2.3

Firm Dynamics: Expansion, Entry and Exit

Following Klette and Kortum (2004), we consider a model of creative destruction where firms grow
by stealing products from their competitors and decline in size if other firms replace them as the
most productive producer in a particular market. There are two main differences with the baseline
Klette and Kortum (2004) model. First of all, because firms’ profits π̃ (n; α) directly depend on
the delegation environment α, delegation efficiency determines firms’ growth and entry incentives
and thereby directly affects the aggregate rate of creative destruction and the equilibrium growth
rate. Second, we explicitly allow firms to be heterogeneous in their growth potential and exposure
to creative destruction shocks. It is this heterogeneity across producers, which gives rise to the
possibility of selection.
Delegation and the Incentives to Expand: Firms spend resources to increase the productivity of
existing products in the economy. Formally, we assume that if a firm with n varieties invests R units
7 Note that two special cases of our model resemble two workhorse models in the literature. When α = 0 there is no
scope of outside delegation. In that case, we have that n∗ = ∞ and all firms are subject to diminishing returns as in Lucas
(1978). On the other hand when α is sufficiently large so that n∗ < 1, every firms delegates and firms’ profits functions
are linear as in the baseline version of Klette and Kortum (2004).

9

Figure 1: Delegation and Decreasing Returns To Scale
:
~ (n; ,)

:
~ (n; ,H )

:
~ (n; ,L )

! "
n$ , H

! "
n$ , L

firm size, n

Notes: The figure depicts the profit function π̃ (n; α) characterized in (11) for α L and α H , α L < α H and a given the managerial wage ω M .
That n∗ (α) is decreasing in α follows from (10).

of the final good, it generates a flow rate of innovation equal to
X ( R; θ, n) = θ [ R/Q]ζ n1−ζ ,

(12)

where θ, which we refer to as firms’ growth potential, determines the efficiency of innovation,
ζ < 1 parametrizes the concavity of the innovation production function and Qt is the productivity
index defined in (6).8 Conditional on innovating, the firm improves the productivity of a randomly
selected product by a multiple γt > 1 and replaces the existing firm as the producer of the product.
We assume that firms are heterogeneous in their growth potential θ and can be either transformative (high, θ H ) or subsistence (low, θ L ) types. A firm’s type is persistent and determined upon entry.
Formally, each new entrant draws a firm type θ ∈ {θ H , θ L } from a Bernoulli distribution, where
θ=


θ

H

with probability δ

θ

L

with probability 1 − δ

.

(13)

To capture the existence of subsistence entrepreneurs, we assume that θ L = 0, so that low-type
firms are entirely stagnant. This polar case is conceptually useful because it stresses that low types
are never able to grow. Hence, the sole difference in firm dynamics across countries stems from the
innovation incentives for high types – it is the high types’ appetite for expansion that determines
the degree of selection, i.e., the time it takes for low-type firms to be replaced.
In addition, we allow for firms to potentially differ in the rate at which they lose markets due to
differences in their reputation, customer loyalty, or organizational capital. Formally, letting τH and
τL be the rates at which high and low-type firms lose a given product to other firms (both of which,
8 Because we denote innovation costs in terms of the final good, the growing scaling variable Q is required to keep the
model stationary. We also assume that firms’ innovation costs depend on the number of varieties n to generate deviations
from Gibrat’s law solely through incomplete delegation. In particular, if the profit function in (11) was linear, e.g. as in
Klette and Kortum (2004), the specification in (12) would imply that firm growth was independent of size.

10

will be determined in equilibrium), we assume that
τL = βτH .
If β > 1, low-type firms are easier to replace (or are targeted by expanding firms more intensely), if
β < 1, the opposite is the case. The parameter β will be one of our structural parameters, which we
will calibrate from the data.
To characterize the optimal expansion policies of high-type firms, which are forward-looking,
we need to solve for their value functions. The value of a high-type firm with n products, VtH (n),
solves the continuous time Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation:
h
i
rt VtH (n) − V̇tH (n) = Πt (n; α) − nτH,t VtH (n) − VtH (n − 1) +
(
  1ζ )
h
i
ζ −1
X
max X VtH (n + 1) − VtH (n) − Qt n ζ
, .
θH
X

(14)

where V̇tH ≡ ∂VtH /∂t. Note that the value function VtH directly depends on the delegation environment α via the profit function. The right-hand-side of (14) consists of three parts. First of
all, the firm earns the flow profits Πt (n; α) given in (11). Secondly, the firm might lose one of its
products to other firms. This occurs with the endogenous rate of creative destruction nτH,t . Finally, the value function incorporates the option value of expansion: The firm experiences a capital
gain VtH (n + 1) − VtH (n) with flow rate X but has to pay the associated innovation costs stemming
from (12). Similarly, we can also derive the value function of low-type firms. Because subsistence
entrepreneurs never grow beyond a single product and they exit at rate τL,t , this value function is
given by:
rt VtL − V̇tL = Πt (1; α) − τL,t VtL .

(15)

Given the definition of the value function VtH , we can characterize high types’ expansion policies.
Let us denote the innovation intensity (i.e. the innovation per product line) by x ≡ X/n. Equation
(14) then implies that the optimal innovation intensity is given by:
1
1− ζ

xt (n; α) = θ H ζ

ζ
1− ζ



×

VtH (n + 1) − VtH (n)
Qt

 1−ζ ζ

.

(16)

Naturally, the incentives to grow depend on the marginal returns of doing so, VtH (n + 1) − VtH (n).

It is this marginal return that links firms’ innovation incentives to the delegation environment. In

equation (11) and Figure 1 we showed that the delegation efficiency α determines the concavity of the
profit function, and hence the marginal flow profit of expansion. Because the value function inherits
the properties of the profit function, the delegation efficiency also determines the slope of the value
function, and hence the optimal innovation rate for firms of different size. The lower the delegation
efficiency α, the more concave the resulting value function, and the more innovation incentives
will decline in firm size. Intuitively, if firms anticipate they will not be able to efficiently delegate
decision power once they reach a size where delegation becomes essential, their incentives to expand
diminish. A higher delegation efficiency α will therefore increase firms’ expansion incentives by
11

increasing the slope of the value function.
Figure 2: Overview of the Life-Cycle Dynamics in the Model
V H (n + 1)

t

...
...
V (2) · · · · · ·
...
...
H

t
x 1∆
τH ∆t

δ
p.

θH

w/

V

H

(1)

1−

(x

1

∆
n
×x

V

H

(n)

1−

n
n × τH ∆t
n×

H)

+x

t

...
...

∆t

H

n) ∆

Exit

+τ

(τ

V H (n − 1)

V H (n)

...

V H (1) · · · · · ·

Free Entry
z

θL

w/
p.

Exit

τ L∆t

1-δ
VL

1−

τL ∆

...

t
VL

...
...
·. · · · · ·
.. .
..

Figure 2 provides an overview of the life cycle dynamics in our model. Firms enter the economy
with a single product and are either transformative, high-type entrepreneurs (with probability δ) or
subsistence, low-type entrepreneurs (with probability 1 − δ). The corresponding value functions are

VH (1) and VL . Within the next time interval ∆t, high-type firms either expand (at rate x1 ), lose their

only product and exit (at rate τH ) or remain a one-product firm. In contrast, low-type firms never
expand but instead either exit the economy (at rate τL ) or remain in the economy by serving their
initial market.
Entry:

A unit mass of potential entrants attempts to enter the economy at any point in time using

a similar innovation technology as incumbent firms, z = θ E [ R E /Q]ζ , where z is the entry flow rate
and R E is amount of final goods spent on entry efforts. Entrants enter the economy with a single,
randomly selected product and the realization of θ is revealed only after entering the market. Recall
from (13) that an entrant becomes a high-type with probability δ. Hence, the equilibrium entry flow
is given by:
 h

i
− 1ζ 1
H
L
zt (α) = argmax z δVt (1; α) + (1 − δ)Vt (α) − Qt θ E z ζ
z

1
1− ζ

= θE ζ

ζ
1− ζ



δVtH (1; α) + (1 − δ)VtL (α)
Qt

 1−ζ ζ

.

(17)

The equilibrium entry flow zt (α) depends on the delegation environment through firms’ value function. Importantly, the effect of α on the entry rate is ambiguous. A better delegation environment
tends to increase the value of being a small high-type firm, VtH (1; α), as seamless delegation carries
an option value of becoming large in the future. At the same time, the value of being a low-type firm
might decline. The reason is that a more efficient delegation environment increases competition by
increasing the expansion rate of high-type firms. This shortens the horizon of low-type producers
by reducing their probability of survival.

12

Delegation and the Process of Firm Dynamics: Firms expansion and entry incentives in (16)
and (17) fully summarize the relationship between delegation efficiency and the process of firmdynamics. To get some intuition, consider an increase in delegation efficiency α holding all wages
and the flow rate of entry z fixed. This will increase managerial hiring (both on the intensive and
extensive margin) and raise firms’ marginal profits conditional on delegating. Such higher marginal
profits will also increase the slope of value function and hence high-type firms’ expansion rates
x (n; α). We depict this expansion response in Figure 3. First of all, an increase in the efficiency of
the delegation from α L to α H will shift the whole expansion schedule upwards. Intuitively, if firms
anticipate to be able to hire outside managers once they reach the delegation cutoff n∗ in the future,
their incentives to expand today are already higher. Secondly, innovation incentives increase more
for larger firms and the schedule x (n; α) becomes flatter, i.e. innovation incentives decline less in
the size of the firm. Hence, improvements in the delegation environment are particularly important
for large firms, who heavily rely on outside managers.
Figure 3: Delegation and Expansion Incentives
x(n; ,)

x(n; ,H )

x(n; ,L )

firm size, n

Notes: The figure depicts the innovation intensity x (n; α) characterized in (16) for α L and α H , α L < α H and a given the managerial wage
ω M and creative destruction τH .

Because high-type firms expand partly at the expense of low-type firms, increasing the delegation efficiency α has the direct implication that low-type firms will exit faster. The fact that stagnant
firms in poor countries survive for a long time, is therefore consistent with the view that efficient
firms expand too little to drive them out of the market quickly. Moreover, because an increase in
delegation efficiency will have a disproportionate effect on expansion incentives of large firms, the
firm size distribution shifts to the right so that a larger share of economic activity will be generated
in big firms. From the point of view of a firm’s life cycle, this implies that the growth rate of large
firms will respond more to an increase in delegation efficiency, so that firm age becomes a stronger
predictor of firm size. This pattern is qualitatively consistent with the cross-country evidence (Hsieh
and Olken (2014); Hsieh and Klenow (2014); Bento and Restuccia (2017)).
The above intuition neglects two countervailing general equilibrium forces. First of all, managerial wages will adjust to ensure labor market clearing. Secondly, there will be a change in entry.
To fully characterize the effects of changes in the delegation environment on the process of firm
dynamics, we turn to a quantitative analysis in Section 5.
13

2.4

Aggregate Dynamics

The equilibrium rate of creative destruction in the economy is endogenous and driven by firms’ expansion and entry incentives xt (n; α) and zt (α). Because firms’ expansion rates are size-dependent,
the rate of creative destruction (and all the remaining general equilibrium variables) depends on the
cross-sectional distribution of firm size. In particular, let FtH and FtL be the mass of active high- and
H denote the share of high-type firms with n products.9 In
low-type producers at time t. Also, let νn,t

Section A.1 in the Appendix we formally derive the flow equations of these objects and show that
the stationary firm-size distribution has a closed form expression.
Because firms’ rates of expansion and the equilibrium rate of entry depend on the delegation
environment α, both the aggregate rate of creative destruction τt and the firm-size distribution explicitly
depends on the delegation efficiency. In particular, τt is given by:
τt (α) = FtH (α)

∞

H
( α ) + z t ( α ).
∑ nxt (n; α)νn,t

(18)

n =1

Differences in the efficiency of delegation affect creative destruction directly through differences
in expansion and entry rates xt (n; α) and zt (α), and indirectly through changes in the firm-size
H ( α ) and the number of high-type firms F H ( α ). Quantifying the extent to which the
distribution νn,t
t

firm size distribution and the rate of creative destruction depends on the delegation efficiency will be
at the heart of our quantitative analysis below. Finally, recall that we allowed the extent of productreplacement to be type-specific. Consistency therefore requires that τt = τH,t (1 − FtL ) + τL,t FtL , as
FtL is the share of products which is produced by low-type firms (all of which have only a single

product).
The rate of creative destruction is also the main driver of aggregate growth in our economy.
Recall that each successful innovation increases productivity by the step size γt . The aggregate
growth rate of the productivity index Qt is then given by (see Appendix A.2)
gt ( α ) ≡

Q̇t
= ln(γt ) × τt (α),
Qt

(19)

i.e. is proportional to the aggregate rate of creative destruction. Equation (19) highlights the relationship between delegation and aggregate growth: In our model, more efficient delegation increases
aggregate growth through its effect on expansion and entry and hence creative destruction.
To account for the fact that the Indian economy is technologically backward (relative to the U.S.),
and might therefore be able to benefit from "catch-up" growth, we assume that its step-size γtI ND is
given by
γtI ND

=γ

US



×

QUS,t
Q I ND,t

λ
,

(20)

where λ ≥ 0 and γUS is the step size for the U.S., which we assume to be constant.10 Equation (20)
9 Recall

that all low-type firms only have a single product.
the U.S. as the frontier economy is purely for simplicity. Suppose there is an exogenous technological frontier
QtF , which grows at rate g. Suppose that the step size in country c is given by (20) relative to this frontier, i.e. γtc =
λ
γ × QtF /Qc,t . If the U.S. economy already reached its BGP, (20) holds with γUS = g/τUS .
10 Taking

14

captures – in a reduce form way – the existence of knowledge spillovers. In particular, to the extent
that productivity in India is relatively low and λ > 0, the Indian step-size might exceed the one for
the U.S. If λ = 0, there are no "benefits from backwardness".
While our empirical analysis focuses on a time period where the Indian economy has not reached
a balanced growth path, note that the formulation in (20) implies that, in the long run, the Indian
and the U.S. economy grow at the same rate and the distribution of income is stationary. Hence,
differences in the delegation efficiency manifest themselves in level differences, not in growth differences. To see this, note that along a balanced growth path, both the rate of creative destruction
and the equilibrium step size have to be constant. This implies that – as long as λ > 0 – aggregate
productivity differences, QUS,t /Q I ND,t also have to be constant. In particular, (19) and (20) imply that

ln

Q I ND,t
QUS,t



ln γUS
×
=−
λ



τUS − τI ND
τI ND


.

(21)

Equation (21) highlights that differences in creative destruction determine the long-run distribution
of income across countries. In particular, the lower the rate of creative destruction in India relative
to the U.S., the higher the differences in productivity. For the limiting case of λ = 0, there are
no linkages across countries, and the long-run income distribution is non-stationary as countries
generically grow at different rates.
Equation (21) also provides the link between differences in delegation efficiency and aggregate
productivity. Suppose that the U.S. and India only differed in their delegation efficiency.11 Because
more efficient delegation in the U.S. increases the equilibrium rate of creative destruction relative
to India, (21) shows that long-run productivity in the U.S. will be higher. We will quantify the
importance of the delegation environment on long-run income and productivity differences between
India and the U.S. in Section 6 below.

2.5

Dynamic Equilibrium

For completeness we can now formally define the full dynamic equilibrium for our economy.
Definition 1 Consider the environment described above. A dynamic equilibrium path is characterized by a
time path of
h

L
∞
H ∞
H
L
p jt , y jt , {VtH (n)}∞
n=1 , Vt , { xt ( n )}n=1 , zt , wt,M , wt,P , { νt,n }n=1 , Ft , Ft , rt , gt

i∞
t =0

,

such that (i) p jt and y jt maximize monopoly profits in (4), (ii) the value functions VtH (n) and VtL are given by
(14) and (15) (iii) the innovation rates xt (n) are optimal and given in (16), (iv) the entry rate zt satisfies (17),
(v) wt,P and wt,M clear the labor market for production and managerial labor, (vi) the number of firms [ FtH , FtL ]
H are consistent with the flow equations in Section A.1 in the Appendix, (vii)
and the firm size distributions νt,n

the interest rate rt satisfies the household’s Euler equation in (1), and (viii) the aggregate productivity growth
rate is consistent (19) and (20).
11 In our quantitative analysis, we will allow for additional differences and we will explicitly show that doing so is
important.

15

In our quantitative analysis we will calibrate this model to micro-data from India and the U.S.
While we assume that the U.S. economy has converged to a balanced growth path, where all aggregate variables grow at a constant rate, we allow for the Indian economy remain along its transition
path, i.e. catching-up with the U.S. As far as the firm size distributions are concerned, we initialize the distribution in both countries at their BGP distribution. As we show in Section A.3 of the
Appendix, this implies that the firm-size distribution will remain stationary during the transition,
i.e. despite the fact that the aggregate economy has not reached a BGP yet. In Section OA-2.2 of
the Online-Appendix, we present direct evidence that size distribution of firms in India is relatively
stable over time.

3

Data and Calibration

3.1

Data

Our quantitative analysis uses both establishment-level and individual-level micro data. To measure
properties of the process of firm dynamics, we rely on micro data for the population of manufacturing establishments in the U.S. and India. We then combine this information with individual-level
census records from both countries to measure the importance of managerial employment. Here we
briefly describe the main data sources. A detailed description of all of our data sources is contained
in Section B.1 in the Appendix.
Establishment level data for the U.S. and India: We calibrate our model to data for the manufacturing sector of the U.S. and India. For the case of the U.S. we rely on publicly available data
from the Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS). The BDS is provided by the U.S. Census Bureau and
compiled from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which draws on the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Registry to provide longitudinal data for each establishment with paid employees.
These data have also been used in Haltiwanger et al. (2013) and Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2012).
We focus on the data from 2012. As for India, we follow Hsieh and Klenow (2014) and Hsieh and
Olken (2014) and use the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) and the National Sample Survey (NSS).
The ASI focuses on the formal sector and covers all establishments employing ten or more workers
using electric power, and employing twenty or more workers without electric power. To overcome
this oversampling of large producers in the ASI, we complement the ASI with data from the NSS,
which (every five years) surveys a random sample of the population of manufacturing establishments without the minimum size requirement of the ASI. We merge these two datasets using the
sampling weights provided in the data and focus on the year 2010, which is the latest year for which
both data sets are available. To be consistent with the existing literature (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow,
2014) and because the Indian data is collected at the level of the establishment, our benchmark analysis will focus on individual establishments. We will conduct robustness checks using firm-level
data in Section 7.12
12 While

a establishment is a fixed physical location where economic activity occurs, firms are defined at the enterprise
level such that all establishments under the operational control of the enterprise are considered part of the firm.

16

Table 1 contains some basic descriptive statistics about the distribution of establishment size in
the U.S. and India. The importance of large firms varies enormously between countries. In the
U.S., two-thirds of manufacturing employment is concentrated in establishments with at least 100
employees; and only one-third of the establishments have fewer than four employees. In India, more
than nine out of ten establishments have fewer than four employees and they account for more than
half of aggregate employment. Below, we will use our theory to rationalize these empirical facts.
Table 1: Establishment Size and Managerial Employment in the U.S. and India

U.S.
India

Mean empl.
42.7
2.7

Establishment Size
1 - 4 employees
≥ 100 employees
Share
Empl. share
Share
Empl. share
32.8%
1.8%
8.8%
65.6%
93.0%
54.8%
0.1%
18.6%

Empl. share
of outside
managers
12.4%
1.7%

Notes: The table contains summary statistic from the firm size distribution in the U.S. and India. The U.S. data come from the BDS in
2012, the data for India from the NSS and ASI in 2010. In the last column, we report the share of outside managers, i.e. all workers who
are classified as managers according to the occupation classification ISCO and who are hired as wage workers.

Data on Managerial Employment:

To infer countries’ delegation efficiency, we require data on

the equilibrium level of managerial employment. Such data is available from the national census
data provided by the IPUMS project. For each country we get a sample from the census, which
has detailed information about individual characteristics. We observe each respondent’s education,
occupation, employment status, sex and industry of employment. We focus on male workers in
the manufacturing industry working in private-sector jobs. We always use the most recent data
available, which is 2004 in the case of India and 2010 in the case of the U.S.
To classify workers as managers in the sense of our model, we use information about workers’
occupational and employment status. As our theory stresses the importance of delegating authority
to outside managers, we classify employees as managers if they assigned the occupational code
“Legislator, Senior official and manager" and they are hired as wage workers instead of being, for
example, family members of the firms’ owner or the employer themselves. As shown in the last
column of Table 1, in the U.S. roughly 12.4% of employees satisfy this criterion. In India, less than
2% are employed as outside managers. Note that insisting on outside managers is important. For
the case of the U.S., roughly 14% of the labor force is classified as managers according to their
occupational code. The majority, namely 90%, are wage workers, hence outside managers in the
sense of our theory. This is very different in the case of India, where conditional on being in a
managerial occupation, only 12% of individuals are wage workers and the majority of individuals
working in managerial occupations are either entrepreneurs themselves or unpaid family members.
The latter is consistent with the findings in Bloom et al. (2013), who also argue that Indian firms
acquire managerial services mostly from their owners or close family members. This pattern is very
much the exception in the U.S.

17

3.2

Identification and Calibration

We now turn to our calibration strategy. To credibly identify the partial effect of the delegation environment (α), we independently calibrate our model to the Indian data and the U.S. data. Hence, we
allow the key parameters of our model to differ between these economies. By doing so, we capture
various alternative mechanisms determining the process of firm-dynamics in a parsimonious way.
By allowing high types’ growth potential θ to vary across countries, we allow – in a reduced form
way – for differences in capital market efficiency, whereby frictions in the Indian financial system
might prevent firms from investing and hence cause them to remain small (see, for instance, Cole
et al., 2016), size-dependent policies, whereby Indian firms might be subject to steeper increases
of (implicit) tax rates in firm size (see, for example, Hsieh and Klenow, 2014, Guner et al., 2008,
Ulyssea, 2016, and Bento and Restuccia, 2017) or product market frictions, which might be more
severe in India (see, for example, Foster et al., 2016, Gourio and Rudanko, 2014, and Perla, 2016). In
our model, we capture such explanations by allowing Indian firms to potentially face high costs of
expansion (θ I ND < θUS ). Similarly, inefficiencies in the allocation of start-up capital or frictions in
labor markets might induce more subsistence firms to enter in India. If this is an important aspect of
the data, our model should estimate low-type firms in India to be plentiful upon entry (δI ND < δUS ).
Finally, the Indian economy might be characterized by higher entry costs due to bureaucratic red
E ).
tape. Our model allows for this margin through variation in the efficiency of entry (θ IEND < θUS

Identification
Our model has 13 parameters:
Ω ≡ {α, σ, T, µ M , ϑ, θ, θ E , ζ, δ, β , γUS , λ, ρ},
|
{z
} | {z } | {z }
Management

Firm dynamics

Macro

where we define the parameter set as Ω. Five parameters relate directly to the demand and supply of
managerial services: The delegation efficiency (α), the managerial output elasticity (σ), the owners’
own human capital (T), and the distribution of managerial skills (µ M and ϑ). The process of firmdynamics is captured by the innovation and entry efficiencies (θ and θ E ), the convexity of the cost
function ζ, the share of high-type entrants (δ) and the difference in type-specific creative destruction
rates (β). Finally, the remaining three "macro" parameters capture the process of the innovation step
size (γUS and λ) and the patience of the household (ρ).
We fix two of the parameters exogenously (ρ and ζ) and calibrate the remaining 11 parameters
by minimizing the distance between several empirical moments and their model counterparts.13 In
particular, let M E denote the vector of empirical moments and M (Ω) denote the vector of modelsimulated moments for a given Ω. We then chose Ω to minimize the absolute relative deviation
13 As

we do not have data on spending on innovation, we do not attempt to estimate the curvature of the expansion
cost function, ζ. Instead we follow the microeconomic literature, whose estimates imply a quadratic cost function, i.e.,
ζ = 0.5. See Akcigit and Kerr (2017) and Acemoglu et al. (2017), who discuss this evidence in more detail. In Section 7 we
provide a battery of robustness checks. We set the discount rate ρ equal to 2%, which roughly corresponds to an annual
discount factor of 97%.

18

between the model and data, i.e. we solve
E − M ( Ω )|
| Mm
m
.
E
| Mm |
m =1
11

min
Ω

∑

Even though our parameters are calibrated jointly, and most of the target moments cannot be expressed analytically, our aim is to be transparent about the parameter identification. Therefore, we
proceed in two steps. First, below we provide a heuristic description about the relationship between
the parameters and specific moments. Second, in Appendix B.2, we not only provide a more formal
identification discussion, we also verify these relationships numerically using a sensitivity matrix,
where we report the elasticity of each moment used in the internal calibration with respect to the
parameters of the model (see Table 10).14
Identifying θ, δ, β and θ E :

The expansion efficiency θ is mostly identified from the profile of firms’

life-cycle growth. This is seen in Panel A of Figure 4, where we depict the extent to which firms
grow as they age for different values of θ, holding all other parameters fixed. The higher θ, the faster
firms will grow conditional on survival. To identify the share of high-type producers δ, we focus
on the age-profile of exit rates conditional on firm size. Without type heterogeneity, the likelihood
of exit would be independent of age conditional on size. In the data, however, such conditional
exit rates are strongly decreasing in firm age [see e.g., Haltiwanger et al. (2013)]. Through the
lens of our model, this pattern is rationalized through endogenous selection, whereby the share of
high-type firms within a given cohort increases as the cohort ages. This is shown in Panel B of
Figure 4, where we show the exit rate of small firms by age for different values of δ. Without any
heterogeneity, i.e. δ = 1, the conditional exit hazard is flat.The parameter β, which determines how
quickly low-type firms lose market share relative to high-type competitors, is identified from the
aggregate employment share of old firms.15 Finally, the entry efficiency θ E is identified from the
aggregate entry rate.
Identifying α, µ M , ϑ, σ and T: As the delegation efficiency α affects firms’ demand for outside
managers, it is mainly identified from the aggregate managerial employment shares reported in
Table 1. In particular, the lower share of outside managers in India implies – all else equal – that
α I ND < αUS .16 As we discuss in Section B.2 in the Appendix, by choice of units for managerial skills,
all allocations in the model only depend on µ M × α. To separately identify the delegation efficiency
α from the supply of managerial skills µ M , we require variation in the demand for managerial

skills holding managerial human capital fixed. To do so, we use data from the New Immigrant
Survey (NIS), which contains information about the pre- and post-migration outcomes of recent
14 In

particular, we report percentage change in the moment for a 1% change in the parameter from its benchmark
calibrated value, while keeping the rest of the parameters at their benchmark values. We report the average elasticities
based on +1% and -1% changes.
15 Intuitively, as high-type firms are older on average, the aggregate size of old cohorts is informative about this parameter.
16 This also illustrates why it is important to introduce other mechanisms that affect the firm size distribution in India:
For a given level of delegation benefit α, any shift in the distribution of firm size towards larger firms (due to an increase
in θ, for instance) will increase managerial demand.

19

Figure 4: Identification of δ and θ
Panel A: The Life-Cycle

Panel B: Exit Rate of Small Firms by Age

0.3

5
3US = 0:252
3 = 0:125
3 = 0:500

/US = 0:61
/ = 0:25
/ = 1:00

0.25
Exit Rate

Mean Employment

4

3

0.2

2
0.15
1
0.1
0-5

6-10

11-15 16-20
Age

21-25

26+

0-1

2-3

4-5

6-10
Age

11-15

16-20

Notes: The left panel shows the employment life-cycle, i.e., average employment by age, for different values of θ. The right panel shows
the exit rate of one-product firms by age for different values of δ. The black line depicts the U.S. calibration (i.e., θUS = 0.25 in the left
panel and δUS = 0.61 in the right panel). The other lines are obtained by varying θ (left panel) or δ (right panel), while keeping the rest
of the parameters constant.

immigrants to the U.S. and has recently been used by Hendricks and Schoellman (2016). As we
show in detail in Section B.3 in the Appendix, this data is informative about the managerial human
capital supply in India. Intuitively, Indian immigrants to the U.S. are almost as likely to work in
managerial occupations as U.S. residents. However, they are much more likely to have worked
in managerial jobs prior to emigrating. This implies that the average managerial human capital
supply of the non-migrant Indian population is lower than in the U.S. The shape parameter of
the managerial skill distribution ϑ can be directly calibrated to match the dispersion in managerial
earnings as the model implies that the variance of log managerial earnings is given by ϑ−2 . As
σ is the elasticity of profits with respect to managerial services, we identify it from the share of
managerial compensation relative to corporate profits. The owner’s time endowment T is directly
related to the need of managerial delegation and hence determines both the extensive margin of
managerial hiring, i.e., the share of firms who hire outside managers, and the entrepreneurial profit
share.
Identifying γUS and λ: The innovation step-size, γt , translates firms’ innovation outcomes into
aggregate growth. Note that γt does not enter any other moment in the model. For the U.S., we
assume that the economy is on a BGP and choose γUS to match a growth rate of 2%. For the case
of India, λ parametrizes the extent of catch-up growth [see (20)]. Empirically, relative productivity
in the U.S. vis-à-vis India’s decreased substantially from about 4 in 1985 to 3.2 in 2005 (see Figure
5). We therefore calibrate λ to match these time-series dynamics of India’s relative productivity. We
use the TFP series from the Penn World Tables to measure productivity.

20

Figure 5: Identification of λ: TFP Differences between the U.S. and India
4.4
Data
Model

T F PU S;t =T F PIN D;t

4.2
4
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Notes: The figure shows the observed relative TFP between the U.S. and India (dashed) and the one implied by the model (solid).

4

Results

In this section we discuss our calibration results. Section 4.1 contains the calibrated structural
parameters. In sections 4.2 and 4.3 we report a variety of targeted and non-targeted moments.
Finally, in section 4.4 we report the implications for the economy-wide degree of creative destruction
in the U.S. and India.

4.1

Calibrated Parameters

Table 2 contains the calibrated parameters. For convenience we also report the main target for the
respective parameters even though the parameters are calibrated jointly.
The first two rows show that entrants in the U.S. economy are much more likely to be hightype firms, δUS > δI ND , and such firms are calibrated to be five times as efficient in expanding
into new markets as their Indian counterparts (θUS ≈ 5 × θ I ND ). Additionally, we estimate that
β > 1, which implies that low-type firms are subject to relatively higher probabilities of creative

destruction, and that this asymmetry is more pronounced in the U.S. Empirically, these differences
reflect mostly the observed differences in life-cycle growth and exit patterns. Economically, we find
these estimates plausible in that they capture the above-mentioned additional reasons for why firms
in India might not expand (e.g., due to the presence of credit constraints or size-dependent policies)
or why unproductive firms are abundant upon entry (e.g., because of low opportunity costs of
entrepreneurship in India).
The next two rows contain the estimates of the delegation environment. Our calibration implies
that the delegation efficiency in the U.S. is about twice as large as in India (αUS ≈ 2 × α I ND ).
Note that this low estimate of α I ND is conditional on other determinants of firm size induced, for

example, by differences in θ, δ, or θ E . This implies that other mechanisms are not able to explain
both the differences in firm dynamics and managerial hiring, simultaneously. Because the cost of
expansion and the share of subsistence firms are high in India, there are few large firms in the Indian
economy, resulting potentially low level of managerial demand. However, to clear the labor market,
managerial wages fall, limiting the impact of other mechanisms on managerial hiring. Therefore a

21

Table 2: Parameters for the U.S. and India
Panel A. Internal Calibration
Parameter Interpretation

Target
Firm-Dynamics
Life-cycle
Age vs exit profile
Empl. share of old firms
Rate of entry

θ
δ
β
θE

Innovativeness of incumbents
Share of high type
Relative creative destruction
Innovativeness of Entrants

α
µM
ϑ
σ
T

Managerial Environment
Delegation efficiency
Managerial employment share
Average managerial skill
Immigration data
Pareto shape
Var of Log manager wage
Curvature of managerial efficiency
Managerial compensation
Entrepreneurial time endowment
Share of non-managerial firms

γUS
λ

Innovation step size
Strength of knowledge diffusion

U.S.

India

0.252
0.611
4.157
0.122

0.046
0.140
2.558
0.089

0.479
1.000†
1.429
0.631
0.114

0.233
0.420
1.429∗
0.631∗
0.355

Step-size
Aggregate growth rate of U.S.
1.167
Rel. TFP between 1985 and 2005 n/a

n/a
0.261

Panel B. External Calibration
ζ
ρ

Curvature of the expansion cost function
Discount rate

0.50
0.02

0.50
0.02

Notes: Table reports the parameter values that yield the model moments reported in Table 3. We denote normalized parameters by "† "
and parameters which we do not calibrate to by "∗ ".

lower delegation efficiency α is required to explain the lack in managerial hiring.17
Finally, also note that the U.S. labor force has a comparative advantage in managerial occupations (µ M,US > µ M,I ND ). This is identified from the fact that the share of managers among Indian
immigrants in the U.S. is 12.9% (hence very similar to the overall manager share in the U.S.), but
they are much more likely to work as managers prior to migrating compared to the Indian population. Therefore, the unselected population in India has a comparative disadvantage in managerial
occupations.18

4.2

Targeted Moments

In Table 3 we report the targeted moments – for the model and the data. We start with the U.S.
calibration. As seen in the first two columns of Table 3, the model is able to rationalize most
empirical moments. In particular, it matches the observed life cycle, i.e., average employment for
21 to 25 year-old firms (relative to 1 to 5 year-old firms), the differences in exit rates, whereby small
17 Another

way to see this is the following: Suppose we kept the main parameters of the delegation margin, α and µ M , at
the U.S. level, but re-calibrated the remaining parameters of the model to match all the Indian moments in Table 3 except
the managerial employment share and relative employment patterns of Indian immigrants. While the model is again able
to match the firm-level data moments equally well, the resulting equilibrium share of outside managers is 13.1%, which
is way above the Indian level and even higher than the U.S. level. Hence the model requires a low delegation efficiency
α I ND < αUS to explain the lack of managerial hiring in India.
18 Recall that the equilibrium allocations only depend on µ × α. This product is directly identified from the remaining
M
set of moments discussed in Table 2. The additional information from the migration data is only required to distinguish
the supply from the demand for managerial services.

22

Table 3: Moments for the U.S. and India
U.S.
Data

India
Model

Data

Model

Firm-Dynamic Moments
Employment share of 21-25-year-old firms (%)
8.10
Relative exit rate of small 21-25-year-old firms
1.55
Mean employment of 21-25-year-old firms
2.55
Entry rate (%)
7.35

6.50
1.55
2.55
7.35

7.70
1.10
1.11
5.60

6.32
1.10
1.11
5.60

Managerial Moments
Share of managers in workforce (%)
12.4
Share of manager compensation (%)
51.0
Employment share of no-manager firms (%)
5.00
Relative managerial share of Indian migrants
n/a
Share of entrepreneurial profit (%)
21.0
Variance of log manager earnings
0.49

12.4
54.7
0.00
n/a
21.1
0.49

1.70
n/a
77.5
2.11
48.3
n/a

1.70
n/a
78.6
2.11
48.3
n/a

Aggregate growth moments
BGP growth rate for the U.S. (%)
2.00
Time series of relative TFP in India (1985 - 2005)
n/a

2.00
n/a

n/a
n/a
See Figure 5

Notes: Table reports both the data moments and the corresponding moments in the model for the U.S. and India. See Section B.1 in the
Appendix for details. "n/a" implies that the moment is not targeted in the calibration for the corresponding country

young firms are around 1.5 times as likely to exit as small old firms,19 and the aggregate share
of managerial workers reported in Table 1. The model underestimates the aggregate employment
share of old firms, as well as the share of firms without any outside managers.20
This is similar for the calibration to the Indian economy. In contrast to the U.S. case, we do
not explicitly target the share of managerial compensation, as the Indian data for informal firms
in the NSS does not provide information on managerial compensation. Hence, we keep σ constant
at its respective U.S. value.21 We also keep the dispersion of managerial ability ϑ constant across
countries. We do so mainly to keep µ I ND and µUS as only difference in managerial skill supplies
across countries. Note that this restriction is not very important as the cross-sectional dispersion in
managerial wages is very similar across the two countries (0.49 in the U.S. vs. 0.45 in India). All
remaining parameters are re-calibrated. The model is again able to match the data well. It replicates the essentially flat life-cycle of Indian establishments, the low share of aggregate managerial
19 In

particular, while young establishments (i.e., establishments of age 1-5) with 1-4 employees have an exit rate of 21%
per year, 21-25 year old establishments of an equal size have an exit rate of only 14%.
20 One reason why the model predicts slightly too few old firms is that in our model growth is only driven by the
extensive margin of adding products. Hence, the process of growth and the resulting exit hazard are tightly linked. If we
allowed for growth on the intensive margin (e.g., through quality innovations within existing product lines as in Akcigit
and Kerr, 2017, or Garcia-Macia et al., 2015), we could break this link. As for the share of firms without any managerial
personnel, our calibration implies that the delegation cutoff in the U.S., n∗ , is smaller than unity.
21 The model implies this moment to be 5.5% for India. To get a sense of whether this is the right order of magnitude,
note that it is arguably the firms in the ASI that mostly hire managerial personnel. For these firms, managerial compensation amounts to 18% of the aggregate profits. As the firms in the ASI account for roughly 25% of employment, the
implied moment in India would be about 18% × 25% = 4.5% if the aggregate profits and employment were in the same
proportion in the ASI and the NSS.

23

employment, and the fact that, in contrast to the U.S., young establishments exit almost at the same
rate as old establishments.22 As is the case for the U.S. calibration, the model underestimates the
share of old firms in the economy.23 Also note that firms in India have a much higher share of
entrepreneurial profits. This is due to the fact that most firms in India are small so that most of their
sales are attributed as entrepreneurial compensation for the provision of the fixed factor T.

4.3

Non-targeted Moments

We now show that our model also performs well in matching a variety moments, which we did not
explicitly target in our calibration. In Section 4.3.1 we focus on the process of firm selection, i.e. the
extent to which small firms are able to survive. In Section 4.3.2 we explicitly compare our model
to the observed distribution of product lines at the firm-level. Most importantly, in Section 4.3.3,
we show that our model can quantitatively replicate the findings of the management experiment
by Bloom et al. (2013). Finally, in Section 4.3.4, we will provide some qualitative correlations on
delegation decision of Indian firms and compare them to the model’s predictions.
4.3.1

Survival Hazards

In Figure 6 we compare our model to two aspects of the degree of selection. In Panel A we depict
the survival rate, i.e. the size of a given age cohort relative to the entering cohort. The rate of firm
survival is reasonably similar in the U.S. and India – both in the data and in the model.24 In Panel
B we show the share of small firms by age (relative to their share among young firms). While the
share of small firms in the U.S. declines to 40% by the age of 25, the vast majority of old firms in
India still only produces a single variety. Our model, again replicates these patterns reasonably
well.
4.3.2

The Product Line Distribution

In our model, a firm is a collection of product lines. Our calibration focuses only on employment
data but does not use direct data at the product level. Both the U.S. and the Indian data, however,
contain information on the number of 5-digit product codes in which individual firms are operating.25 In Figure 7 we plot the distribution of products in the data and the model. Our model
matches this aspect of the data remarkably well, despite the fact that this moment is not targeted.
In particular, the vast number of Indian firms indeed only produce a single product.
22 This

result is consistent with the one reported in Hsieh and Klenow (2014, Figure 2).
first glance it might be surprising that old firms, i.e., firms of ages 21-25, have roughly the same aggregate
employment share in the U.S. and India. The reason is that the aggregate employment share of very old firms is much
higher in the U.S. In the U.S. (India) the share of firms older than 25 years is 55% (20%). See Sections OA-2.1 and OA-2.2
in the Online Appendix for details.
24 As for the category of 26+ firms: Note that this is the accumulated stock of surviving firms, who are older than 26
years. Hence, even though the U.S. exit rates are only slightly lower than the one in India, the small differences in the
flow of exit add up to a sizable difference in the stock of old firms. See also Figure 2 and 3 in Hsieh and Klenow (2014),
who also show that exit rates are only slightly lower in the U.S. but that the aggregate employment share of old firms is
vastly larger in the U.S.
25 The data for the U.S. firms come from Acemoglu et al. (2017)
23 At

24

Figure 6: Firm Selection in the U.S. and India

Number of Firms

1.4
1.2

Panel A: The Survival of a Cohort

Panel B: The Share of Small Firms By Age

US - Data
US - Model
India - Data
India - Model

1

Share of Small Firms

1.6

1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.8

0.6

India - Data
India - Model
US - Data
US - Model

0.4

0.2
0

0.2
0-5

6-10

11-15

16-20

21-25

26+

0-5

6-10

11-15

Age

16-20

21-25

26+

Age

Notes: Panel A depicts the share of firms by age relative to the share of firms in the youngest age category. Panel B shows the share of
small firms by age. We show the data in solid lines and the model in dashed lines.

Figure 7: The Product Line Distribution
1
India - Data
India - Model
US - Data
US - Model

Share of Firms

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10+

Number of Product Lines
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of the number of products by firm in the data (dashed line) and the model (solid line).

4.3.3

“Management Does Matter”: Replicating the Experiment of Bloom et al. (2013)

Perhaps the most important out-of-sample test for our model focuses on the delegation aspect of
our model. Because we are interested in quantifying the aggregate effects of changes in delegation efficiency, we want to ensure that our model is quantitatively consistent with well-identified
microeconomic evidence on the effects of delegation efficiency. In this section, we provide such an
exercise, which is one-of-its kind and explicitly connects the micro evidence in the literature to a
macro framework.
In Bloom et al. (2013), the authors provided free consulting on management practices to a set of
randomly chosen textile establishments in India and compared their performance to a set of control
establishments. In order to compare our model’s implication for the effect of management practices
25

Figure 8: Simulated Partial Equilibrium Effect of Delegation Efficiency on Firm Output

1.1

Before
Treatment

1.1

After
Treatment

Output

1.05

1.05

5-95% C.I.

1

1

5-95% C.I.
0.95

0.9
-20

0.95

0.9
0

20

40

60

80

100

Weeks
Treated

Non-treated

Notes: This figure depicts the dynamics of output of treated firms (i.e. firms with α = αUS ) and non-treated firms (i.e. firms with
α = α I ND ). We normalize output to 1 for every firm at the beginning of the period. See text details. 5-95% confidence intervals are
constructed based on bootstrapping the sample of firms 250 times.

on firms’ outcomes with their results, we run a similar exercise in our model. In particular, we take
50 firms from our benchmark Indian economy, which have a similar employment level as the firms
used in Bloom et al. (2013) (i.e. are in the top 1% of the firm-size distribution), and increase their
delegation efficiency α to the level calibrated for the U.S.26 Importantly, while increasing delegation
efficiency, we keep all general equilibrium variables – such as managerial wages, ω M , and the rate of
creative destruction, τH – at their Indian benchmark values. In other words, we implement a partial
equilibrium analysis to be consistent with the Bloom et al. (2013) experiment.
To measure the size of this treatment effect in our model, we calculate the time-series of output
for the next 100 weeks, after the delegation efficiency is increased for the set of treated firms. In
Figure 8, we present the average output among these treated firms. To see the relative performance
of Indian firms with αUS , we also present the same series for non-treated firms, i.e. firms with
α I ND . The results imply that treated firms reach 15% higher output, on average, compared to nontreated firms at the end of 100 weeks. Moreover, the average effect of the treatment in the first 100
weeks after the implementation is an increase in output by about 5%. This is slightly lower than,
but qualitatively consistent with, the experimental findings in Bloom et al. (2013), who estimate an
increase in production of 9.4% (see Table II in Bloom et al., 2013).
26 This

approach is motivated by the fact that management practices introduced in the randomized experiment are
widely used in the U.S. and many developed economies.

26

4.3.4

Qualitative Predictions on Delegation and the Indian Micro Data

Finally, we can compare the qualitative predictions of our theory to various salient correlations in
the Indian micro data.27 Our theory implies that firms’ managerial hiring decision is given by [see
(10)]:
mj = 0

if

n < n∗ (α) ≡ T

 ω  1−1 σ
M

σα

.

Hence, firms are more likely to delegate if (i) firm size n increases, (ii) the delegation environment
α improves, and (iii) owner’s inelastically provided managerial human capital T is smaller.
To take this prediction to the data, we follow Bloom et al. (2013, p. 4), who argue that for Indian
textile firms “managerial time was constrained by the number of male family members. Non-family
members were not trusted by firm owners with any decision-making power, and as a result firms did
not expand beyond the size that could be managed by close (almost always male) family members.”
Hence, we take the size of the entrepreneurs’ family as a proxy for T 28 and use regional variation in
trust within India as inducing variation in α. The latter is calculated from the World Value Survey
as the share of people providing the answer “Most people can be trusted” within the Indian state
where the firm is located. This is the most common measure of trust used in the literature (see for
instance, Bloom et al. (2012) and La Porta et al. (1997)).
More specifically, we regress firms’ managerial hiring decision on firm size, household size and
regional trust (in 22 Indian states).29 We always control for the market of a firm, i.e., whether or not
the firm is urban or rural, firm age, state-level GDP per capita, and 2-digit sector fixed effects. Due
to space constraints, below we provide only the estimated equation; the full analysis can be found
in Appendix B.4. We find that:
[Manager=0/1] = 0.039 × Firm_Size −0.003 × Family_Size +0.013 × Trust,
Firm_Size
= (0.003)∗∗∗ ×Family_S−(0.001)∗∗ ×Family_Size (0.006)∗∗∗ ×Family_Size
where “Manager" is an indicator variable whether the firm hires a manager and “Firm_Size” and
“Family_Size” are the logarithms of the number of employees and household members, respectively.
The results show that firm size and regional trust correlate positively, whereas family size correlates
negatively with the probability of hiring an outside manager. These findings are, qualitatively, in
line with the theoretical predictions of the model.30
Our model also has implications for the relationship between family size and firm size, which
was emphasized in the quotation by Bloom et al. (2013) above. In our model, without delegation,
firm owners run into a span-of-control problem as managerial resources within the family, T, are the
constraining factor. This constraint, however, is less important, the higher the delegation efficiency α.
Hence, while family size should be a predictor of firm-size, the effect should be particularly strong
in regions where trust, and hence the possibility of delegation, is less developed. We can identify
27 See

Section B.4 for the details of the empirical analysis and robustness.
data does not have information on either age or sex of the entrepreneur’s children.
29 In Appendix B.4, we provide an explicit derivation of the regression equation based on the theory.
30 These effects are also economically large. A one standard deviation increase in firm size is associated with an increase
in the probability of managerial hiring by 110% relative its sample mean. Likewise, adding one more person to a singleperson household is associated with a decrease in the managerial hiring by 13% and moving from the lowest trust region
to highest trust region in India is associated with an increase in managerial hiring by 37% relative to the sample mean.
28 Our

27

this prediction of our theory from the interaction between trust and family size in the data. This also
allows us to include a full set of state-fixed effects in the regression to control for all characteristics
(including the level of trust), which are constant within Indian states.31 We find that:
Firm_Size = 0.812 × Family_Size − 1.329 × [Family_Size × Trust].
Firm_Size =(0.278)∗∗∗ ×Family_Size− (0.758)∗ ×Family_Size × Trust[]
This regression highlights two key empirical findings. First, in line with Bloom et al. (2013), we find
a strong positive correlation between family size and firm size. Secondly, the link between family
size and firm size is much stronger in low-trust regions. Through the lens of our model, this occurs
due to the imperfections in delegation in those regions.32

4.4

Selection and Creative Destruction in India and the U.S.

Our theory stresses that the extent of creative destruction is a key determinant of long-run productivity differences. Our calibration indeed implies that the degree of creative destruction in the U.S.
is almost twice as large as in India. This is seen the first row in Table 4, where we report various
properties of the stationary distribution in the U.S. and India.
Our model infers the extent of creative destruction only from firm-level moments, i.e. the extent
of life-cycle growth, entry and exit rates, and the employment share of old firms. At first glance
it seems surprising that we infer large differences in creative destruction despite the fact that both
aggregate entry and exit rates and firms’ survival probability by age are quite similar (see Figure
4.3.1). The key to reconcile these facts is differences in the distribution of firm size. Recall that the
number of exiting firms is the product of the mass of firms operating in a single market, and the rate
of creative destruction. Given the large share of small firms in India, the fact that exit rates are quite
similar despite the fact that many firms in India are close to the exit threshold, implies that creative
destruction in India has to be substantially smaller. Conversely, most creative destruction in the U.S.
takes place in infra-marginal markets, where firms lose market share without exiting.
Table 4: Creative Destruction and Selection in India and the U.S.

Rate of creative destruction, τ
Share of high-type firms upon entry (δ)
Long-run share of high-type firms
Long-run employment share of high-type firms
Long-run share of high-type firms among firms of age 21-25

India
U.S.
0.055
0.130
Equilibrium Selection
0.140
0.611
0.356
0.944
0.445
0.981
0.340
0.999

Notes: The table contains various equilibrium objects from the stationary distribution of the calibrated model.

The models are

parametrized according to Table 2.

31 As

before, we also control for location of the firm (rural vs. urban), firm age and 2-digit sector fixed effects.
a 1% increase in family size is associated with a 0.34% increase in firm size in a region with an average
level of trust. The same elasticity increases to 0.66% when we move to the lowest-trust region.
32 Quantitatively,

28

In the remaining rows of Table 4, we report some properties of the degree of firm selection. In the
stationary distribution in the U.S., almost 95% of firms are high-type firms (compared to 61% at the
time of entry) and they have a combined employment share of 98%, as they are bigger on average.
In India, even in the long-run, high-type firms account for only 36% of firms, and 45% of aggregate
employment. This slower weeding-out process of low-type firms in India is also highlighted by the
fact that even among old firms, i.e. firms of age 21-25, two thirds are subsistence entrepreneurs.
This is in stark contrast to the U.S., where the population of old firms is only comprised of high
types.
In Figure 9 we display the strength of this "shake-out" process in more detail. In Panel A we
display the share of high-type firms within a cohort at different ages. Not only is the share of hightype firms in the U.S. significantly greater among the entering cohort, they also grow much faster,
creating a much stronger selection force. This selection process is dampened in India: Even for
30-year-old plants, more than half of them are low-type firms. Importantly, this lack of selection
in India is not only due to there only being very few high-type firms to begin with. To see that,
in Panel B we simulate a counterfactual cohort of U.S. (Indian) firms, which starts with the initial
type distribution of India (U.S.), i.e., where the initial share of high-type firms was α I ND (αUS ). It
is clearly seen that the differences in growth incentives of existing high-type firms in the U.S. and
India are a key aspect of the selection dynamics: By the age of 20, this counterfactual cohort in
the U.S. would again be populated by only high-type firms, despite the high share of subsistence
entrepreneurs at the time of entry. Conversely, even if a cohort in the Indian economy were to start
with αUS high-type firms, the process of selection would be very slow, and a substantial share of
stagnant producers would be able to survive.
Figure 9: Endogenous Selection
Panel A: Selection in the U.S. and India

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

US
India

0

5

10

15

20

25

Panel B: Counterfactual Selection

1

Share of High-Type Firms

Share of High-Type Firms

1

30

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

US w/ /IND
India w/ /US

0

Age

5

10

15

20

25

30

Age

Notes: Panel A shows the share of high-type firms by age both for the India calibration (red line) and for the U.S. calibration (black line). Panel B shows the counterfactual share of high-type firms by age if the initial share of high-type firms
in a cohort in the U.S. (India) was given by its Indian (U.S.) counterpart α I ND (αUS ). For comparison we also display the
calibrated share of high-type firms contained in Panel A in dashed lines. All calibrated parameters are taken from Table 2.

29

5

Management and Firm Dynamics

To what extent are differences in the delegation efficiency α responsible for the observed differences
in firm-dynamics and aggregate economic performance between the U.S. and India? In the following
sections we are going to answer these questions using our calibrated model. Specifically, we study a
counterfactual Indian economy where we increase the efficiency of delegation from α I ND to αUS . In
Section 4.3.3 we showed that the partial equilibrium effects of this counterfactual are quantitatively
consistent with the experimental findings in Bloom et al. (2013). We are now going to assess the full
general equilibrium effects of such a policy. In this section we quantify the relationship between
firm-level outcomes and the efficiency of delegation. In Section 6 we then turn to the aggregate
effects and study the link between delegation efficiency and aggregate growth, long-run income,
and productivity differences.
Table 5: Increasing the Delegation Efficiency in India

Expansion rate x (n; α)
Entry intensity z(α)
Creative destruction τ

Average
+16.02%

Average firm size
Share of high type firms
Empl. share of small firms

Avg employment
Share of small firms

<=5
1.05%
-0.07%

Panel A: Equilibrium outcomes
n=1
n=2
n=3
n=4
+11.66%
+15.64%
+17.87%
+19.21%
+2.83%
+4.12%
Panel B: Implications for firm dynamics
+1.47%
+1.61%
−1.31%
Effects by age
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
1.11%
1.22%
1.41%
1.67%
-0.24%
-0.46%
-0.75%
-1.12%

n=5
+20.06%

+26
2.84%
-3.36%

Notes: The table reports the changes in various equilibrium outcomes after increasing the delegation efficiency in India from α I ND to
αUS . By "small firms" we refer to firms with a single product.

The firm-level implications of an increase in delegation efficiency for the Indian economy are
summarized in Table 5. In Panel A, we focus on the changes in firm expansion, entry, and creative destruction. We see that firms’ innovation incentives are much more responsive than the entry
margin. While incumbent firms’ expansion rates increase by 16% on average, the entry intensity
increases by less than 3%. These differences are due to the fact that delegation efficiency is complementary with firm-size and therefore not very important for subsistence firms, which never grow
large.33 This complementarity also implies that the change in firm expansion is increasing in firm
size. At the aggregate level, the change in creative destruction is much closer to the change in the
entry intensity. This is due to the fact that in India, the market share of high-type firms is relatively
small, so that the majority of creative destruction is accounted for by new entrants.
way to see this complementarity is via the changes in the value functions. While the value of low types, V L ,
only increases by about 2%, the average increase in high-types’ valuations, V H (n), is 19%, with the biggest increases for
large firms. Because 86% of Indian entrants are low-type firms (as δI ND = 0.14), the change in entry incentives is mostly
governed by the change in V L , which is modest.
33 Another

30

In Panel B we report the implications of these changes in firms’ policies on the resulting process
of firm-dynamics. If Indian firms had access to the delegation efficiency of the U.S., average firm
size would increase by 1.5%, the employment share of high-type would increase by 1.6%, and the
importance of small producers would decline by 1.3%. We further report the effects of delegation
efficiency on firm size and the share of small producers for different age bins. Focusing first on
employment, we see that the effect of delegation efficiency on average firm size mirrors the patterns
of firms’ expansion incentives and is increasing in age. Hence, better delegation makes firms’ lifecycle steeper as the effects of higher expansion rates accumulate over time. The reason why the effect
on the life-cycle of the average firm seems small compared to the increase in high types’ expansion
rate , x (n; α), is again due to the selection – even among old firms, the majority of firms in India are
low-type firms, which do not show any life-cycle dynamics.

The “Power of Complementarities”
The results in Table 5 are suggestive of important complementarities between the efficiency of delegation and other aspects of the economy. In particular, improvements in the delegation are plausibly
more potent if high-type firms are plentiful, and those firms can expand easily. To see that this intuition is indeed correct, Table 6 is the U.S. analogue of Table 5.34 In contrast to the results for the
Indian economy, we find that a decrease in delegation efficiency in the U.S. would affect firm growth
substantially. In particular, the rate of creative destruction decreases by 26%, and average firm size
declines by 15%.
The reason for these larger effects is that the inherent complementarity between delegation and
firm size implies an important interaction between delegation efficiency and other factors affecting
firm growth. In contrast to the Indian economy, high-type firms are abundant and the cost of
innovation is low in the U.S. Preventing these dynamic entrepreneurs from growing by imposing
the inefficient delegation environment of India is costly in terms of life-cycle growth, and reduces
the aggregate rate of churning substantially. In contrast, in India transformative entrepreneurs are
not only relatively scarce, they also expand less efficiently. While there is a benefit to allowing these
firms to sustain their expansion incentives through better delegation, the aggregate effects are much
smaller.35

6

Management, Aggregate Productivity and Transitional Dynamics

Are the differences in delegation efficiency between the U.S. and India an important driver of the
disparities in aggregate productivity and income per capita between these two economies? In this
section, we answer this question through the lens of our calibrated model.
In our environment, a change in α has both dynamic and static consequences. Because seamless
delegation increases the rate of creative destruction τ, an increase in α will increase the growth rate
34 For

brevity we only report the aggregate outcomes. The results by firm size and firm age are available upon request.
we also want to note that the counterfactual equilibrium managerial shares are quite different. If we endow
the U.S. economy with India’s delegation efficiency α I ND , the implied equilibrium managerial share declines from 12.4%
to 4.9%, which is in the same ballpark of India’s actual share of 1.7%. If, on the other hand, Indian firms could hire
managers at the U.S. level of efficiency αUS , managerial employment would only increase to 4.6%.
35 Relatedly,

31

Table 6: Decreasing the Delegation Efficiency in the U.S.
Panel A: Equilibrium outcomes
Average
Entry
Creative
Expansion rate
intensity
Destruction
-30.2%
-9.7%
-26.2%

Panel B: Implications for firm dynamics
Average
Share of
Empl. Share of
Firm Size
high type firms
small firms
-14.9%
-0.33%
+24.1%

Notes: The table reports the changes in various equilibrium outcomes after decreasing the delegation efficiency in the U.S. from αUS to
α I ND . By "small firms" we refer to firms with a single product.

of Q I ND,t during the transition and will lead to a permanent decline in the level of productivity
differences between the U.S. and India. In particular, (21) implies that the long-run effect of the
delegation environment is simply given by:

d ln

Q I ND
QUS



=

ln γUS τUS
× d ln τI ND .
λ τI ND

(22)

Hence, the increase in creative destruction due to the improvements in delegation efficiency reduces
the long-run level of technological differences between the U.S. and India. In addition, an increase
in delegation efficiency increases the amount of available managerial efficiency units, Mt , and hence
raises income per capita, holding the level of the technology index Qt fixed [see (6)].

To quantify the strength of these forces, we consider an experiment, where in 2010 the delegation
efficiency in India increases unexpectedly and permanently from α I ND to αUS . We then trace out
the dynamic evolution of the Indian economy. Prior to the shock, i.e in 2000, the technological
backwardness allows the Indian economy to catch-up with the technological frontier and grow at
3%, i.e. at a faster rate than the U.S. (which we calibrate to grow at rate 2%). The increase in
delegation efficiency in 2010 increases the rate of creative destruction in India and hence the rate of
productivity growth – on impact, the growth rate increases by about 0.15 percentage points. Over
time, this growth rate differential declines and in the long-run, the growth rate is again equal to the
growth rate of the U.S. so that the relative income difference between the two countries is constant.
The time path of the Indian growth rate is depicted in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Delegation and Growth
0.03

India
India w/ ,US
BGP

0.028

gQ

0.026

0.024

0.022

0.02
2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

2090

Year

Notes: The figure depicts the growth rate of productivity Qt along the transition for baseline and counterfactual Indian economies.
For the counterfactual, we increase the Indian delegation efficiency to the U.S. level in 2010. The change is unexpected and permanent.

32

In Table 7, we summarize the aggregate implications of this shock. In Panel A, we report the implications for the growth rate of the technology index Qt shown in Figure 10. In Panel B we calculate
the cumulative effect of this higher growth rate on the (relative) level of physical productivity Qt .
In 2000, Indian productivity is about 20% of the U.S. productivity. Higher growth in India means
that the Indian economy is converging towards the U.S. economy. Our baseline estimates imply that
the Indian economy reaches the US level of GDP per capita in about 45 years and that the long-run
technological differences between the U.S. and India would be about 45%, reflecting the fact that
there is less creative destruction in India. Improvements in the efficiency of delegation increases
creative destruction and hence reduces these productivity differences. Our estimates imply that this
effect is modest. We find that India would reach the US level of income in 41 instead of 45 years.
In the long-run, India’s relative technology would be about 2.5 percentage points higher. Given the
difference of roughly 50 percentage points in our baseline calibration, we conclude that the delegation environment can account for roughly 5% of the long-run differences in physical productivity
between India and the U.S.
Table 7: The Aggregate Effects of Delegation Efficiency in India
Year:

2000

2010

2020

∞

2030

Panel A: Productivity Growth gQ
Baseline

3.00%

2.87%

2.75%

2.65%

...

2.00%

α = αUS

3.00%

3.01%

2.87%

2.74%

...

2.00%

Panel B: Relative productivity Q I ND /QUS
Baseline

22.6%

24.8%

26.9%

28.8%

...

45.3%

α = αUS

22.6%

24.8%

27.2%

29.5%

...

47.9%

Panel C: Relative income pc y I ND /yUS
Baseline

27.8%

30.6%

33.1%

35.5%

...

55.9%

α = αUS

27.8%

32.8%

35.9%

38.8%

...

62.7%

Notes: The table reports the aggregate implications of an increase in the delegation efficiency in India from α I ND to αUS in the year 2010.
In Panel A we report the rate of growth of the productivity index Qt , in Panel B we report the differences in Qt between the U.S. and
India and in Panel C we report the differences in income per capita between the U.S. and India.

The effect of a more efficient delegation environment on income per capita differences, shown
in Panel C, are larger. In the long-run, an increase in delegation efficiency is predicted to improve
the relative income per capita of India from 56% to around 63%. These higher effects stem from
the static effects of delegation efficiency captured by Mt as a more efficient managerial technology
increases firm-productivity, and therefore income per capita.36 By increasing relative income in

India by 6.8 percentage points, differences in delegation efficiency can plausibly account for 15% of
the long-run income differences between the U.S. and India.
36 Additionally, the increase in α also reduces the number of production workers as individuals sort into managerial
occupations. Quantitatively, the number of production workers declines by about 2.9%.

33

7

Robustness

In this section, we study the robustness of our results, in particular the quantitative importance
of changes in the delegation efficiency α on the process of firm dynamics and macro outcomes
characterized in Sections 5 and 6. We consider the robustness of our results with respect to (i) the
entry elasticity, (ii) the convexity of incumbents’ innovation cost function, (iii) the empirical moment
to measure the share of managerial compensation, (iv) our measure of entrepreneurial profits, (v)
the strength of knowledge diffusion, and (vi) using firm instead of establishment-level moments to
estimate the model. For each specification, we recalibrate both the U.S. and the Indian economy and
redo our analysis. Overall, we find that our main conclusions are fairly robust across these different
specifications. All the results are reported in Table 8. In the table, we report the implied levels of
creative destruction in both countries (columns 1 and 2); and the change in creative destruction,
productivity and income differences, average firm size and the share of small firms for 21 to 25
year-old firms in India due to an increase in delegation efficiency.
Entry: In our benchmark specification, we assume that the entrants use the same form of innovation
technology as incumbent firms, with curvature parameter ζ e = 0.5. In order to assess the importance
of entrants for our results, we recalibrate our model, for both the U.S. and India, while setting ζ e
to alternative values. The higher the value of ζ e , the more responsive are entrants to changes in
the value of entry. Panel B of Table 8 suggests that as the entrants become less responsive, the
effect of improving the delegation environment for India is dampened. Yet, the quantitative change,
compared to the baseline calibration, is modest.
Convexity of incumbents’ innovation cost function: As with our robustness exercise concerning
entrants, we also study how the curvature parameter of the innovation production function for
incumbents, ζ, affects our results. We consider two alternative values for ζ, which are in the ballpark
of the lowest and highest micro estimates for this parameter.37 Panel C of Table 8 shows that our
results are robust to these alternatives.
Managerial Compensation: The elasticity of profits with respect to managerial services, σ, is identified mainly from the share of managerial compensation relative to corporate profits. We calculate
this moment from NIPA between 2000 and 2007 and target the average value for our main analysis.38 However, the precise value depends on the year used in the calculation. In Panel D of Table
8 we show that targeting lower (40%) or higher (60%) shares of managerial compensation yields
quantitatively similar results.
Entrepreneurial Profits

In the data, Indian entrepreneurs have a significantly higher profit share

compared to U.S. entrepreneurs (48% versus 21%). In our quantitative analysis, this difference
manifests itself in a higher level of T in India. To see whether this feature of the data drives our
main results, we recalibrate the model for India by targeting the U.S. value for the entrepreneurial
profit share. As seen from Panel E of Table 8, the resulting impact of the delegation efficiency α
from our counterfactual exercises are slightly higher, but very close to the baseline results.
37 For
38 See

more on this, see Akcigit and Kerr (2017) and Acemoglu et al. (2017)
Section B.1 in the Appendix for detailed information.

34

Table 8: Robustness Results

Low
High

0.130

4.12%

Panel A. Baseline
5.63%

12.30%

1.67%

-1.12%

0.130
0.130

Panel B. Entry elasticity
2.49%
3.42%
9.71%
6.89%
9.33%
16.66%

1.60%
1.78%

-1.10%
-1.15%

0.127
0.134

Panel C. Curvature of innovation function
4.28%
5.90%
13.09%
4.01%
5.41%
11.52%

1.28%
2.03%

-0.80%
-1.48%

0.127
0.131

Panel D. Managerial compensation
4.03%
5.02%
10.90%
4.34%
6.05%
13.20%

1.40%
1.69%

-0.87%
-1.15%

0.130

Panel E. Entrepreneurial profits
6.30%
6.23%
12.74%

2.05%

-1.71%

0.056

0.119

Panel F. Estimation with firm level data
4.12%
5.84%
12.50%

1.57%

-1.09%

0.055
0.055

0.130
0.130

Panel G. Strength of knowledge diffusion
4.12%
7.89%
14.70%
4.12%
3.87%
10.43%

1.67%
1.67%

-1.12%
-1.12%

0.055
0.055

0.056
0.056

0.056
0.056

0.057

Low
High

Q I ND /QUS

Share of
small firms

0.055

Low
High

τI ND

Avg.
firm size

τI ND

Low
High

Change in...
y I ND /yUS

τUS

Notes: Panel A contains our baseline results based on the parameters reported in Table 2. In Panel B we consider two different values
for the elasticity of the entry technology, ζ eL = 0.2 and ζ eH = 0.8. In Panel C we consider two different values for the convexity of the
innovation function, ζ L = 0.4 and ζ H = 0.6. In Panel D we consider different moments for the share of managerial compensation.
Instead of our baseline moment, we target either 40% and 60%. Panel E recalibrate the model for India by targeting the U.S. value for the
entrepreneurial profit share. In Panel F we report the results when we calibrate the model for the U.S. economy to firm-level moments.
In Panel G, we consider two values for λ, which controls the strength of the knowledge diffusion in step size for India, λ L = 0.181 and
λ H = 0.343. These values are chosen such that the speed of convergence (in terms of half-life) is 25% longer (λ L ) and 25% shorter (λ H )
compared to baseline Indian economy.

Firm-Level Analysis: In the main analysis, we have focused solely on establishment-level data.
We did so to ensure comparability between the U.S. and India since we cannot link individual
establishments to specific firms in the Indian data.39 Panel F shows that this choice has no substantial
implications for our conclusions – the counterfactual implications of a change in the delegation
efficiency are quantitatively similar, when we calibrate the U.S. parameters to firm-level moments.40
39 Although

firm-level data is not available for India, with the majority of employment being accounted for by very
small producers, multi-establishment firms are unlikely to be of aggregate importance for India.
40 The model is able to match the firm-level moments quite well. The main difference between establishments and firms
at the horizon of age 21-25 is the life-cycle, the aggregate employment share, and the relative exit rate. The life-cycle is
slightly steeper, the employment share is lower (because very old firms are much bigger than very old establishments),
and the relative exit rate of young firms is higher than that of older establishments, because old firms exit less frequently

35

While the estimated level of creative destruction in the U.S. based on firm-level is slightly lower, the
counterfactual results are essentially unchanged, as the estimate of α based on U.S. firm-level data
is very close to the one based on establishment-level data.
Strength of Knowledge Diffusion: Our benchmark calibration for the strength of the diffusion
parameter λ based on the time series dynamics of TFP differences between India and the U.S. implies
a half-life to converges around 50 years. To study how this particular choice of calibration approach
affects our results, we consider two alternative values for λ which imply the speed of convergence
(in terms of half-life) 25% longer (λ L ) and 25% shorter (λ H ), compared to baseline Indian economy.
Panel F of Table 8 shows that faster (slower) transition speed decreases (increases) the impact of
improved delegation efficiency on productivity and income differences, yet the quantitative results
are in the ballpark of benchmark results.41

8

Conclusion

Many firms in poor countries start small, stay small, but nevertheless survive. This is very different
in rich countries, where firms either exit or expand. In this paper we build a micro-founded model
of firm growth to study why this is the case. The main focus of our analysis is whether cross-country
differences in the efficiency of managerial delegation, as emphasized by a recent empirical literature
(see e.g., Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007, 2010), can quantitatively account for such differences in firm
dynamics. To this end, we construct a general equilibrium growth model, that allows us to connect
managerial delegation, the distribution of firm size, and the degree of creative destruction, i.e., the
speed with which firms lose market share and, eventually, exit.
Our theory has two main components. First of all, our model contains an explicit rationale for
delegation: If the entrepreneur’s own time is a fixed factor, firms need to delegate decision power
to be able to grow large. Secondly, we allow firms to be heterogeneous in their growth potential
whereby stagnant, subsistence firms survive if transformative entrepreneurs do not expand enough
to replace them. Frictions in the delegation environment reduce such incentives to grow and thereby
limit the degree of selection by allowing stagnant producers to survive.
We calibrate the model to the U.S. and Indian data and show that there is a tight relationship
between the general equilibrium theory and the empirical micro moments on firm growth, firm exit,
and managerial employment. In particular, we show that the estimated model generates results that
are very much in line with the well-known field experiment by Bloom et al. (2013).
We draw three main lessons from our quantitative analysis. First, our model implies that the
majority of Indian entrepreneurs are subsistence entrepreneurs, which are not destined to grow. At
the same time, they also do not exit as transformative firms’ growth incentives are also low, which
implies a low level of creative destruction in equilibrium. Our model emphasizes that the existence
of small firms may not be a sign of the frictions these firms face, but rather a symptom that other,
more dynamic firms do not grow sufficiently. Policies targeted at small firms could therefore end
than older establishments. Moreover, the aggregate entry rate is slightly lower at the firm level. In Section OA-2.1 in the
Online Appendix, we provide more details on establishment-firm comparison for the U.S.
41 Note that different values of λ only affects the transition speed. The firm size distribution is not affected.

36

up supporting stagnant, subsistence producers and have negative productivity consequences.
Second we find that differences in the delegation environment have important macroeconomic
implications. In particular, in the current setting, India is expected to reach the current U.S.-level
of income per capita in about 45 years. An improvement in the Indian delegation efficiency to the
U.S.-level could reduce this time by 10%. In addition, our estimates imply that the lower delegation
efficiency in India can plausibly account for 5% of the steady-state productivity and for 15% of the
steady-state income differences between the U.S. and India.
Finally, we find that there are important complementarities between the efficiency of managerial
delegation and other factors affecting firm growth. If U.S. producers were to face the Indian delegation environment, their growth incentives would be much lower. Quantitatively, this would lead to
a 15% decrease in average firm size and and a decline in creative destruction by 25%. Conversely,
the direct effect of increases in delegation efficiency on Indian firms is more limited. This suggests
that for improvements in the efficiency of delegation to have sizable long-run effects in India, other
aspects that affect firm expansion, such as financial frictions or distortionary regulations, also need
to be addressed. Effective growth policies have to consider the fact that even if one of its tires is
fixed, a car cannot run when the rest of the tires remain broken.
An important future step in this research agenda is to study the sources of differences in delegation efficiency α. How could different degrees of financial development, legal systems, or monitoring technologies determine that delegation efficiency? What kind of policies could provide more
effective growth incentives to medium-sized firms, induce more competition, and produce national
champions? These are just some of the many important questions that await further research.

References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, H. Alp, N. Bloom, and W. Kerr: 2017, ‘Innovation, Reallocation and
Growth’. NBER Working Paper 18993.
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, and P. Howitt: 2014, ‘What Do We Learn From Schumpeterian Growth
Theory?’. In: P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf (eds.): Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2. pp.
515–563.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt: 1992, ‘A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction’. Econometrica
60(2), 323–351.
Akcigit, U.: 2017, ‘Economic Growth: The Past, the Present, and the Future’. Journal of Political
Economy 125(6), 1736–1747.
Akcigit, U., H. Alp, and M. Peters: 2016, ‘Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation: Firm Dynamics
in Developing Countries’. NBER Working Paper 21905.
Akcigit, U. and W. Kerr: 2017, ‘Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations’. Journal of Political
Economy. forthcoming.
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, and C. Kinnan: 2015, ‘Do Credit Constraints Limit Entrepreneurship? Heterogeneity in the Returns to Microfinance’. Working Paper.
Bento, P. and D. Restuccia: 2017, ‘Misallocation, Establishment Size, and Productivity’. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. forthcoming.
37

Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar: 2006, ‘The Role of Family in Family Firms’. Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 73–96.
Bloom, N., B. Eifert, T. Heller, E. Jensen, and A. Mahajan: 2009, ‘Contract Enforcement and Firm
Organization: Evidence from the Indian Textile Industry’. Center on Democracy, Development,
and The Rule of Law Working Paper 104.
Bloom, N., B. Eifert, D. McKenzie, A. Mahajan, and J. Roberts: 2013, ‘Does Management Matter:
Evidence from India’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1), 1–51.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen: 2012, ‘The Organization of Firms Across Countries’.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(4), 1663–1705.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen: 2007, ‘Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms
and Countries’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4), 1351–1408.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen: 2010, ‘Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and Countries?’. Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(1), 203–224.
Buera, F., J. Kaboski, and Y. Shin: 2011, ‘Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sectors’. American
Economic Review 101(5), 1964–2002.
Caselli, F. and N. Gennaioli: 2013, ‘Dynastic Management’. Economic Inquiry 51(1), 971–996.
Cole, H. L., J. Greenwood, and J. M. Sanchez: 2016, ‘Why Doesn’t Technology Flow from Rich to
Poor Countries?’. Econometrica 84(4), 1477–1521.
Collard-Wexler, A., J. Asker, and J. De Loecker: 2011, ‘Productivity Volatility and the Misallocation
of Resources in Developing Economies’. NBER Working Paper 17175.
De Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff: 2008, ‘Returns to Capital in Microenterprises: Evidence
from a Field Experiment’. Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 1329–1372.
Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda: 2014, ‘The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job
Creation and Economic Dynamism’. Journal of Economic Perspectives pp. 3–24.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson: 2016, ‘The Slow Growth of New Plants: Learning about
Demand?’. Economica 83(329), 91–129.
Fukuyama, F.: 1996, Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, Vol. 457. Free Press New
York.
Gabaix, X., J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll: 2016, ‘The Dynamics of Inequality’. Econometrica.
forthcoming.
Garcia-Macia, D., C.-T. Hsieh, and P. Klenow: 2015, ‘How Destructive is Innovation?’. Stanford
University mimeo.
Garicano, L. and E. Rossi-Hansberg: 2015, ‘Knowledge-based Hierarchies: Using Organizations to
Understand the Economy’. Annual Review of Economics 7, 1–30.
Gennaioli, N., R. L. Porta, F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer: 2013, ‘Human Capital and Regional
Development’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1), 105–164.
Gopinath, G., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, L. Karabarbounis, and C. Villegas-Sanchez: 2017, ‘Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe’. Quarterly Journal of Economics. Forthcoming.

38

Gourio, F. and L. Rudanko: 2014, ‘Customer Capital’. Review of Economic Studies 81(3), 1102–1136.
Grobvosek, J.: 2015, ‘Managerial Delegation, Law Enforcement, and Aggregate Productivity’. Working Paper.
Guner, N., A. Parkhomenko, and G. Ventura: 2015, ‘Managers and Productivity Differences’. Working Paper.
Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu: 2008, ‘Macroeconomic Implications of Size-dependent Policies’.
Review of Economic Dynamics 11(4), 721–744.
Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda: 2013, ‘Who Creates Jobs? Small Versus Large Versus
Young’. Review of Economics and Statistics 128(2), 347–361.
Hendricks, L. and T. Schoellman: 2016, ‘Human Capital and Development Accounting: New Evidence from Wage Gains at Migration’. Working Paper.
Hopenhayn, H.: 2012, ‘On the Measure of Distortions’. Working Paper.
Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, P. Klenow, and C. Jones: 2013, ‘The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic
Growth’.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. Klenow: 2009, ‘Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India’. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), 771–807.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow: 2014, ‘The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico’. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 129(3), 1035–1084.
Hsieh, C.-T. and B. A. Olken: 2014, ‘The Missing "Missing Middle"’. Journal of Economic Perspectives
28(3), 89–108.
Hurst, E. and B. Pugsley: 2012, ‘What Do Small Businesses Do’. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Jones, C.: 2013, ‘Misallocation, Economic Growth and Input-Output Economics’. In: D. Acemoglu,
M. Arrelano, and E. Dekel (eds.): Advances in Econometrics: 10th World Congress, Vol. 2. Cambridge
University Press.
Klette, T. J. and S. Kortum: 2004, ‘Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation’. Journal of Political
Economy 112(5), 986–1018.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny: 1997, ‘Trust in Large Organizations’.
American Economic Review 87(2), 333–38.
La Porta, R. and A. Shleifer: 2008, ‘The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development’. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity pp. 123–135.
La Porta, R. and A. Shleifer: 2014, ‘Informality and Development’. Journal of Economic Perspectives
pp. 109–126.
Laeven, L. and C. Woodruff: 2007, ‘The Quality of the Legal System, Firm Ownership, and Firm
Size’. Review of Economics and Statistics 89(4), 601–614.
Lentz, R. and D. T. Mortensen: 2005, ‘Productivity Growth and Worker Reallocation’. International
Economic Review 46(3), 731–751.
Lentz, R. and D. T. Mortensen: 2008, ‘An Empirical Model of Growth through Product Innovation’.
Econometrica 76(6), 1317–1373.
39

Lentz, R. and D. T. Mortensen: 2016, ‘Optimal Growth Through Product Innovation’. Review of
Economic Dynamics 19, 4–19.
Lucas, R. E.: 1978, ‘On the Size Distribution of Business Firms’. Bell Journal of Economics 9(2), 508–523.
Luttmer, E. G.: 2011, ‘On the Mechanics of Firm Growth’. Review of Economic Studies 78(3), 1042–1068.
Midrigan, V. and D. Y. Xu: 2014, ‘Finance and Misallocation: Evidence From Plant-Level Data’.
American Economic Review 104(2), 422–458.
Moll, B.: 2014, ‘Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo Capital
Misallocation?’. American Economic Review 104(10), 3186–3221.
Moscarini, G. and F. Postel-Vinay: 2012, ‘The Contribution of Large and Small Employers to Job
Creation in Times of High and Low Unemployment’. American Economic Review 102(6), 2509–
2539.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson: 2018, ‘Identification in Macroeconomics’. Journal of Economic Perspectives. forthcoming.
Penrose, E. T.: 1959, Theory of the Growth of Firms. New York: J. Wiley & Sons.
Perla, J.: 2016, ‘Product Awareness, Industry Life-Cycles, and Aggregate Profits’. Working Paper.
Peters, M.: 2016, ‘Heterogeneous Mark-Ups, Growth and Endogenous Misallocation’. Working
Paper.
Powell, M.: 2012, ‘Productivity and Credibility in Industry Equilibrium’. Technical report, Working
Paper.
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson: 2008, ‘Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Heterogenous Establishments’. Review of Economic Dynamics 11(4), 707–720.
Roys, N. and A. Seshadri: 2014, ‘Economic Development and Organization of Production’. Working
Paper.
Schoar, A.: 2010, ‘The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship’. In:
Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 10. University of Chicago Press, pp. 57–81.
Stokey, N., R. Lucas, and E. Prescott: 1989, Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ulyssea, G.: 2016, ‘Firms, Informality and Development: Theory and Evidence from Brazil’. Working Paper.

40

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

Appendices
A
A.1

Theoretical Appendix
Firm Size Distribution
j

H denote the share of high-type firms with n products, and F be the number of firms of
Let νn,t
t
type j. Then, firm size distribution of the economy can be represented by the following differential
equations:
H
∂FtH ν1,t
∂t
H
∂FtH νn,t
∂t
∂FtL
∂t

H
= zt × δ − F H,t ν1,t
τH,t

=

h

(23)

i
H
νnH−1,t (n − 1) xn−1,t + νnH+1,t τH,t (n + 1) − νn,t
n (τH,t + xn,t ) × FtH .

= zt × (1 − δ) − F L,t τL,t .

(24)
(25)

H be a proper distribution, ∞ ν H = 1.
and the requirement that νn,t
∑n=1 n,t
Equation (23) states that the number of one-product high type firms is given by difference between entering high-type firms and exiting high-type firms. Recall that τj,t denotes the rate at which
a firm of type j loses a given product at each point in time. Similarly, equation (24) is an accounting
equation for the net-change in the number of high type firms with n products. Finally, (25) is the
analogue of (23) for low-type firms, which always have a single product.

Proposition 1 Consider a stationary equilibrium and let the flow of entry z and high-type firms’ expansion
rates { xn }∞
n=1 at stationary equilibrium be given. The distribution of high-type firms is
 
x
n−1 τxHn ∏nj=1 τHj
H
 ,
νn =
(26)
xj
∞
s
−
1 τH
s
∑ s =1
xs ∏ j=1 τH
the measure of high- and low-type firms is
"
∞
δz
τ
H
F =
× ∑ H
τH
nx
n
n =1

n

∏



j =1

xj
τH

#
and

FL =

(1 − δ ) z
,
τL

(27)

the aggregate rate of creative destruction is
"

∞

s

τ = z× δ∑∏
s =1 j =1

and the type-specific creative destruction rates are


β−1
τH = τ − z (1 − δ)
β

and



xj
τH



#

+1 ,

τL = βτ − z (1 − δ) ( β − 1) .

(28)

(29)

Proof. By setting the time derivatives to zero in (23), (24) and (25), stationary firm size distribution

41

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

is described by the following equations
F H ν1H τH
νnH n (τH

= z×δ
+ xn ) = νnH−1 (n − 1) xn−1 + νnH+1 τH (n + 1)
F L τL = z × (1 − δ)

(30)
(31)
(32)

Let ν1H and τ be given. First note that consistency requires that the total amount of innovation
has to be equal to the total rate of creative destruction:
τ = τH (1 − F L ) + τL F L
Then, by using (32), (33) and τL = βτH , we get


β−1
and
τH = τ − z (1 − δ)
β

(33)

τL = βτ − z (1 − δ) ( β − 1) .

(34)

Next, by using (30) - (32), we calculate F L , F H , and {νn }∞
n =2 .
Lemma 1 The distribution of high types takes the following form
νnH n =

∏nj=1 x j τH H
ν .
τHn xn 1

(35)

Proof. Substituting (35) in (30) - (32) shows that if νnH satisfies (35), it satisfies all the flow equations
in (30) - (32).
 
xj
n
1 τH
H = νH ∞
This implies that 1 = ∑∞
ν
∑
∏
n =1 n
n =1 n x n
j=1 τH , so that (35) reads
1
n

νnH =

1 ∏ j=1 x j τH
n τHn xn ∑∞
s =1

Then, from (30) and (32), we have
"
∞
δz
1 τH
FH =
× ∑
τH
n xn
n =1

n

∏
j =1



xj
τH

1
1 τH
s xs

∏sj=1

#
and



xj
τH

.

FL =

(1 − δ ) z
.
τL

Hence, we only need to determine τ, which we get from (18) as
"
!
#
∞
∞
n  x 
j
H H
+ 1 z.
τ = ∑ nxn νn F + z = ∑ δ ∏
τH
n =1
n =1
j =1
Together with (34), one can show that (37) has a unique solution for τ.

A.2

Derivation of Equation (19)

We can express ln Qt after an instant ∆t as

ln Qt+∆t =

Z 1
0



τt ∆t ln γt q jt + (1 − τt ∆t) ln q jt dj

= τt ∆t ln (γt ) + ln Qt

42

(36)

(37)

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix
where second and higher order terms in ∆t are omitted. By subtracting ln Qt from both sides,
dividing by ∆t, and taking the limit as ∆t → 0, we get
gt =

A.3

ln Qt+∆t − ln Qt
Q̇t
= lim
= ln (γt ) τt .
Qt
∆t
∆t→0

Transitional Dynamics with Stationary Firm Size Distribution

Proposition 2 Suppose that the firm-size distribution at time t coincides with the stationary distribution
characterized in Proposition 1. Then, for any path of the step size γt , there is an equilibrium path, where (i)
the firm size distribution remains stationary, (ii) all aggregate variables grow at the same rate ln(γt )τBGP ,
where τBGP is the constant rate of creative destruction rate at the stationary equilibrium.
Proof. Note that in the stationary equilibrium of the model described in Online Appendix
OA-1.3, the step size γt does not affect any expressions. Hence, we need to show that there exists an
interest rate path rt such that Ct , Qt and Yt grow at the same rate during the transition. If this was
the case, firms’ innovation and entry choices would not change and the distribution would remain
stationary. It is easy to see that interest rate path
rt = ln(γt )τBGP + ρ
serves the purpose. Recall that consumption decisions of the household yield the usual Euler equation which implies that
rt = gC,t + ρ
so that under the proposed interest rate path, gC,t = ln(γt )τBGP . Moreover gQ,t = ln(γt )τBGP as
shown in Appendix A.2. Lastly we have Yt = Qt Mt L P,t . Since Mt and L P,t are constant at the
proposed equilibrium, this implies that gY,t = gQ,t . Therefore all growing variables grows at the
same rate.

B
B.1

Empirical Appendix
Data

In this section we provide more information about our data sources.
Establishment- and Firm-level Information for the U.S. We use data from the Business Dynamics
Statistics (BDS). BDS is a product of the U.S. Census Bureau. The BDS data are compiled from the
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD is a longitudinal database of business establishments and firms covering the years between 1976 and 2012. We focus on the manufacturing sector
in 2012. The data are publicly available at http://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/.
For our analysis, we utilize the following four moments from the U.S. data: (i) the cross-sectional
relationship between age and size, which we refer to as the life-cycle, (ii) the aggregate employment
share by age, (iii) the exit rate as a function of age conditional on size, and (iv) the rate of entry. For
our main analysis we focus on establishments. The BDS reports both aggregate employment and the
number of establishments by age. This allows us to calculate the first two moments. The BDS also
directly reports both entry and exit rates for each size-age bin. The entry rate at the establishment
level is calculated as the number of new establishments at time t relative to the average number of
establishments in t and t − 1. Similarly, the exit rate at the establishment level is calculated as the
number of exiting establishments in t relative to the average number of establishments in t and t − 1.
The corresponding information is also reported at the firm level. In particular, the BDS reports the
number of exiting firms for different size-age bin. Note that all establishments owned by the firm
43

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

must exit for the firm to be considered an exiting firm. As for firm entry, we treat firms of age 0
as an entering firm. Because a firm’s age is derived from the age of its establishments, this implies
that we treat firms as entering firms only if all their establishments are new. In Section OA-2.1 in
the Online Appendix we provide detailed descriptive statistics about the dynamic process at both
the firm- and establishment-level.
Establishment-Level Information for India As explained in the main body of the text, we construct a representative sample of the Indian manufacturing sector by combining data from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) and the National Sample Survey (NSS), which - every five years has a special module to measure unorganized manufacturing establishments. We use cross-sectional
data from 2010. In contrast to the U.S., both the ASI and NSS are based on establishments and we
cannot link establishments to firms. With the majority of employment being accounted for by very
small producers, multi-establishment firms are unlikely to be important for the aggregate in India.
Firms in the NSS account for 99.2% of all establishments and for 76% of manufacturing employment. In Section OA-2.2 in the Online Appendix we provide more detailed descriptive statistics and
additional results concerning the process of firm dynamics of ASI and NSS establishments.
Data on Managerial Compensation and Profits for the U.S. We identify σ from the share of
managerial compensation in aggregate profits before managerial payments [see equation (38)]. To
estimate this moment, we use two data sources. From NIPA we can retrieve a measure of aggregate
profits in the manufacturing industry. Specifically, we start with aggregate corporate profits, which
are directly measured in NIPA. The BEA’s featured measure of corporate profits -profits from current
production - provides a comprehensive and consistent economic measure of the income earned
by all U.S. corporations. As such, it is unaffected by changes in tax laws, and it is adjusted for
non- and misreported income. We then add to this measure non-farm proprietors’ income in the
manufacturing sector, which provides a comprehensive and consistent economic measure of the
income earned by all U.S. unincorporated non-farm businesses.
To measure managerial wages, we augment the information in NIPA from information in the
census. While NIPA reports compensation for workers, managerial payments are not directly
recorded in NIPA. To calculate the managerial wage bill, we therefore use the U.S. census data.
In the census we have micro data on labor compensation and occupations at the micro level. Hence,
we calculate the share of managerial payments in the total wage bill and apply that share to the aggregate compensation data in NIPA. According to the census, managerial compensation amounts to
roughly 20% of total wages. Recall that the managerial employment share in the U.S. is about 12% so
that managerial wages are relatively high. We then calculate the share of managerial compensation
(CSM) in aggregate profits net of managerial wages as
CSM =

Managerial Compensation
,
Corporate Profits + Nonfarm Proprietor’s Income + Managerial Compensation

where "Managerial Compensation" is simply 20% of the total labor compensation in NIPA. We also
calculate a second measure of CSM, where we do not include “Nonfarm Proprietor’s Income." We
calculate CSM before the Great Recession, because we were concerned about corporate profits being
very low during the financial crisis. CSM is quite volatile. It ranges from 65% in 2001 to 33% in
2006. For our calibration we focus on the average across the years 2000 - 2007, which is 51%. If
we do not include "Nonfarm Proprietor’s Income", the numbers are very similar and only slightly
larger, ranging from 69% in 2001 to 35% in 2006. Hence, it is not essential for us to take "Nonfarm
Proprietor’s Income" into account.

44

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

Data on Managerial Employment and Earning: To measure managerial employment and earnings in the U.S. and India, we employ national Census data from the IPUMS project. We focus
on the most recent year, which is 2010 for the U.S. and 2004 for India. For each country we get a
sample from the census, which has detailed information about personnel characteristics. In particular we observe each respondent’s education, occupation, employment status, sex, and industry of
employment. We focus on male workers in the manufacturing industry working in private-sector
jobs.
The list of occupations according to ISCO is contained in Table 9. To qualify as a manager in the
sense of our theory, two characteristics have to be satisfied. First, the respective individual has to
work as a “Legislator, senior official, and manager.” In order to focus on managers, which are agents
of a firm owner, i.e., outside managers, we also require workers to be wage workers and not working
on their own account or to be unpaid family members. This information is also contained in the
IPUMS census data in the variable “worker type." As we showed in Table 1 above, it is important
to take these differences into account as poor countries have a higher share of people working on
their own account (or as a family member) conditional on being classified as a manager according to
ISCO.
Table 9: List of Occupations according to ISCO
Legislators, senior officials, and managers
Professionals
Technicians and associate professionals
Clerks
Service workers and shop and market sales
Skilled agricultural and fishery workers
Crafts and related trades workers

Plant and machine operators and assemblers
Elementary occupations
Armed forces
Other occupations, unspecified or n.e.c.
Response suppressed
Unknown
NIU (not in universe)

Notes: Table 9 contains the occupational categories available in the IPUMS data. A necessary condition for someone to be classified as an
outside manager is to be assigned the occupational title “Legislators, senior officials, and managers." See the main body of the text for
the additional requirements.

B.2 Identification of the Model
We will now discuss the identification of our model in more detail. In total, there are 11 parameters
to identify42 :
Ω ≡ {α, σ, T, µ M , ϑ, θ, θ E , δ, β, γUS , λ}.
In Section A.1, we discussed how the distribution of firm size is determined given the optimal
∞
innovation and entry rates { xn }∞
n=1 and z. More specifically, { xn }n=1 and z determine the aggregate
innovation rate τ and these three objects together uniquely pin down the joint distribution of age
and size, i.e., the entire process of firm-dynamics. The four parameters that affect this process
directly are (θ, θ E , β, δ). We therefore use the following four firm-level moments to calibrate these
parameters: (i) the life cycle, i.e., the relative size of firms of age 21-25 to firms of age 1-5, (ii) the
share of aggregate employment accounted for by firms of age 21-25, (iii) the relative exit rate of 1-5
year old firms relative firms of age 21-25 conditional on size, and (iv) the entry rate. Intuitively, the
slope of the life-cycle is informative about θ, which determines the level of incumbent’s innovation
effort. As β effectively controls the size of old cohorts (by determining the speed with which hightype firms exit), it is related to the aggregate importance of old cohorts in the economy, i.e., the
relative employment share of old firms. The exit hazard conditional on size is informative about
the degree of selection. If there was no type heterogeneity, the exit rate would only be a function of
42 Recall

that we calibrate ζ and ρ outside of the model.

45

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

size. To the extent that older firms are positively selected, they are less likely to exit conditional on
size. The ex-ante heterogeneity δ determines how strong this effect can be. Finally, the entry rate is
informative about θ E .
We then use several moments related to managerial employment patterns - namely the compensation of managers relative to corporate profits, the entrepreneurial share in total compensation, the
dispersion of managerial wages, and managerial employment shares - to identify σ, T, ϑ, α and µ M .
Consider first σ, the elasticity of profits with respect to managerial services.43 In the model, the total
compensation for managerial personnel relative to aggregate profits (before managerial payments)
is given by
wM H M
Π + wM H M

=

∑∞
n =1 w M × n × m ( n ) × ϕ n
,
σ
∑∞
n =1 e ( n ) Y × n × ϕ n

where ϕn = F H νnH and ϕ1 = F H ν1H + F L is the endogenous firm size distribution. By using m(n) =
 ∗  1− σ


Tα−1 × max 0, (n∗ )−1 − (n)−1 , ω M ≡ wYM = σα nT
and e(n) = T max n−1 , (n∗ )−1 , we get
that


∗ 1−σ max 0, 1 − 1
× n × ϕn
wM H M
∑∞
∗
n =1 ( n )
=σ
.
(38)
 1 1 n σ n
M
∞
Π + wM H
× n × ϕn
∑n=1 max , ∗
n n

Hence, conditional on n∗ and the firm size distribution, (38) only depends on σ.
To determine T, we target the share of income accruing to entrepreneurs after paying for their
factors of production. As entrepreneurs are the residual claimants on firm profits, this moment is
simply given by
Π
Y

∞

=

∑ [e(n)σ − ω M m(n)] × n × ϕn

n =1

∞

= Tσ

∑



n =1



n
oσ
1
1
× n × ϕn ,
max n−1 , (n∗ )−1
− σn∗ max 0, ∗ −
n
n

which is directly informative about T for given n∗ , ϕn , and σ.
The shape parameter of skill distribution ϑ can be identified directly from the dispersion of
managerial earnings. To see this, note that the earnings of a manager with relative skill h is w M h.
The distribution of managerial earning is therefore given by


wP
P w M h > x|h ≥
wM





=

w P /w M
x/w M

ϑ

=

 w ϑ
P

x

,

which
is pareto with shape ϑ and location w P . Defining the relative managerial earnings y ≡

wM h
ln wP , we get P (y ≤ y0 ) = 1 − e−ϑy0 , so that

var (y) = var ln



wM h
wP



= var (ln (w M h)) = ϑ−2 .

Hence, we can calibrate ϑ directly to the variance of log managerial earnings.
Finally, we identify α and µ M by using the share of managers in the whole economy and among
Indian immigrants to the U.S. economy. Let χ denote the equilibrium managerial employment share
43 Although the specific ordering of parameters in the identification discussion is not essential,

46

it facilitates the argument.

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

which is given by
χ = P [h M w M ≥ wP ] =

ϑ −1
ϑ µM

!ϑ

w P /w M

=

ϑ−1
σα
µM
ϑ
ωP



n∗
T

 1− σ ! ϑ

.

Using the expression for total managerial demand, the equilibrium condition for the managerial
labor market can be written as


∞
1
1
1
− ϑ−
µ M α = (χ) ϑ × ∑ T
−
× n × ϕn .
(39)
n∗
n
n≥n∗
Hence, given n∗ , T, ϑ, and ϕn , we can directly determine µ M × α from the data on the share of
managers in the whole population (i.e., χ). To separate the effect of managerial human capital (µ M )
from delegation efficiency (α), we use data on managerial employment pattern of Indian immigrants.
Because our approach uses additional data and because all allocations in the model only depend on
µ M × α, we discuss the details of our strategy in Section B.3. Once we identify µ M , we get α from
(39).
Lastly we use moments regarding aggregate dynamics of the economies to pin down γ and λ. In
particular, we calibrate the step-size for U.S., γUS , to fit the aggregate growth rate as g = ln γUS τ
and U.S. is assumed to be on the balanced growth path. In the case of India, step size is partly
determined by the productivity gap between U.S. and India and λ parametrizes the importance of
this channel on step size [see (20)]. By using (19) and (20), we can write productivity differences as
n
h
io
Żt = Zt ln(γUS τUS,t − τI ND,t ln(γUS ) + λ ln( Zt )
Q

where Zt ≡ Q IUS,t
. Therefore, given γUS and aggregate creative destruction for U.S. and India,
ND,t
dynamics of productivity differences is informative about λ. We therefore calibrate λ to match the
time-series evolution of India’s productivity relative to the U.S.
Table 10: Moment Sensitivity
M1.
M2.
M3.
M4.
M5.
M6.
M7.
M8.
M9.
M10.
M11.

Empl. share of 21-25-year-old firms
Rel. exit rate of small 21-25-year-old firms
Aggregate growth rate
Mean empl. of 21-25-year-old firms
Share of managers in the workforce
Variance of log manager wage
Entry rate
Share of entrepreneurial profit
Share of manager compensation
Employment share of no-manager firms
Rel. manager share of Indian migrants

δ
0.58
-0.80
0.08
-0.40
0.02
0.00
-0.13
0.17
-0.09

β
-0.02
0.01
0.00
-0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.02
0.01

γ
0.00
0.00
6.48
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

θ
α×µ
ϑ
-0.09 0.11 -0.17
-0.24 -0.19 0.21
0.86 0.60 -0.67
0.61 0.26 -0.21
-0.03 1.44 0.82
0.00 0.00 -2.00
0.25 0.55 -0.63
-0.23 0.49 -0.42
0.12 0.22 -0.19
See Table Notes
See Table Notes

θE
0.63
-0.09
0.27
-0.34
0.03
0.00
0.86
0.23
-0.12

T
0.21
-0.04
0.17
-0.01
0.03
0.00
0.19
0.29
-0.15

σ
-0.34
0.49
-1.58
-0.65
-0.53
0.00
-1.47
-1.90
0.90

Notes: The table presents the elasticity for each moment used the internal calibration with respect to the parameters of the model.
In particular, we report percentage change in the moment for a 1% change in the parameter from its benchmark value in the U.S.
calibration, while keeping the rest of the parameters at their benchmark values. We report the average elasticities based on +1% and -1%
changes. Our calibration for the U.S. implies that employment share of no-manager firms (M10) is zero, i.e., all the firms hire managers.
Due to discrete nature of extensive margin of managerial hiring, M10 does not move as a response to a small change in the parameters.
Relative manager share of Indian migrants (M11) is used identify the relative managerial skill supply of workers in India relative to the
U.S.,

µ M,I ND
µ M,US

.

47

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

B.3

Identifying Managerial Skill Supplies µ M

To decompose differences in the managerial environment in India and the U.S. into supply and demand factors, we start out with 4 parameters: (µ M,US , αUS , µ M,I ND , α I ND ). Without loss of generality
we can normalize µ M,US = 1. Since µ M,c × αc is identified from the equilibrium managerial employment shares [see (39)], we require one additional equation to determine the relative managerial
human capital in India, µ M,I ND . To do so, we use data on employment patterns of immigrants from
India to the U.S.
Let χc be the managerial share of the native population in country c. Let χ M
I ND be the managerial
M be the
employment share in the population of Indian migrants in India (i.e., pre-migration). Let χUS
managerial employment share in the population of Indian migrants in the U.S. (i.e., post-migration).
Suppose that the distribution of managerial ability of Indians who migrate to the U.S. is distributed
Pareto with shape ϑ and mean µ̂ M,I ND . If µ̂ M,I ND = µ M,I ND , migration is orthogonal to managerial
skills. If µ̂ M,I ND > µ M,I ND , migrants have, on average, a comparative advantage in managerial work.
Given these assumptions it follows that
χc = ϑ̃ (ω cM )ϑ (µ M,c )ϑ
where ϑ̃ =


ϑ −1 ϑ
ϑ

and

χcM = ϑ̃ (ω cM )ϑ (µ̂ M,c )ϑ

and ω cM is the relative managerial wage
µ M,I ND
=
µ M,US

!1/ϑ
M
χUS
×
χUS
| {z }

uncorrected ratio



wM
wP

χ I ND
χM
{z
| I ND

in country c. Hence,

1/ϑ
.

(40)

}

selection correction term

The first term in (40) compares migrants and U.S. natives in the U.S. economy, i.e., holding α
constant. Differences in managerial employment are therefore interpreted as differences in human
capital. The second term accounts for selection into migration: if immigrants are positively selected
on their managerial skills, i.e., χ M
I ND > χ I ND , the observed differences in outcomes in the U.S.
underestimate the differences in skills in the population.44 The last term in equation (40) corrects for
that potential selection.
M is
Note that we already calibrated ϑ and we already used χ I ND and χUS in our calibration. χUS
directly observable in the U.S. Census, because we see the employment structure among recent Indian immigrants. Finally, χ M
I ND can be estimated from the New Immigration Study, which explicitly
asks immigrants about the occupations prior to migration [see Hendricks and Schoellman (2016)].
The data to quantify (40) is contained in Table 11. Column 1 and 3 report the managerial share
in the U.S. and India, respectively. In column 2 we report the managerial share among Indian
immigrants in the U.S. To ensure that this population is informative about the human capital of
recent Indian migrants, we restrict the sample to migrants that arrived in the U.S. within the last
5 years. The managerial share in this population is given by 12.9%. In the last column we exploit
information from the New Immigration Study to measure the share of migrants that used to work
as managers in India. We find that roughly 6% of them worked as outside manager.
The sample size for estimating the managerial share of migrants in India, χ M
I ND , is only 403, i.e.,
quite small. To judge the robustness of our results, we report the implied differences in delegation quality ααIUS
as a function of the point estimate of χ M
I ND . We treat the other empirical objects
ND
in (40), as fixed as these are precisely estimated. We construct the confidence intervals for ααIUS
ND
using a Bootstrap procedure, where we repeatedly draw samples with replacement from the New
44 We

want to note that this identification relies on there not being excessive frictions to enter managerial positions
(relative to other jobs) for Indians in the U.S. If immigrants from India do not enter managerial occupations because they
are discriminated against, we would conclude that they have relatively little human capital. See also Hsieh et al. (2013)
for an elaboration of this point.

48

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

Table 11: Identification of Managerial Skills: Managerial Employment Shares
U.S.
Sample
Population
Managerial share
Data source

U.S. population
χUS
12.4 %
U.S. Census

India

Male, 20-60 years, employed
Indian migrants Indian population
M
χUS
χ I ND
12.9 %
1.7%
U.S. Census
Indian Census

Indian migrants
χM
I ND
6.1%
New Immigration Study

Notes The table contains estimates for the managerial employment share in the native population of the U.S. (column 1), the population
Indian immigrants in the U.S. (column 2), the native population in India (column 3), and the sample of Indian migrants to the U.S. in
M are calculated from the
India (column 4). For the definition of outsider managers, see Table 1 and the discussion there. χUS and χUS

U.S. census and χ I ND from the Indian census. χ M
I ND is calculated from the data of the New Immigration Study. We refer to Hendricks
and Schoellman (2016) for a detailed description of the data. For the New Immigration Study we use the occupational codes "10 to
430: executive, administrative and managerial" and "500 to 950: management related" as referring to managers. We also insist on the
individual having received a salary (instead of, for example, being self-employed).

Immigration Study data and calculate χ M
I ND . The results of this exercise are contained in Figure 11.
We find that the relative delegation efficiency of the U.S. is between 1.7 and 3.1 of the one in India
with 90% probability. We also want to stress that this uncertainty only affects the decomposition of
the implied counterfactual into the human capital and the delegation efficiency component, as all
allocation only depend on µ M,c αc .
Figure 11: Calibrating

αUS
α I ND

3.5
5-95 Confidence Int.

3
2.5
,US
,IND

2.05

2

1.5
1

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

@M
IN D
Notes: The figure depicts the resulting

αUS
α I ND

as a function of χ M
I ND . Our point estimate for the immigrants’ managerial share in India

(6.1%) yields a relative delegation quality of 2.05. The 5-to-95 confidence interval around that value ranges from about 1.7 to 3.1.

B.4

Reduced-Form Evidence based on Variation across Indian Establishments

In Section 4.3.4, we reported some basic patterns on managerial hiring and firm size from the Indian
micro data and discussed how they relate to our theory. This section describes this analysis in more
detail.
Our empirical investigation mainly focuses on the implications of the two parameters of our
model: (i) entrepreneur’s time endowment T and (ii) delegation efficiency α. In the theory, time
endowment of entrepreneurs T has the interpretation that it can neither be sold on the market,
49

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

nor is there any need to monitor. The NSS data for 1995 contain information on the size of the
family of the establishment’s owner. As long as family members require less monitoring time than
outside managers, we can think of family size as inducing variation in the time endowment T.
As for the delegation efficiency α, we will rely on the variation in trust across 22 Indian states.
The Indian micro data contain information about the state in which the respective establishment is
located. Additionally, we extract information on the general level of trust between people at the
state level from the World Value Surveys. The World Values Survey is a collection of surveys based
on representative samples of individuals and provides an index of trust in different regions of India.
The primary index we use is derived from the answers to the question “Generally speaking, would
you say that most people can be trusted, or that you can not be too careful in dealing with people?”.
Following Bloom et al. (2012) and La Porta et al. (1997), the regional trust index is constructed as the
percentage of people providing the answer "Most people can be trusted" within the state where the
firm is located. This is the most common measure of trust used in the literature. While this variable
is not directly aimed at eliciting the (perceived) quality of the prevailing legal environment, it fits
well into our theoretical framework as long as trust reduces the required time the owner needs to
spend to incentivize outside managers. See also Bloom et al. (2012), who also use this variable to
proxy the efficiency with which decisions can be delegated.
In Table 12, we look at some of the implications of our theory based on the above-mentioned
proxies. We first focus on the extensive margin of managerial hiring. In the model, a firm hires an
outside manager only when its size n is above a certain (endogenous) threshold which we denote
as n∗
 ω  1−1 σ
M
n∗ ≡ T ×
.
σα
For the purpose of the empirical analysis, in addition to firm size n, suppose that firms also differ
in (i) owner’s time endowment T and (ii) delegation efficiency α. Then, the extensive margin of
managerial hiring decision for firm f can be summarized as
h
i


1 Manager f > 0 = 1 n f ≥ n∗f
"

 1 #
ω M 1− σ
= 1 n f ≥ Tf ×
σα f


1
× log α f + const. ≥ 0 ,
= 1 log n f − log T f +
1−σ
where subscript f indicates firm specific values and const. includes all terms that are not firm
specific. This relation can be converted to an estimable one by introducing some stochasticity. In
particular, by introducing a uniformly distributed random variable, which can be considered as
measurement error, to the RHS of the above equation and taking the expectation of both sides, we
get

P Manager f > 0 = β 0 + β 1 log n f − β 2 log T f + β 3 log α f .
(41)
This equation implies that the likelihood of hiring a manager should be increasing in firm size
and delegation efficiency and declining in the owner’s time endowment. To test these predictions
empirically, we estimate the coefficients of (41) by using the proxy variables mentioned above.45
Column 1 of Table 12 summarizes the results. It suggests that the predictions of the model regarding
extensive margin of managerial hiring are in line with the data: empirically large firms and firms
in states with favorable trust measures are more likely to hire outside managers, while firms with
45 Note that (41) implies a linear probability model and its parameters can be estimated using OLS. We also include
additional control variables in the regression. Details are given in the notes under Table 12.

50

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

larger families abstain from hiring outside managerial personnel holding firm size constant.
Table 12: Managerial Hiring, Firms Size and Growth in India

Log Empl
Log HH Size
Trust

Manager > 0
0.039***
(0.003)
-0.003**
(0.001)
0.013**
(0.006)

Log HH Size* Trust
State FE
N
R2

N
178,999
0.04

Dependent Variable
Log empl (Manager > 0)

0.927***
(0.306)
3.264**
(1.628)
-1.694**
(0.818)
N
2,350
0.42

0.812***
(0.278)

-1.329*
(0.758)
Y
2,350
0.50

Log empl

0.224***
(0.033)
0.094
(0.174)
0.036
(0.093)
N
178,999
0.18

0.235***
(0.032)

0.028
(0.090)
Y
178,999
0.20

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. All regressions include 2-digit fixed effects, the age of the
establishment, year dummies, and a dummy variable for the establishment to be in a rural area as control variables. For the regressions
that do not include state-level fixed effects, log GDP per capita at the state level is included as a control variable. "Log Empl" denotes
the (log of) total employment at the establishment. "Log HH size" denotes the (log of) the size of the household of the establishment’s
owner. This variable is only available for the NSS data. “Trust" is the measure of trust at the state level, which we calculate from the
World Value Surveys. The dependent variables are: an indicator of managerial hiring (column 1), log employment conditional on
managerial hiring (columns 2 - 3), log employment (columns 4-5).

These static determinants of managerial hiring have dynamic implications relating to firms’
expansion incentives and hence firm size. In particular, conditional on hiring managers, growth
incentives and hence firm size are increasing in delegation efficiency. Our theory implies that delegation efficiency α and the owner’s time endowment T are substitutes, i.e., we should expect a
tighter link between family size and firm size in low-trust regions. Columns 2 and 3 show that this
is the case. First, similar to Bloom et al. (2013), we also find a tight relationship between firm size
and family size. We interpret this correlation as family members substituting for the scarcity of
available outside managers. Furthermore, the coefficient on the interaction term is negative, which
means that the positive relationship between firm size and family size is weaker in regions where
trust is higher and hence delegation is more efficient.46 In column 3, we replicate these results with
state fixed effects to control for all time-invariant regional characteristics.
In columns 4 and 5, we redo the analysis of columns 2 and 3 for the whole sample of firms,
i.e., we do not condition on delegation. Again we find a positive correlation between the size of the
family and firm size. Note that the effect of trust for the entire sample of firms is much weaker. This
is consistent with our theory, which implies that delegation efficiency only matters for the firms that
actually delegate. For firms without outside managers (i.e., firms with n < n∗ ), growth incentives
are only determined by the owner’s time endowment T.
Finally, we replicated the entire analysis of Table 12, which controlled for 2-digit sector fixed
effects, with 3-sector fixed effects. The results are contained in Table 13. It is seen that results are
similar. The only exception are the results in columns 2 and 3, which are conditioned on managerial
hiring and hence have a small sample size47 . While all point estimates are of the same sign, they are
not significantly different from zero.
46 In

a separate regression, not shown here, we also control for the assets of the firm as both family size and the level of
regional trust could be correlated with the supply of capital to the firm. The results are very similar.
47 Given the small sample size, finer controls for sector fixed effect leave less variation in the data for the relations we
are interested in.

51

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Appendix

Table 13: Managerial Hiring, Firms Size and Growth in India: Robustness

Log Empl
Log HH Size
Trust

Manager > 0
0.040***
(0.003)
-0.004***
(0.001)
0.012*
(0.006)

Log HH Size* Trust
State FE
N
R2

N
178,999
0.05

Dependent Variable
Log empl (Manager > 0)

0.389
(0.248)
0.570
(1.300)
-0.443
(0.658)
N
2,350
0.58

0.394*
(0.231)

-0.359
(0.614)
Y
2,350
0.63

Log empl

0.207***
(0.030)
-0.008
(0.160)
0.062
(0.086)
N
178,999
0.28

0.220***
(0.030)

0.040
(0.084)
Y
178,999
0.30

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. All regressions include 3-digit fixed effects, the age of
the establishment, and a dummy variable for the establishment to be in a rural area as control variables. For the regressions that do not
include state level fixed effects, log GDP per capita at the state-level is included as a control variable. "Log Empl" denotes the (log of)
total employment at the establishment. "Log HH size" denotes the (log of) the size of the household of the establishment’s owner. This
variable is only available for the NSS data. “Trust" is the measure of trust at the state level, which we calculate from the World Value
Surveys. The dependent variables are: an indicator of managerial hiring (column 1), log employment conditional on managerial hiring
(columns 2 - 3), log employment (columns 4-5).

52

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

Online Appendix for
“Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation:
Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries”
by Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, Michael Peters
April 14, 2018
- Not for Publication Unless Requested -

OA-1

Online Appendix - Theory

OA-1.1

Static Equilibrium

Consider the equilibrium in the product market. At each point in time, each product line j is
produced by a single firm with productivity q jt . We normalize the price of aggregate output Y to
1
one. As firms set a price equal to p j f = q−
j f wt we get that
ln(Y ) =

Z 1
0

ln(y j )dj =

which implies w P = Q ≡ exp
that
ln( L P ) =

hR

Z 1
0

Z 1
0

ln( p j y j )dj −

1
ln q j dj
0

i

ln(l j )dj =

Z 1
0

ln( p j )dj = ln(Y ) − ln(w P ) +

M = 1−

0

ln(q j )dj

. The production function [see equation (3)] also implies

Z 1
0

ln(y j )dj −

Z 1
0

ln(q j )dj −

Z 1
0

ln(µ(e j ))dj,

where L P is the aggregate demand for production labor. Then, we get L P =
ω P = wYP and M is defined as
"

Z 1

∞

∑ (e(n))σ × n ×



νnH F H + νnL F L



Y
QM

(OA-1)

=

1 1
M ωP

where

# −1

n =1

where function e(.) is defined in (8), νni and Fi are the size distribution and the measure of i-type
firms, i ∈ { H, L}, respectively (see Proposition 1).

OA-1.2

A Simple Microfoundation for α

In this section, we provide a simple example of how α could depend on various institutional parameters in an economy. Please note that none of the analysis in the main text depends on this
particular example. This example is provided to fix ideas.
Suppose that both managers and entrepreneurs each have one unit of time at their disposal.
While the latter can provide T units of effort during that time interval, managers can provide 1
unit of effort. Suppose that the provision of managerial effort is subject to contractual frictions. For
simplicity, assume that the manager can decide to either provide effort or shirk, in which case he
adds no usable services to the firm. The firms can translate each unit of managerial effort into η
units of managerial services.
While the manager’s effort choice is not contractible, the entrepreneur can monitor the manager
to prevent him from shirking. If the entrepreneur spends s units of her time monitoring the manager,
she will catch a shirking manager with probability s. Whenever the manager shirks and gets caught,
OA-1

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

the entrepreneur can go to court and sue the manager for the managerial wage w. In particular, the
court (rightly) decides in the entrepreneur’s favor with probability κ. Hence one can think of κ as
parameterizing the efficiency of the legal system. Finally, the demand for shirking arises because
shirking carries a private benefit bw, where b < 1.48
It is straightforward to characterize the equilibrium of this simple game. If the entrepreneur
spends s units of her time monitoring the manager, the manager does not shirk if and only if
w ≥ bw + w (1 − κs) ,
where (1 − κs) is the probability that the manager gets paid despite having shirked. Clearly the
owner will never employ a manager without inducing effort. Hence, the owner will spend s = b/κ
units of time monitoring the manager. The overall amount of managerial services in product line j
is therefore given by49


T
b
T
T
e j = − m j s + ηm j =
+ η−
(OA-2)
× m j = + α (κ, η, b) × m j .
n
n
κ
n
Hence, α measures precisely the net increase in managerial services through delegation. In particular, the delegation efficiency is increasing in the firm’s efficiency to employ managers (η ) and in the
state of the contractual environment (κ ), because monitoring and the strength of the legal system
are substitutes. Note also that the whole purpose of delegation is to increase a firm’s managerial
resources, so that firms will never hire a manager if α (κ, η ) ≤ 0. Hence, whenever managers are
sufficiently unproductive or the quality of legal systems is sufficiently low, firms will never want
to hire outside managers because owners need to spend more of their own time to prevent the
opportunistic behavior of managers than they gain in return.

OA-1.3

Stationary Equilibrium of the Model

In this section, we describe the stationary equilibrium of the model in detail. To do so, we proceed
in two steps.
Step 1 Fix s ≡ (n∗ , ω P ) where n∗ and ω P are delegation cut-off and normalized wage rate for
production workers, respectively. By using (28) and (29), we can write the rate of destruction for
high types τH (s) as
("
#

)
∞ h  x (s) 
β−1
j
τH (s) = z(s) ×
δ∑∏
+ 1 − (1 − δ )
,
(OA-3)
τH (s)
β
h =1 j =1
where [ x j (s)]∞
j=1 is the optimal innovation policy by high types implicitly defined in (14) and z ( s ) is
the optimal entry rate. We focus on a solution where x j < τH for all τH . This is a sufficient condition
for a stationary solution.50 We will show below that such a solution exists for all s provided that θ E
is large enough.
Let v H (n) be normalized value function (normalized with Yt ) of a high-type firm depicted in
48 The

necessity for the private benefit being proportional to the wage arises in order to make the contract stationary.
that we do not require that s < T, i.e., we do not require the owner to perform the monitoring himself. We
rather think of managerial efficiency units to be perfect substitutes within the firm, i.e., an owner can hire a manager to
monitor other managers.
50 A necessary condition is that there exists n̂ with x < τ for all j > n̂.
H
j
49 Note

OA-2

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix
(14).51 At BGP where both Ct and Yt grows at the same rate and v̇ H,t = 0, it can be written as


1
− 1ζ
ζ
∗
ρv H (n) = max π̃ (n; n ) − ω p θ nxn + xn n [v H (n + 1) − v H (n)] + τH n [v H (n − 1) − v H (n)] .
xn

52
where we use the fact that w p = Q to substitute Q
Y with ω P and r = ρ + g from household problem.
By rearranging terms and explicitly imposing the restriction x j < τH , we can write v H as



1
 π̃ (n;n∗ ) − ω θ − 1ζ x ζ + x v (n + 1) + τ v (n − 1) 
p
n H
H H
n
n
v H (n) = n × max
.
xn <τH 

ρ + ( xn + τH )n
v (n)

Now consider the function b(n) ≡ Hn , which - by using the above equation - can be written as


x n ( n + 1)
τH (n − 1)
b(n) = max h(n, xn ) +
(OA-4)
b ( n + 1) +
b ( n − 1) ,
xn <τH
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
1
−1
π̃ (n;n∗ )
−ω p θ ζ xnζ
n
ρ+( xn +τH )n

where h(n, xn ) ≡
.
We will show that the right-hand side of (OA-4) satisfies Blackwell’s sufficient conditions for a
contraction. To see this, define the operator T by


x n ( n + 1)
τH (n − 1)
( T f )(n) ≡ max h(n, xn ) +
f ( n + 1) +
f ( n − 1) .
(OA-5)
xn <τH
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
Hence, b can be defined as a fixed point of T, i.e., a function such that ( Tb)(n) = b(n). First,
note that h(n, xn ) is bounded [see (11)] so that T maps the space of continuous bounded functions
into itself (Berge’s Maximum Theorem). Moreover, for any continuous bounded functions f , g with
f (n) ≤ g(n) for all n ∈ Z ++ , we have


x n ( n + 1)
τH (n − 1)
( T f )(n) = max h(n, xn ) +
f ( n + 1) +
f ( n − 1)
xn <τH
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
ρ + ( xn + τH )n


x n ( n + 1)
τH (n − 1)
≤ max h(n, xn ) +
g ( n + 1) +
g ( n − 1)
xn <τH
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
= ( Tg)(n),
so that the monotonicity condition is satisfied. Lastly, for any continuous bounded function f and
a ≥ 0,


τH (n − 1)
x n ( n + 1)
( T [ f + a])(n) = max h(n, xn ) +
[ f ( n + 1) + a ] +
[ f ( n − 1) + a ]
xn <τH
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
ρ + ( xn + τH )n


x n ( n + 1)
τH (n − 1)
≤ max h(n, xn ) +
f ( n + 1) +
f (n − 1) + Ωa
xn <τH
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
ρ + ( xn + τH )n
= ( TF )(n) + Ωa
where
Ω ≡ max

xn <τH

51 We
52 See



( xn + τH )n
xn − τH
+
ρ + ( xn + τH )n ρ + ( xn + τH )n

drop the dependence of the value function on s for notational clarity.
Section OA-1.1 for details.

OA-3



< 1.

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

Hence, the operator T satisfies the discounting condition, so that T is a contraction mapping and
therefore posses a unique fixed point [Stokey et al. (1989)], which is continuous in s and τH . Moreover, the expression inside the max operator in (OA-5) is continuous in xn and strictly concave so
that Berge’s Maximum Theorem implies that the set of maximizers xn∗ is a continuous function of s
and τH . The equilibrium entry rate z is fully determined from v H and v L [see (17)] and hence also a
continuous function of s and τH .53
Hence, equation (OA-3) is continuous in τH . To see that there exists a fixed point for τH , note
that the RHS is bounded away
 from
 zero because z(s) > 0 and that it is bounded from above. To
x (s)

j
h
see that, note that ∑∞
h=1 ∏ j=1 τH (s) is bounded in a stationary equilibrium and that z is bounded
[see (17)]. Hence, there exits a fixed point for τH . Moreover, because z is increasing in θ E for a given
s and τH , (OA-3) implies that for each s there is θ E large enough such that this fixed point satisfies
τH > xn .

Step 2 We can now represent the whole model in terms of labor market clearing conditions. The
Cobb-Douglas final good production function together with the market structure described in Section 2.1 implies that the total number of production workers hired for variety j by a producer, who
is active in n markets, is given by54
l j = [ω P µ(e)]

−1

= ωP−1 × (1 − e(n)σ ).

Using firms’ optimal delegation policy and aggregating over the firm size distribution yields the
aggregate demand for production workers is given by
"
#

σ
∞ 
T
T
H P = 1 − ∑ max
, ∗
× n × ϕn × ωP−1
(OA-6)
n
n
n =1
Similarly, firms’ managerial demand function implies that the aggregate demand for managers
is given by
 1

∞
σ 1− σ σ ∞
T ∞
M
H = ∑ n × m(n) × ϕn =
α 1−σ ∑ nϕn −
ϕn .
(OA-7)
ωM
α n∑
n≥n∗
n≥n∗
≥n∗
Given Step 1, we can calculate the firm size distribution ϕn (s) = νnH (s) F H (s) + νnL (s) F L (s) from
Proposition 1. From (7), (OA-6), and (OA-7), the labor market clearing conditions for managers and
production workers can then be written by
 ϑ  ∗ 1− σ  ϑ −1


ϑ−1
(n ) σα
ϑ
T
1
1
0 =
µM
−
−
nϕn (s)
(OA-8)
∗
ϑ
ϑ−1
α n∑
n
T 1− σ ω P
>n∗ n
"
#

 ϑ  ∗ 1− σ  ϑ

σ
∞ 
T T
ϑ−1
1
(n ) σα
0 = 1−
µM
−
1 − ∑ max
,
nϕn (s) (OA-9)
ϑ
ωP
n n∗
T 1− σ ω P
n =1


where two equations depend only on s ≡ (n∗ , ω P ). Note that ϕn (s) is continuous in z, τH and xn .
Therefore, from Step 1, left-hand-side of both equations are continuous in (n∗ , ω P ). Solution to the
system of equation given by (OA-8) and (OA-9) constitutes an equilibrium for our economy.
53 Recall
54 To

π (1)

that v L (1) = ρ+τL , where τL = β × τH .
see this, note that Y = p j y j = wq jP q j µ(e j )l j and ω P = w P /Y.

OA-4

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

OA-2

Online Appendix - Empirical Analysis

OA-2.1

Firms vs. Establishments in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector

In this section we compare the process of firm-dynamics across U.S. manufacturing firms and establishments. Table OA-1 provides some summary statistics about the size-distribution of firms and
establishments in the U.S. The average manufacturing firm in the U.S. has 51 employees, while the
average establishment only 43. It is also the case that large firms have multiple establishments (firms
with more than 1000 employees have on average 13) so that large firms account for half of total employment. There is a lower concentration at the establishment level in that establishments with more
than 1000 employees account for less than one-fifth of aggregate employment in manufacturing in
the U.S.
Table OA-1: Descriptive Statistics: U.S. Micro Data
Firms
Establishments
Avg.
Agg.
No. of
Exit
No.
Avg.
Agg. Exit
Employment Share Establishments rate
Employment Share rate
1-4
86936
2.30
1.65
1.00
13.22 93038
2.31
1.78 16.50
5-9
48178
6.68
2.66
1.00
3.46 54281
6.73
3.02
4.20
10-19
37942
13.80
4.33
1.01
2.66 45803
14.01
5.30
3.10
32555
30.92
8.31
1.05
2.27 44085
31.90
11.62 2.40
20-49
50-99
13516
67.94
7.58
1.21
2.03 21582
71.54
12.75 1.90
100-249
8914
139.90
10.30
1.61
1.59 16476
155.76
21.20 1.00
250-499
3167
280.96
7.35
2.47
0.92
5444
348.72
15.68 0.50
500-999
1720
503.49
7.15
3.94
0.29
2120
677.19
11.86 0.30
1000+
2423
2531.92
50.67
12.68
0.25
984
2068.2
16.81 0.30
Aggregate 235351
51.44
100
6.53 283813
42.66
100
7.3
Size

No.

Notes: This table contains summary statistics for U.S. manufacturing firms and establishments in 2012. The data are taken from the
BDS.

We now turn to the implied dynamics. Because we focus on cross-sectional data, the information
on firm (establishment) age is crucial for us. For establishments, the definition of age is straightforward. Birth year is defined as the year a establishment first reports positive employment in the
LBD. Establishment age is computed by taking the difference between the current year of operation
and the birth year. Given that the LBD series starts in 1976, the observed age is by construction left
censored at 1975. In contrast, firm age is computed from the age of the establishments belonging to
that particular firm. A firm is assigned an initial age by determining the age of the oldest establishment that belongs to the firm at the time of birth. Firm age accumulates with every additional year
after that. In Figure OA-1 we show the cross-sectional age-size relationship for establishments (left
panel) and firms (right panel) in the U.S.
Not surprisingly, the life-cycle is much steeper for firms, especially for +26-year-old ones, as
firms grow both on the intensive margin at the establishment level and the extensive margin of
adding establishments to their operation.
In Figure OA-2 we show the aggregate employment share of establishments and firms of different ages. As suggested by the life-cycle patterns in Figure OA-1, old firms account for the bulk of
employment in the U.S. However, the relative importance of old establishments/firms is somewhat
less pronounced because of exit, i.e., while the average firm/establishment grows substantially by
age conditional on survival, many firms/establishments have already exited by the time they would
have been 20 years old. Nevertheless, firms (establishments) older than 25 years account for 76%
(53%) of employment in the manufacturing sector.
OA-5

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

Figure OA-1: Life Cycle of Establishments and firms in the U.S.

The Life Cycle in the US (Plants)

The Life Cycle in the US (Firms)

5.0

12.0

4.0

10.0
8.0

3.0

6.0

2.0

4.0

1.0

2.0

0.0
0-5

6-10

11-15

Full Economy

16-20

21-25

26+

0.0
0-5

Manufacturing

6-10

11-15

Full Economy

16-20

21-25

26+

Manufacturing

Notes: The figure contains the cross-sectional age-size relationship for establishments (left panel) and firms (right panel) in the U.S. The
data are taken from the BDS and we focus on the data for 2012. We depict the results for both the manufacturing sector and the entire
economy.

Figure OA-2: The employment share by age of establishments and firms in the U.S.

Aggregate Employment Share (Plants)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0-5

6-10

11-15

Full Economy

16-20

21-25

Aggregate Employment Share (Firms)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0-5

26+

6-10

11-15

Full Economy

Manufacturing

16-20

21-25

26+

Manufacturing

Notes: The figure contains the aggregate employment share of establishments (left panel) and firms (right panel) in the U.S. as a function
of age. The data are taken from the BDS and we focus on the data for 2012. We depict the results for both the manufacturing sector and
the entire economy.

This pattern of exit is depicted in Figure OA-3. There we show annual exit rates for firms and
establishments as a function of age. The declining exit hazard is very much suggestive of a model of
creative destruction, whereby firms and establishments grow as they age (conditional on survival)
and exit rates are lower for bigger firms/establishments.
An important moment for us is the age-specific exit rate conditional on size. It is this moment
that will identify the importance of selection. In a model without heterogeneity, size will be a
sufficient statistic for future performance, so that age should not predict exit conditional on size.
However, if the economy consists of high- and low-type entrepreneurs, old firms are more likely to
be composed of high types conditional on size. Hence, the size-specific exit rate by age is monotone
in the share of high types by age. In Figure OA-4 we report this schedule for both establishments

OA-6

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

Figure OA-3: The Exit Rates of Establishments and Firms in the U.S. by Age

Exit Rates in the US (Firms)

Exit Rates in the US (Plants)

14.0

14.0
12.0

12.0

10.0

10.0

8.0

8.0

6.0

6.0

4.0

4.0

2.0

2.0
0.0

0.0
0-5

6-10

11-15

16-20

Full Economy

21-25

0-5

26+

6-10

11-15

16-20

Full Economy

Manufacturing

21-25

26+

Manufacturing

Notes: The figure contains the exit rates of establishments (left panel) and firms (right panel) in the U.S. as a function of age. The data
are taken from the BDS and we focus on the data for 2012. We depict the results for both the manufacturing sector and the entire economy.

and firms. The data show a large degree of age-dependence (conditional on size). The schedules
for small firms and establishments look almost identical. This is reassuring because small firms are
almost surely single-establishment firms, so that a firm-exit will also be a establishment-exit and
vice versa.
Figure OA-4: Size-dependent exit rates of establishments and firms in the U.S. by age
Exit and Age conditional on size (Firms)
30.0

25.0

25.0

20.0

20.0

Exit Rate

Exit Rate

Exit and Age conditional on size (Plants)
30.0

15.0
10.0

10.0
5.0

5.0
0.0

15.0

1

2

3

4

1 - 4 Employees
10-19 Employees

5

6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 +26

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 +26

5-9 Employees

1 - 4 Employees

5-9 Employees

20-49 Employees

10-19 Employees

20-49 Employees

Notes: The figure contains the conditional exit rates by size of establishments (left panel) and firms (right panel) in the U.S. as a function
of age. The data are taken from the BDS and we focus on the data for 2012. We depict the results for the manufacturing sector.

OA-2.2

Establishments in the Indian Manufacturing Sector

In this section we provide more descriptive evidence about the underlying process of firm dynamics
in the manufacturing sector in India. Table OA-2 contains descriptive statistics for our sample of
Indian manufacturing establishments. For comparison, we organize the data in the same way as
in the left panel of Table OA-1, which contains the results for manufacturing establishments in the
OA-7

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

U.S. It is clearly seen that the establishment-size distribution in India is concentrated on very small
firms. The average establishment has fewer than 3 employees and more than 50% of aggregate employment is concentrated in establishments with at most 4 employees. Such establishments account
for 93% of all establishments in the Indian manufacturing sector. A comparison of establishment
size distribution for the years 1995 and 2010 in Table OA-3 suggests that these patterns are stable
over time.
Table OA-2: Descriptive Statistics: Indian Micro Data
Size
1-4
5-9
10-19
20-49
50-99
100-249
250-499
500-999
1000+
Aggregate

No.
15957296
843091
243868
70834
23242
14898
4701
2283
1232
17161445

Avg. Employment
1.56
6.26
12.98
29.22
69.89
149.31
346.69
683.86
2452.65
2.65

Aggregate Employment Share
54.76
11.61
6.96
4.55
3.57
4.89
3.58
3.43
6.65
100.00

Notes: This table contains summary statistics for establishments in the Indian manufacturing sector in 2010. The data are taken from
the ASI and the NSS. To calculate the number of firms, we use the sampling weights provided in the data.

Table OA-3: Establishment Size Distribution in India

1995
2010

1-4
0.9171
0.9297

5-9
0.0631
0.0491

Firm Size
10-19
20-49
0.0143 0.0035
0.0143 0.0042

50+
0.0020
0.0027

Notes: This table presents the share of establishments for different size bins in India, for the years 1995 and 2010. Size bins are
constructed based on number of employees.

Figure OA-5 reports the aggregate employment share by age for Indian manufacturing establishments and is hence comparable to Figure OA-2 for the U.S.
It is clearly seen that the aggregate importance of old firms is very small in India. While firms,
that are older than 25 years account for 55% of employment in the U.S., the corresponding number
is less than 20% in India. This is a reflection of the shallow life-cycle in India and not of there being
fewer old firms in the Indian economy.

OA-8

Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries: Online Appendix

Figure OA-5: The employment share by age of establishments in India

Aggregate Employment Share (Plants)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0-5

6-10

11-15

16-20

21-25

26+

Manufacturing
Notes: The figure contains the aggregate employment share of manufacturing establishments in India as a function of age. The data are
taken from the ASI and the NSS and we focus on the data for 2010. We combine the two data sets using the sampling weights provided
in the micro data.

OA-9

