                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE CHINA SHOCK:
 LEARNING FROM LABOR MARKET ADJUSTMENT TO LARGE CHANGES IN TRADE

                                        David H. Autor
                                          David Dorn
                                       Gordon H. Hanson

                                       Working Paper 21906
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21906


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2016




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

Â© 2016 by David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including Â© notice, is given to the source.
The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade
David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 21906
January 2016
JEL No. F14,J23,J31

                                              ABSTRACT

Chinaâ€™s emergence as a great economic power has induced an epochal shift in patterns of world trade.
Simultaneously, it has challenged much of the received empirical wisdom about how labor markets
adjust to trade shocks. Alongside the heralded consumer benefits of expanded trade are substantial
adjustment costs and distributional consequences. These impacts are most visible in the local labor
markets in which the industries exposed to foreign competition are concentrated. Adjustment in local
labor markets is remarkably slow, with wages and labor-force participation rates remaining depressed
and unemployment rates remaining elevated for at least a full decade after the China trade shock commences.
Exposed workers experience greater job churning and reduced lifetime income. At the national level,
employment has fallen in U.S. industries more exposed to import competition, as expected, but offsetting
employment gains in other industries have yet to materialize. Better understanding when and where
trade is costly, and how and why it may be beneficial, are key items on the research agenda for trade
and labor economists.


David H. Autor                                       Gordon H. Hanson
Department of Economics, E17-216                     IR/PS 0519
MIT                                                  University of California, San Diego
77 Massachusetts Avenue                              9500 Gilman Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER                                             and NBER
dautor@mit.edu                                       gohanson@ucsd.edu

David Dorn
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schoenberggasse 1
CH-8001 Zurich - Switzerland
david.dorn@econ.uzh.ch
1        Introduction


Mainstream economists have long argued that international trade improves welfare.                       While trade

may redistribute income, theory assures us that under standard conditions the gains to winners

are more than sucient to oset any losses incurred by those suering adverse eects from foreign

competition. Belief in the Pareto-improving nature of trade made economists front-line advocates

for the broad-based liberalization of commerce that was embedded in the General Agreement on

Trade and Taris and other institutions built to manage the global economy after World War II

(Bhagwati, 1989). Paul Krugman states this view vividly in his 1997 Journal of Economic Literature

article, If economists ruled the world, there would be no need for a World Trade Organization. The

economist's case for free trade is essentially a unilateral case: a country serves its own interests by

pursuing free trade regardless of what other countries may do.

        Of course, introductory trade theory also teaches us that international trade is not generally

Pareto improving.          In their undergraduate textbook, Krugman and Obstfeld (2005, p64) write,

Owners of a country's abundant factors gain from trade, but owners of a country's scarce factors

lose... [C]ompared with the rest of the world the United States is abundantly endowed with highly

skilled labor and (...)       low-skilled labor is correspondingly scarce.        This means that international

trade tends to make low-skilled workers in the United States worse onot just temporarily, but

on a sustained basis. For the rst three or four decades of the Bretton Woods era, however, there

was little occasion to scrutinize the benets of trade. Most goods ows were North-Northbetween

nations with relatively similar average incomeswhich helped subdue distributional impacts.

        Views on how trade aects wages and employment turned less sanguine in the 1990s. As wage in-

equality rose, low-skill wages and employment fell, and manufacturing employment contracted in the

U.S., globalization was seen initially as a prime suspect. Yet, after vigorous inquiry, concern about

the labor-market consequences of trade receded. Economists did not nd trade to have had substan-

tial adverse distributional eects in developed economies, either for low-skill workers specically or

for import-competing factors and sectors more generally.
                                                                    1 The broad sentiment that emerged in the

literature was that labor-market developments were primarily attributable to technological changes

that complemented high-skill workers and reduced labor demand in manufacturing. The impact of

international trade on these outcomes seemed to be modest, at best.

        Several pieces of evidence favored these conclusions.          First, the share of U.S. employment in

    1
        For formal surveys of the literature on trade and wages, see Feenstra and Hanson (2003) and Harrison, McLaren,
and McMillan (2011).       In developing economies, the labor-market impacts of globalization have been more diuse
(Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007).




                                                            1
manufacturing had been in decline since the end of World War II, peaking at 39.0% of U.S. nonfarm

employment in January of 1944 and then falling decade over decade to a low of 8.6% in June 2015

(Figure 1).      The disappearance of manufacturing jobs was `nothing new.'                 Second, the steep rise

in wage inequality and fall in real wages of low-education workers in the U.S. and many other

developed countries did not coincide closely with rising trade openness. As noted by Feenstra (1998)

and Leamer (2000), the ratio of merchandise trade to GDP in the developed world rose steeply

during the 1970s but stabilized thereafter, a fact that greatly weakened the case for trade causing

rising wage inequality and falling low-skill wages during the 1980s and early 1990s.

       Third, contrary to the predictions of textbook trade models, manufacturing industries in de-

veloped countries appeared to be substituting towards high-skill workers despite rising skill prices,

suggesting that these industries were experiencing a skill-biased demand shift that emanated log-

ically from the adoption of new technology (Berman, Bound and Machin, 1998). Although trade

in the form of oshoring may produce such demand shifts, its modest scale in the 1980s and early

1990s meant that its estimated impacts were far smaller than those of investments in high-tech

capital and equipment (Feenstra and Hanson, 1999).
                                                                 2 Finally, simple factor content calibration

exerciseswhich rescaled traded-good imports into embodied labor importsfound that rising trade

integration could account for only a small part of the fall in relative wages of low-skill workers in the

U.S. (Borjas, Freeman and Katz, 1997; Krugman, 2000).
                                                                     3 When Richard Freeman asked in 1995 if

U.S. wages were being set in Beijing, his answer was an emphatic no.

       The trade and wages debate reached something of a coda around the year 2000. A reasonable

summary of the contemporaneous consensus was that:


   1. Trade had not in recent decades been a major contributor to declining manufacturing employ-

         ment or rising wage inequality in developed countries;


   2. Workers employed in regions specializing in import-competing sectors could readily reallocate

         to other regions if displaced by trade; and


   3. Due to the 'law of one price' for skill, any labor market impacts of trade would be felt by

         low-skill workers generally, not by trade-exposed workers specically.

   2
       A further development, seen initially as damning for trade-based explanations of changes in labor-market out-
comes, was the simultaneous rise in wage inequality in developed and developing economies (Berman, Bound, and
Machin, 1998). We now know that either in the presence of oshoring (Feenstra and Hanson, 1997; Grossman and
Rossi-Hansberg, 2008) or of heterogeneous rms and skill-technology complementarity (Burstein and Vogel, 2012;
Sampson, 2014), greater economic integration between countries may cause wage inequality to rise worldwide.
   3
       The usefulness of factor-content calculations for predicting labor-market outcomes was the subject of a spirited
debate in the 1990s (Krugman, 2000; Leamer, 2000). This debate has since been largely resolved by the discovery
that a tight (though structurally model-specic) relationship between the factor content of trade and relative factor
prices holds for a wide class of trade theories (Burstein and Vogel, 2011).



                                                            2
A corollary of these observations is that trade should aect prevailing wage levels nationally but not

employment rates locally or regionally. Moreover, given the presumed uidity of U.S. labor markets,

even in the short- or medium-run the aggregate gains from trade in the U.S. should be positive.
                                                                                                                                                    4



                                  Figure 1: Manufacturing Share of U.S. Nonfarm Employment, 1939 - 2015
                                   0.40
             0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20 0.24 0.28 0.32 0.36
                Manufacturing Share of Non-Farm Employment
                                   0.04




                                                             1939 1944 1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009 2014

Source: FRED Economic Data https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/graph/?g=1Gor

      Just as the economics profession was reaching consensus on the consequences of trade for wages

and employment, an epochal shift in patterns of world trade was gaining momentum. China, for

centuries an economic laggard, was nally emerging as a great power, and toppling established

patterns of trade accordingly.                                                The advance of China, as we argue below, has also toppled much

of the received empirical wisdom about the impact of trade on labor markets. The consensus that

trade could be strongly redistributive in theory but was relatively benign in practice has not stood

up well to these new developments. Nor has the belief that trade adjustment is relatively frictionless,

with impacts that diuse over large skill categories rather than being concentrated among groups

of workers in trade-competing industries or locations. In quantifying these impacts and adjustment

frictions, recent evidence further suggests that the short and medium-run adjustment costs demanded

  4
      While these views may appear as a straw man, they are not.                                            On point (1), see Baily and Bosworth (2014).
On points (2) and (3), see Edwards and Lawrence (2010). And on the broader implications of these points, see the
President's Council of Economic Advisers,                                          Economic Report of the President, 2015, chapter 7.


                                                                                                 3
by large trade shocks are sizable entries in the accounting of gains from trade.

    China's rise has provided a rare opportunity for studying the impact of a large trade shock

on labor markets in developed economies. An emerging literature on this topic oers a wealth of

evidence and surprises that should catalyze and discipline research for many years to come.        We

believe that this evidence calls into question the consensus of the early 2000s, and makes clear that,

after the early Bretton Woods era aberration, the distributional consequences of trade are alive and

well. While these results do not at all suggest that international trade is in the aggregate harmful

to nationsindeed, China's unprecedented rise from widespread poverty bears testimony to trade's

transformative economic powerit makes clear that trade not only has benets but also signicant

costs. These include distributional costs, which theory has long recognized, and adjustment costs,

which the literature has tended to downplay. Better understanding when and where trade is costly,

and how and why it may be benecial, are key items on the research agenda for trade and labor

economists. Developing eective tools for managing and mitigating the costs of trade adjustment

should be high on the agenda for policymakers and applied economists.

    This essay discusses ndings from the rapidly growing literature on China's rise that have en-

riched our understanding of the impact of trade shocks on developed countries. We begin by dis-

cussing why China's long-awaited reemergence is helpful for studying the impacts of trade on labor-

market outcomes. We then oer a simple theoretical framework that guides inquiry on measuring

and interpreting these impacts. Next, we present evidence on how trade shocks originating in China

have aected industries and plants, local labor markets housing those plants, and individual workers

employed (or formerly employed) in those industries and local markets. We suggest how these re-

sults should cause us to rethink the short- and medium-run gains from trade. Finally, we argue that

having failed to anticipate how signicant the dislocations from trade might be, it is incumbent on

the literature to more convincingly estimate the gains from trade, such that the case for free trade is

not based on the sway of theory alone, but on a foundation of evidence that illuminates who gains,

who loses, by how much, and under what conditions.




2    China's Rise


On June 23, 1989, the Wall Street Journal marked the publication of its centennial edition by

predicting what the global economy would look like 25 years hence. It selected the countries that

it thought would be growth leaders and those it saw as future growth laggards. On the former list

were Bangladesh, Thailand, and Zimbabwe.        On the latter list was China, which, the newspaper




                                                  4
prognosticated, would fail to shake o the stultifying bureaucracy of hard-line communism.
                                                                                                                      5

      The Journal 's predictions reveal just how uncertain China's future appeared in the late 1980s.

After a decade of reform and opening under Deng Xiaoping, hardliners had reestablished control

over economic policy. Their resurgence, fueled on the economic side by rising ination and on the

political side by the events at Tiananmen Square, caused reform to stall and cast doubt on China's

market transition (Naughton, 2007). Seen in this context, skepticism about China's future, though

far o the mark from today's vantage point, would then have been entirely warranted.




                     China's share of world manufacturing activity
                  Figure 2: China's Share of World Manufacturing Activity, 1990 - 2012

                                                                                                       25


                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                       15




                                                                                                            percent
                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                       5


                                                                                                       0
           1990                1995                  2000            2005              2010
                                                        Year

                                  China share of world manufacturing value added
                                  China share of world manufacturing exports
             Source: World Development Indicators.




      China's quarter century of dizzying export growth began once the reformist camp rearmed its

authority over economic policy in the early 1990s. Deng, in one of the nal political gambits of his

career, launched his famous southern tour in 1992 to focus national attention on the successes of

earlier policy experiments in a handful of locations on China's east coast (Vogel, 2011). These eorts

had included the creation of Special Economic Zones (SEZs), which allowed foreign companies to set

up factories that imported inputs and exported nal outputs, relatively free from the interference of

government minders (Yu and Tian, 2012; Alder, Shao and Zilibotti, 2013). As reformers retook the

helm, China embraced global markets more fully, pushing the number of SEZs from 20 in 1991 to

  5
      George Anders, How We Saw the Future in 1989,      The Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2014, p.   R13.




                                                               5
150 in 2010. According to the World Bank, inows of foreign direct investment, which had averaged

only 0.7% of GDP during the 1980s, surged to 4.2% of GDP during the 1990s and 2000s. Production

for foreign markets began a spectacular ascent, with China's share of world manufacturing exports

growing from 2.3% in 1991 to 18.8% in 2013 (Figure 2).
                                                                  6

      To provide context for China's reintegration into the world economy, we highlight key aspects

of its recent performance that inform the analysis of attendant labor-market outcomes in developed

countries.     One is the idiosyncratic nature of China's transition from central planning to market

orientation. The momentum of this transitionwhich has propelled China's tradeowes much more

to dismal conditions in China at the time of Mao's death than to China's subsequent responses to

contemporaneous shocks in high-income economies. Also important is the nature of China's post-

reform manufacturing surge.          When and how China became the global factory is important for

dening the scope and intensity of the China trade shock. Then, there is the structure of global trade

balances.     China's penchant for running large current account surpluses has shaped the temporal

distribution of trade gains and losses arising from its growth.



2.1      Making Use of Trade Shocks

The interest of trade economists in China is driven both by its large quantitative importance as an

exporter of manufactured goods, and by the paucity of natural experiments in international trade.

Among the most challenging issues for empirical analysis is that changes in trade policy in one

country are often dictated by changes in the behavior of its trading partners. Consider the North

American Free Trade Agreement, enacted in 1994. After investing heavily in Mexico in the 1980s and

early 1990s, multinational companies lobbied hard for the U.S. Congress to approve the pact.
                                                                                                             7 The

treaty's passage, which contributed to a further expansion in foreign direct investment, was arguably

induced at least in part by the earlier FDI. In the NAFTA case, as in similar episodes of economic

opening, identifying trade's impact on labor markets is complicated by the joint determination of

trade barriers and trade and investment ows.
                                                       8

      Three features of China's experience help to overcome these challenges in identifying the casual

eects of trade shocks. The rst is the unexpected nature of China's export growth, which caught

many observersincluding those at the Wall Street Journal by surprise. Even after the launching

of reform in the 1980s, few anticipated how important China would become for the world economy.

  6
      See Storesletten and Zilibotti (2014) on the factors that have shaped China's development process.
  7
      See, e.g., Joshua Mills, Business Lobbying for Trade Pact Appears to Sway Few in Congress,   New York Times,
November 12, 1993.
  8
      See McLaren and Hakobyan (2015) on the local labor market eects of NAFTA in the United States.




                                                           6
Between 1984 and 1990, China's share of world manufacturing exports ticked up only modestly,

from 1.2% to 1.9%.          Its trade expansion did not begin in earnest until the 1990s, a full decade

and a half after Mao's death. China's post Tiananmen crackdown made it dicult to foresee the

conuence of events that would allow it to unleash its potential. After all, the Chinese economy had

underperformed relative to Western Europe during every epoch since the 1500s (Zhu, 2012).

       Second is the degree of China's isolation under Mao, which created abundant opportunities for

later catch up (Zhu, 2012; Brandt, Ma, and Rawski, 2014).                    The distortions of the Maoist era

kept China far inside its production frontier. Between 1952 and 1978from three years after the

Communist Party's rise to power until Deng's rehabilitation following Mao's deathChina's GDP

per capita sank from 59th in the world to 134th out of 167 Penn World Table countries.
                                                                                                        9 By 1991,

China's income ranking had nudged up modestly from 134th to 126th in the world. Convergence

did not begin in earnest until the rapid globalization of the ensuing two decades. By 2001, China's

income ranking had risen to 101st and by 2011 it had reached 77th. Once China's economy took

o, it ignited a phase of transitional growth that was governed largely by the country's accumulated

productivity gap with the developed world (Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti, 2011).
                                                                                                   10

       A nal key feature of China's risewhich we explore in more detail belowis its distinctive

comparative advantage. Manufacturing is at the heart of the country's economic turnaround. Be-

tween 1991 and 2012, China's share of world manufacturing value added increased by a factor of

six, from 4.1% to 24.0% (Figure 2). Whereas many large emerging economies specialize in primary

commoditiesBrazil in iron ore, Indonesia in rubber, and Russia in oil and gasChina's advantage

is overwhelmingly in industrial goods. Over the period 1990 to 2013, the manufacturing sector aver-

aged 88% of China's merchandise exports, compared to 50% for Brazil, 46% for Indonesia, and 20%

for Russia.
               11 This trade concentration means that China's growth has represented a large positive

net global supply shock for manufacturing and a large positive net global demand shock for raw

materials. The impacts of China's rise are consequently likely to vary across regional and national

economies according to their initial patterns of industry specialization.



2.2       The Global Factory

   9
       These ranks are of GDP at constant national prices (in 2005 U.S. dollars) from the Penn World Tables 8.0.
  10
       This period of transitional growth will of course come to an end ultimately and indeed may have ended already.
See Eichengreen, Park and Shin (2013) for a discussion.
  11
       Over time, China has become even more specialized in manufacturing.     Between 1990 and 2007, the share of
manufacturing in China's merchandise exports rose from 72% to 93%, a level at which it has since stabilized.




                                                           7
                     Figure 3: The Evolution of China's Imports and Exports


                      A. Exports
                       Exports   Minus
                               minus    Imports
                                     imports     as a Share
                                             as share of GDPof for
                                                                GDP   for China
                                                                   China
                                                                                                        15


                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                               percent of GDP
                                                                                                        5


                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                        -5


                                                                                                        -10
                   1985          1990           1995           2000             2005          2010
                                                              Year

                                            Net exports of manufacturing
                                            Net exports of food, fuels, ores and metals
                    Source: World Development Indicators.

                             B. Revealed Comparative Advantage for China
                            Revealed comparative advantage for China
                                                                                                        .5


                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                               log RCA
                                                                                                        -.5


                                                                                                        -1


                                                                                                        -1.5

                   1988        1992         1996            2000         2004          2008      2012
                                                              Year

                                            China RCA in manufacturing
                                            China RCA in food, fuels, ores and metals
                    Source: World Development Indicators.




   China's manufacturing performance reects a comparative advantage in the sector that remained

latent during the Maoist era. Today, China's net exports in manufacturing are strongly positive and

its net exports of raw materials are strongly negative (Figure 3A). Its true strength in the sector

emerged only in the 1990s. Figure 3B plots revealed comparative advantage (RCA: a country's share

of global exports in an industry divided by its share of aggregate global exports) for China in two

broad sectors, manufacturing and primary commodities, where the latter group comprises foods,




                                                                     8
fuels, ores and metals.
                             12 It was not until 1992 that China moved from disadvantage to advantage

in manufacturing, as indicated by positive log RCA values, and from advantage to disadvantage in

primary commodities, as indicated by negative log RCA values. The strength of China in manufac-

turing surely reects its abundant supply of labor relative to the rest of the world (Amiti and Freund,

2010). The massive increase in China's industrial labor forceresulting from the decollectivization

of agriculture, the closing of inecient state-owned enterprises, and the migration of 250 million

workers from farms to citieshas made China the default location for all manner of labor-intensive

production (Li, Li, Wu, and Xiong, 2012).              Yet, factor abundance cannot be the whole story be-

hind the country's specialization. Its advantage is far from uniform across labor-intensive industries

(Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Song, 2014). Figure 4 plots the change in net import penetration from

China between 1991 and 2007 against the share of production workers in total employment in 1991

for 397 four-digit U.S. manufacturing industries.
                                                           13 We group industries into 10 sectoral aggregates,

which share a common marker in the gure. That few points in Figure 4 show a negative change

in net import penetration over the period reveals how U.S. imports from China grew by more than

exportsoften substantially by morein nearly every industry.

       The dominant pattern in Figure 4 is that industries within a sector tend to occupy a relatively

narrow range on the horizontal axisindicating similar within-sector labor intensitybut a wide

range on the vertical axisindicating highly varying within-sector changes in import penetration.
                                                                                                                    14

Apparel, leather, and textiles stand out in Figure 4 as the most labor-intensive activity, with an

average initial share of production workers in industry total employment of 0.85. Still, the industries

within this sector diverge sharply in their changes in import penetration. In some (e.g., women's

non-athletic footwear, waterproof outerwear), the increase in penetration approaches or even exceeds

100 percent, which indicates that the 1991 to 2007 growth in imports from China is nearly equal to

or greater than initial domestic spending on the industry. Other industries in the sector (e.g., coated

fabrics, automotive and apparel trimmings) show near zero increase in import penetration. Similar

patterns of dispersion hold for sectors with comparably high labor intensity, such as furniture and

wood products (average initial production worker share of 0.82) and toys and miscellaneous products

  12
       The denominator in China's RCA index is the country's share of world merchandise exports. Following World
Bank denitions, manufacturing includes SITC sectors 5 (chemicals), 6 (basic manufactures except for division 68),
7 (machinery and transport equipment), and 8 (miscellaneous manufactured goods).          Food, fuels, ores and metals
include SITC sectors 0 (food and live animals), 1 (beverages and tobacco), 2 (crude materials), 3 (mineral fuels), and
4 (animal and vegetable oils and fats), and division 68 (non-ferrous metals).
  13
       The change in import penetration is the 1991 to 2007 change in U.S. imports from China divided by 1991 U.S.
domestic absorption (shipments plus imports minus exports); it is Winsorized at -20 and 100 in the gure.          The
employment share of production workers uses 1991 values from the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database.
  14
       Employment of production workers is a standard, but not problem free, measure of industry intensity in low-skill
labor. See Katz and Autor (1999) on the relation between production worker intensity and skill intensity.




                                                            9
(average initial production worker share of 0.72).
                                                                                  15




 Figure 4:           âˆ†China-U.S.
              Growth Net Import Penetr. 1991-2007         Net Import Penetration in Detailed Manufacturing Industry, 1991 - 2007

              -20 0      20 40 60 80 100




                                                    .2             .4                .6               .8             1
                                                                     Share of Production Workers 1991

                                                               food/tobacco             textile/apparel/leather
                                                               wood/furniture           paper/print
                                                               chemical/petroleum       plastic/rubber/glass
                                                               metal/metal products     machines/electrical
                                                               transportation           toys/other




       The cross-industry variation in Chinese export growth evident in Figure 4 is far from unusual.

The distribution of comparative advantage across industries for a country tends to be fat-tailed,

such that for most countries a relatively small number of products dominate exports (Hanson, Lind,

and Muendler, 2015).                                     Because of this skewness, U.S. industriesand the regions in which they

locatevary widely in their exposure to import competition from China. As we discuss in section

4, this variation is very useful for identifying the labor-market consequences of trade shocks.

       China's export surge in manufacturing accelerated after 2001, the year in which the country

entered the World Trade Organization (Figure 2). On rst consideration, it is puzzling why WTO

accession should have mattered much for China's trade. Europe and the U.S. had granted China

most-favored nation (MFN) status as far back as the 1980s. WTO membership would seem to have

done little more than formalize trade relations that were already two decades old. Still, something

  15
       An industry-level regression of the change in net import penetration between 1991 and 2007 on 10 subsector
dummies has an r-squared value of just 0.17, indicating that the majority of the variation in penetration occurs across
detailed industries within subsectors.




                                                                                 10
happened to deepen China's manufacturing prowess: between 1998 and 2007 productivity in the

sector grew at the astounding pace of 8% per year (Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang, 2012).

Although the literature has yet to provide a full accounting of China's recent export growth, it has

uncovered several mechanisms through which reform strengthened its manufacturing industries.

   One such mechanism is privatization. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, China idled many state-

owned manufacturing enterprises, moving towards compliance with WTO provisions that sanction

state subsidies for domestic industries. Capital and labor were then reallocated from smaller, less

productive state-owned companies to privately owned manufacturing plants, raising productivity

and output in the sector (Hsieh and Song, 2015). Joining the WTO also forced China to phase out

requirements that had obligated many private establishments to export through state intermediaries.

Such restrictions constitute barriers to export, which the WTO forbids expressly.     Bai, Krishna,

and Ma (2015) estimate that had private rms not been granted direct trading rights, China's

manufacturing exports in the 2000s would have been one third smaller than they were. Along with

greater ease in exporting, WTO membership gave Chinese manufacturers greater access to imported

intermediate inputs (Brandt and Morrow, 2014), which were an added boon to productivity (Manova

and Zhang, 2012). A further consequence of China's WTO entry regards the insecurity of its earlier

MFN access to the U.S. market. Prior to 2001, China's MFN status in the U.S. was subject to annual

reauthorization by Congress. Pierce and Schott (2015) and Handley and Limao (2014) argue that

the lurking prospect of a return to non-MFN taris, which averaged 37.0% in 1999 and compared to

average MFN taris of only 3.4% in that year, dissuaded Chinese rms from investing in exporting

to the U.S.. WTO accession removed this uncertainty, and encouraged China-U.S. trade.



2.3   The Global Macroeconomic Context

The impact of China's recent growth on the global economy is not just about the country's long-run

comparative advantage. Also important for the near-term labor-market consequences of its trade

expansion is that China's trade surplus widened substantially. Figure 5 shows the current account

balance as a share of GDP for China and the United States from 1985 to 2012. China's average

current account surplus rose from 1.7% of GDP in the 1990s to 4.8% in the 2000s. In mirror-like

fashion, the average U.S. current account decit rose from 1.6% of GDP in the 1990s to 4.4% in the

2000s. In a world economy with many countries, there is no reason why the trade balance for any

one country would be related systematically to that for any other country. However, because the

U.S. dollar functions as a global reserve currency, China's massive net capital outows have been

associated with net foreign purchases of dollar-denominated assets.




                                                11
       In trade theory, it is standard to assume that trade is balanced and to analyze the impact of trade

shocks on the long-run global equilibrium. Why should trade imbalances matter for the labor-market

consequences of China's growth?             With balanced trade, growth in China's exports is matched by

growth in its imports. While the United States sees greater import competition in some industries,

it also sees expanded exports elsewhere in manufacturing and in other traded sectors. China's rise

may cause U.S. workers to reallocate from one traded industry to another but it would not cause

them necessarily to exit the traded sector altogether.




                        Current account balance (percent of GDP)
               Figure 5: U.S. and China Current Account Balances (% of GDP) 1985 - 2012

                                                                                                10




                                                                                                     percent of GDP
                                                                                                5



                                                                                                0



                                                                                                -5

             1985            1990             1995           2000        2005          2010
                                                      Year

                                              China current account balance
                                              U.S. current account balance
              Source: World Development Indicators.




       Trade imbalances complicate matters by introducing a temporal dimension into sectoral em-

ployment adjustment.
                            16 Suppose that policy distortions in Chinasuch as the excess absorption of

credit by state-owned enterprises (Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti, 2011)induce the country to

run a trade surplus and the U.S. to run a trade decit. Growth in China's manufacturing sector

due to enhanced productivity arising from its market transition would cause employment in U.S.

traded industries to contract, pushing workers either into non-traded jobs or out of work entirely.

In eect, China would be loaning the U.S. the funds that it needs to enjoy positive net imports

  16
       See Crino and Epifani (2014) on how changes in trade balances aect labor-market outcomes in a North-South
trade model.




                                                          12
today.
            17 In Figure 4, few U.S. industries saw an increase in net exports to China between 1991

and 2007. At some point in the future, Chinese savings would be expected to fall and consumption

to rise, as China's net exports turned negative and U.S. net exports turned positive. U.S. traded

output and employment would expand, and the United States would begin to repay China for its

earlier borrowing. In this long run scenario, China's rising comparative advantage would generate

long-run employment losses in the U.S. traded industries in which China enjoyed a long-run com-

parative advantage, while trade imbalances cause additional short-run U.S. employment losses in

traded industries pushed temporarily into contraction.Why has China become such a large a net

creditor to the rest of the world? The literature attributes current account surpluses in China to

government interventions that have kept national savings at articially high levels. One hypothe-

sized distortion is the government's continued support for large state-owned enterprises.
                                                                                                               18 These

companies have rst call on loans from state-run banks, leaving private businesses to nance invest-

ment out of retained earnings and thereby elevating the corporate savings rate (Song, Storesletten,

and Zilibotti, 2011). Another, and perhaps less obviously relevant, distortion is China's one-child

policy (recently relaxed), which increased male-female birth ratios and intensied competition in the

marriage market (Wei and Zhang, 2011). Households whose one child is a son may have increased

their savings rate to nance real estate purchases as a means of improving their child's marriage

prospects. A third distortionadvanced by think tanks and politicians in Washington, D.C. (see,

e.g., Cline, 2010)is that China has consciously undervalued its nominal exchange rate so as to

promote its exports.
                            19




3         Theory


Much rst-generation research on trade and wages worked under the canonical version of the

Heckscher-Ohlin model (e.g., Lawrence and Slaughter, 1993; Borjas, Freeman, and Katz, 1997). The

attraction of the HO framework, and in particular of the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem, for analyzing

labor-market impacts of trade is its elegant connection between industry-level shocks (manifested

as externally given changes in product prices) and national factor-market outcomes (changes in

wages). The simplicity of this mapping perhaps explains why economists relied on the model for so

long, despite its dependence upon assumptions that range from the counterfactualcountries have

    17
         This logic, of course, applies to a two-country world. In a many-country world, there is no necessary connection
between bilateral trade and bilateral capital ows.
    18
         Although the private sector has grown substantially in China, state-owned companies remain an active part of the
economy (Hsieh and Song, 2015), especially in banking, communications, construction, energy, and transportation.
    19
         The popular sentiment notwithstanding, the academic literature has had little success in nding empirical support
for systematic renminbi undervaluation (Cheung, Chinn, and Fujii, 2007).



                                                              13
to remain within their initial `cone of diversication'to the arcanethe number of nal goods a

country produces has to equal to the number of primary factors.

       Frustration with HO turned out to be a boon to research on trade and labor markets. Early

approaches (Feenstra and Hanson, 1997 and 1999; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008) ipped the

framework on its head by focusing on changes in the set of goodsor, more precisely, the set of

intermediate inputsthat countries produce. Allowing for changes in specialization patterns creates

a new adjustment margin between the production tasks a country performs at home and the others it

oshores. Recent work has married HO with modern trade theories that incorporate heterogeneous

rms. Burstein and Vogel (2012) embed a Melitz (2003) style model, in which rms dier according

to their productivity, into an otherwise standard HO setting. Calibrating the model, and allowing

for more productive rms to be more intensive in the use of high-skill labor, reveals that freer trade

aects the wage premium for high-skill labor primarily through the Melitz mechanism of within-

industry shifts in employment toward more productive rms rather than through the HO mechanism

of between-industry shifts in labor demand. In many analyses of the impact of productivity growth

in China on global welfare, the literature dispenses with HO entirely, relying either on a Melitz-type

setting (Hsieh and Ossa, 2015) or on the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model of Ricardian comparative

advantage (Di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Zhang, 2014). Gone from current literature is the singular

concern with estimating the impact of trade on the wage gap between high-skill and low-skill labor,

which preoccupied inquiry in the 1990s. In its place is interest in a wider array of margins through

which economies adjust to trade shocks.

       The sketch of a theoretical framework that we provide in this section follows the recent trend

of working with trade models that have a gravity structure (Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-

Clare, 2012).      These models do not lend themselves easily to studying the impact of trade on

earnings inequality.      They do, however, make it tractable to allow for varying degrees of labor

mobility between regions or industries (Redding, 2012). The presence of frictions in worker mobility

creates an abundant set of margins along which we can observe how labor markets respond to trade

shocks.
          20 The task of empirical research then becomes to clarify which margins of adjustment are

operational, to estimate the magnitude of adjustment along each margin at dierent time horizons,

and to determine how long it takes for full adjustment to occur.

  20
       On adjustment to trade shocks at the rm level, see Amiti and Davis (2012) and Hummels, Jorgensen, Munch
and Xiang (2014); on adjustment at the industry level, see Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006), Ebenstein, Harrison,
McMillan and Phillips (2014), and Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (forthcoming); and on adjustment to trade at the
regional level see Borjas and Ramey (1995), Topalova (2010), Kovak (2013), and McLaren and Hakobyan (2015).




                                                        14
3.1       A Bare Bones Model

To characterize the theoretical mechanisms at work, it is sucient to allow for a single labor-market

friction, which we designate as imperfect labor mobility across regions within a country. Allowing

for geographic labor immobility runs counter to the belief that U.S. regional labor markets are

integrated seamlessly. Yet there is mounting evidence that the movement of labor across U.S. cities

and states in the aftermath of changes in regional labor demand is slow and incomplete (Blanchard

and Katz, 1992; Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005; Yagan, 2014) and that such incompleteness is strongest

among less-educated workers (Bound and Holzer, 2000; Wozniak, 2010; Malamud and Wozniak,

2012; Diamond, 2015).
                                 21 Recent work on the impacts of trade with China, discussed in section 4,

likewise conrms the slowness of regional labor-market adjustment.

       In our model sketch, we make the extreme assumption of complete geographic labor immobility.

In an Eaton and Kortum (2002) framework, one can relax this assumption by allowing for worker

heterogeneity in moving costs between regions (Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro, 2015) or for a Roy-type

structure with worker heterogeneity in industry productivity (Galle, Rodriguez-Clare, and Yi, 2015).

Either setting creates an upward sloping regional labor supply curve, whose slope may be steeper in

the short or medium run than in the long run. Variation in regional exposure to foreign competition

arises from dierences in regional industry specialization patterns.                         In Eaton and Kortum, these

specialization patterns reect exogenous regional dierences in industry productivity.                               Empirical

work does not take a stand on the origin of industry specialization, treating it as pre-determined in

some period well before the China trade shock materializes.

       We begin by describing how changes in China's export supply aect U.S. industry product

demand, and are subsequently transmitted to changes in traded sector output at the U.S. regional

level. If trade has a gravity structure, we can write total demand by the U.S. aggregate economy

for traded output produced in U.S. region               i   as,


                                                             X Aik Ï„ âˆ’Î¸
                                                                          ik
                                                     Xi =                      Ek                                                (1)
                                                                        Î¦k
                                                              k
where     Xi   is total sales by region       i   in the aggregate U.S. market,           Aik   is the production capability

of region      i   in industry   k , Ï„ik   is the average iceberg transport cost for region              i   in shipping goods

in industry        k   to the aggregate U.S. market,
                                                            22    Î¸   is the trade cost elasticity,    Ek    is U.S. aggregate

  21
       The empirical literature has yet to resolve whether slow regional employment responses to labor demand shocks
are the result of labor-market frictions (e.g., search costs) or economic distortions (e.g., social insurance programs), a
distinction that matters for welfare analyses of changes in the trading environment.
  22
       For expositional simplicity, we treat the aggregate U.S. marketwhich is in truth a collection of distinct regional
marketsas a single entity. Traded output by region             i   thus refers to total shipments by the industries in   i   (e.g.,
manufacturing) that sell their output outside the region.             Alternative versions of the gravity model dier in terms




                                                                  15
expenditure on goods in industry                  k,      and    Î¦k   is the competitiveness of the aggregate U.S. market in

                                                Ai0 k Ï„i0 k âˆ’Î¸ .23
                                       P
industry     k,   dened as     Î¦k â‰¡       i0

       Consider the impact on traded output in region                                  i   of changes in production capabilities in the

regions that supply the U.S. Totally dierentiating (1), and using                                             xÌ‚ â‰¡ dx/x, we obtain the following
equilibrium condition for the log change in region                              i's    output:


                            X                               X                   X                X                         X
                    XÌ‚i =       Ï†ik EÌ‚k âˆ’ Î¸wÌ‚i +                 Ï†ik AÌ‚k âˆ’                 Ï†ik            Ïi0 k AÌ‚i0 k âˆ’        Ï†ik Ïck AÌ‚ck                      (2)
                            k                                k                     k             i0 6=c                    k
where     Ï†ik â‰¡ Xik /Xi      is the share of industry                     k   in region          i's      total sales on the U.S. market,                       Ïik â‰¡
Xik /Ek     is the share of region     i   in total U.S. purchases in industry                                  k,   and subscript          c   indexes China.

For simplicity, we assume that             AÌ‚ik = AÌ‚k âˆ’ Î¸wÌ‚i ,                and that trade costs remained unchanged.
                                                                                                                                                           24

       Equation (2) provides a reduced-form specication for estimating the impact of trade shocks

emanating from China on regional economic activity in the U.S. or other countries. Most empirical

analyses of the China trade shock base estimation on a specication like (2) or its industry-level

counterpart.
                  25 Of primary interest is the nal term on the right of (2), which captures the impact

of growth in China's productive capacity on traded output by U.S. region                                                       i.   It can be rewritten as,
                                                                                            "                  #
                                                X                             X                  Xck AÌ‚ck
                                                          Ï†ik Ïck AÌ‚ck =           Ï†ik                                                                            (3)
                                                                                                  Ek
                                                  k                            k

which is the weighted average exposure of region                               i   to changes in U.S. industry import penetration

that is mandated by changes in China's production capabilities.                                                      During the 1990s and 2000s,

advances in Chinese manufacturing were driven by the country's market transition, which gave its

rms access to foreign capital, technology, and inputs; allowed capital to move from the public to

the private sector; permitted rural-to-urban migration; and ended restrictions on direct exporting

by private enterprises. The         Ï†ik     weights in (3)the share of each industry in region i's total sales on

the U.S. marketsummarize dierences in industry specialization patterns across U.S. regions and

thus capture variation in regional exposure to China's supply-driven export growth.

of how    Aik   is determined. In Eaton and Kortum (2002), this value is the product of the location parameter for the
distribution of productivity for industry             k   in region   i   and unit production costs for industry                      k   in region   i.
  23
       For simplicity, we ignore sales by U.S. regions to foreign markets. Incorporating these sales is straightforward.
Equilibrium conditions not shown include factor-market clearing, to which we return below, and the balance of trade,
discussed in the previous section.
  24
       The rst assumption implies that the change in production capability for region                                i in industry k can be decomposed
into the exogenous change in national productivity in industry                              k (AÌ‚k )       and the change in wages in region     i (wÌ‚i ),
consistent with Eaton and Kortum (2002). We thus assume that the exogenous determinants of regional comparative
advantage (e.g., the Eaton-Kortum productivity distribution location parameters) are unchanged.
  25
       See, e.g., Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2015).




                                                                              16
3.2      Identifying the Reduced-Form Impact of the China Trade Shock

To estimate the impact of the trade shock in equation (3) on regional labor-market outcomes, it is

necessary to control for the confounding factors that also aect these outcomes.               Helpfully, these

confounds are summarized in the rst four terms on the right of (2). Anticipating the estimation

approaches that we describe in section 4, we discuss each of these components in turn.
                                               P
      The rst term on the right of (2),          k   Ï†ik EÌ‚k ,   is regional exposure to U.S. industry demand

shocks. Because observed changes in import penetration from China will be aected by both the

rst and last terms in (2), they will embody changes both in U.S. product demand and in China's

supply conditions. Any reduced-form regression of changes in regional outcomes on regional trade

exposure may thus be contaminated by U.S. product demand shocks.                     Autor, Dorn and Hanson

(2013) propose using Chinese import growth in other high-income markets as an instrument for the

growth in U.S. imports from China in order to isolate the foreign-supply-driven component of changes

in U.S. import penetration. Specically, they instrument the observed change in U.S. industry-level

import penetration from China with a non-U.S. exposure variable that is constructed using data on

contemporaneous industry-level growth of Chinese exports to other high-income markets.
                                                                                                      26

      Table 1 documents the operation of the Autor-Dorn-Hanson instrumental-variables strategy. The

rst column of the table shows that annual U.S. imports from China increased by 304 billion dollars

between 1991 and 2007, while imports from China grew by 235 billion dollars across the eight other

high-income countries oering comparable trade data for the full sample period.                 Both the U.S.

and the other high income countries experienced rising imports in almost all of the 397 harmonized

four-digit manufacturing industries, and the pattern of import growth across industries is highly

correlated between the U.S. and the other countries (correlation coecient of 0.92). The remaining

columns of the table show the same information separately for each of the eight other high income

countries. Remarkably, each of the comparison countries witnessed import growth in at least 343

of the 397 manufacturing industries, and industry patterns of imports are strongly correlated with

the U.S., with correlation coecients ranging from 0.55 (Switzerland) to 0.96 (Australia). The fact

that China made comparable gains in penetration by detailed sector across numerous countries in

the same time interval suggests that China's falling prices, rising quality, and diminishing trade and

tari costs in these surging sectors are a root cause.

 26
      These countries are Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland.




                                                           17
Table 1: Imports from China and Other Developed Economies 1991  2007 (in Billions of 2007$),
and their Correlations with U.S.-China Imports


                                                United States               Japan        Germany                Spain         Australia
  âˆ† Chinese Imports (Bil$)                            303.8                 108.1             64.3              23.2              21.5
  No. Industries with Import Growth                    385                   368              371               377               378
  Correlation w/ U.S.-China Imports                   1.00                  0.86              0.91              0.68              0.96
                                                 8 Non-US
                                                 Countries              Finland          Denmark           New Zealand      Switzerland
  âˆ† Chinese Imports (Bil$)                            234.7                  5.7               4.7               3.8               3.3
  No. Industries with Import Growth                    383                  356               362               379               343
  Correlation w/ U.S.-China Imports                   0.92                  0.58              0.62              0.92              0.55
  Correlations of imports across 397 4-digit industries are weighted using 1991 industry employment from the NBER Manufacturing database.



          Table 1. Imports from China in the U.S. and Other Developed Economies 1991 - 2007 (in Billions of 2007$),
                                        and their Correlations with U.S.-China Imports
       A possible threat to this supply-based explanation for Chinese export patterns is that product

demand      shocks
  First stage        are correlated
              regressions               across high-income
                          (using import penetration variables as incountries,
                                                                   ADHS QJE) in which case using cross-industry vari-
                                                                            Japan        Germany                Spain         Australia
ation in China's penetrationcoeff
                              in other high-income
                                                1.918 markets 3.897
                                                               as an instrument
                                                                           9.203 for U.S.  penetration
                                                                                       13.646
                                           se                       0.112             0.136             0.551             0.495
could confound import growth
                         t-stat with unobserved  components
                                              17.075         of demand.
                                                         28.674           Autor, Dorn
                                                                     16.705       27.550 and Han-
                                                 8 Non-U.S.             Finland          Denmark           New Zealand      Switzerland
son (2013) also utilize a gravity-based
                              coeff 1.169 strategy that
                                                   16.041replaces 24.541
                                                                   the growth in  U.S. imports
                                                                               61.478          from China
                                                                                           40.995
                                           se 0.046                 1.368             2.250             2.866             3.408
with the inferred change in China's     comparative11.725
                             t-stat 25.281          advantage and  market access
                                                               10.907       21.450 vis-a-vis12.028
                                                                                             the U.S. This

gravity approach dierences out import demand in the purchasing country, thereby retaining supply

and trade-cost-driven changes in China's export performance.                                  The residuals from this regression

approximate the percentage growth in imports from China due to changes in China's productivity

and trade costs relative to the U.S.. Gravity and IV estimates turn out to be similar, which suggests

that correlated import demand shocks are not overly important for the estimation.

       Moving to the second term on the right of equation (2),                        Î¸wÌ‚i    is the endogenous change in wages

in U.S. region       i   resulting from external product-market shocks.                         Most empirical analyses exclude

wages as an independent variable. Estimating (2) without wages on the right-hand side captures the

reduced-form impact of trade exposure on economic activity in region                                   i   that works either directly

through changes in industry output or indirectly through feedback eects from changes in local

wages.
          27 Alternatively, estimating a version of (2) that makes either the change in regional wages or

the change in regional labor supply the dependent variable provides a test of the geographic mobility

of labor in response to trade-induced labor demand shocks.
                                                        P
       The third term on the right of (2),                k   Ï†ik AÌ‚k , captures exposure of region i to changes in national
industry productivity. Another consequence of regions varying in their specialization patterns is that
  27
       See Kovak (2013) on the impact of trade shocks on wages in Brazil based on a specic factors model.



                                                                     18
they will dier in their exposure to sector-biased technological progress. Are regions that are more

subject to technology shocks also ones that tend to face greater import competition? It appears not.

There is near zero correlation between exposure to technological change and exposure to trade with

China across U.S. local labor markets (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013b, 2015).
                                                                                                28 A related issue,

to which we return in section 4, is whether exposure to trade with low-wage countries induces rms

to step up innovation, making technology endogenous to trade.
                                          P           P
       Finally, the fourth term in (2),     k   Ï†ik   i0 6=c Ïi0 k AÌ‚i0 k , captures changes in production capabilities

in other supplying countries. These changes may be in part a response to changes in supply conditions

in China. If we exclude this term from the estimation, we model changes in supply capabilities in

other countries implicitly as a reduced-form function of changes in industry productivity in China.
                                                                                                                    29

       The specication in (2) does not comprise an input-output structure. The presence of interme-

diate inputs may aect the transmission of trade shocks within the U.S. Consider the case of tire

production.      If rising imports of Chinese tires causes U.S. tire producers to reduce their output,

demand for U.S.-made synthetic rubber and steel ber, which are used as inputs in domestic tire

production, may decline as well. The trade shock, which began in the U.S. tire industry, would also

aect domestic demand in the industries that supply inputs to U.S. synthetic rubber and steel ber

producers, as the shock works its way up the production chain. A full accounting of the impact of

trade shocks thus requires incorporating input-output linkages between domestic industries (Pierce

and Schott, 2015; Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Price, 2016). A related possibility is that

U.S. synthetic rubber and steel ber producers may benet from access to lower-cost inputs from

China. Recent literature allows for both channels of transmission, from U.S. nal goods producers

to their domestic input suppliers and from Chinese input suppliers to U.S. input buyers.

       To summarize this discussion, identifying the impact of trade with China on U.S. local labor

market outcomes requires a valid instrumental variableor, more broadly, a source of plausibly

exogenous variationfor regional exposure to import competition, controls for regional exposure to

technological change, and recognition that the estimated reduced-form impact may be attenuated

  28
       Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013b and 2015) measure regional technology exposure using an occupational compo-
sition index that captures the opportunities for substitution of computers for workplace tasks. This index is highly
correlated with measures of computer adoption (Autor and Dorn, 2013), but it is necessarily incomplete and would not
be expected to capture industry-specic innovations that deviate from the overall pace of machine-labor substitution.
  29
       China's manufacturing growth is closely related to the expansion of global production networks in East Asia
(Hsieh and Woo, 2005). As China has grown, so too has its demand for imported inputs, which it assembles into nal
outputs for shipment abroad. During the 2000s, approximately half of China's manufacturing exports were produced
by export processing plants, which are dedicated solely to assembly of imported components (Yu and Tian, 2012).
Over time, China has begun to produce an ever greater fraction of the inputs that it uses in export production, as it
diversies away from pure processing trade (Brandt and Morrow, 2014). Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2012) estimate
that the share of domestic value added in China's total exportsthe fraction of China's exports composed of value
added in Chinarose from 50% in 1997 to 62% in 2007.




                                                           19
by labor migration between regions. An alternative approach to identication is to utilize changes

in imports that result from changes in trade policy. Topalova (2010), Kovak (2013), and McLaren

and Hakobyan (2014) estimate the change in local incomes or employment due to greater import

competition that arises from tari reductions mandated by trade reforms in India, Brazil, and North

America, respectively.   Tari reductions are a less obvious source of the increase in imports from

China by developed economies.      By the early 1990s, most developed nations, including the U.S.,

already provided China with MFN access to their markets, implying an average import tari of

under four percent. Trade barriers in these countries did decline in the late 1990s and early 2000s,

as a result of the Uruguay Round of the GATT, but the average decline was less than two percentage

points, except in apparel and textiles (Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen, 2015). Hence, changes in

applied taris would seem to predict no more than modest growth in China's shipments to the U.S.

We discuss below how the observed reduction in U.S. MFN taris may not capture the full impact

of changes in U.S. trade barriers on imports from China (Pierce and Schott, 2015).




4     Labor Market Adjustment to Trade


If we suppose that the growth in U.S. manufacturing imports from China was triggered by a combi-

nation of productivity growth and improving foreign market access for Chinese rms, the shock that

originated across the Pacic would rst manifest itself in the U.S. in terms of more intense compe-

tition in product markets. Next, the shock would be transmitted to the regions in which competing

manufacturing industries are concentrated, to the U.S. sectors that supply these industries with

inputs, and to the workers employed in manufacturing and its supplier industries. In this section,

we empirically trace out the impacts of the China trade shock by examining consequences at each

of these levels.



4.1    Industry Adjustment to Import Competition

The initial point of transmission of supply shocks in China to factor markets in the U.S. is the product

market. Improvements in China's productive capabilities and reductions in its trade costs will change

the intensity of competition for U.S. goods, leading to a contraction in U.S. industries subject to

greater import exposure. Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006) use data on U.S. manufacturing plants

for 1977 to 1997 to examine the consequences of increased exposure to import competition from low-

wage countries, which they measure as the share of these economies in U.S. imports and which is




                                                  20
attributable in large account to China.
                                                   30 They nd that over ve-year intervals, industries facing

greater increases in exposure to trade are subject to higher rates of plant exit.
                                                                                                31 Among the plants

that survive, those in more trade-exposed sectors have larger reductions in employment and a higher

likelihood of changing their primary four-digit manufacturing category.

       Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Price (2016) provide a complementary analysis to Bernard,

Jensen, and Schott (2006) that moves the focus to the industry level and extends the data forward

in time to cover the period 1991 to 2011.
                                                    32 Consistent with the logic of equation (2), they estimate

the following model for the impact of shifts in trade exposure on manufacturing employment:



                                           âˆ†LjÏ„ = Î±Ï„ + Î²1 âˆ†IP jÏ„ + Î³Xj0 + ejÏ„ .                                       (4)


Here,     âˆ†LjÏ„     is 100 times the annual log change in employment in industry                 j   over subperiod     Ï„;
âˆ†IP jÏ„      is 100 times the annual change in import penetration from China in U.S. manufacturing

industry     j   over subperiod   Ï„ ; Î²1   is the estimated eect of exposure to import competition on industry

employment;        Xj0   is a set of industry-specic start of period controls (suppressed initially);          Î±Ï„    is a

period-specic constant; and          ejÏ„    is an error term.
                                                                 33 Table 2, reproduced from their results, shows

that the employment-weighted mean industry saw Chinese import exposure rise by 0.5 percentage

points per year between 1991 and 2011, with more rapid penetration in the period of 1999 through

2007during China's WTO accessionthan from 1991 through 1999.
                                                                                      34 Growth from 2007 to 2011

indicates a marked slowdown in import expansion following the onset of the global nancial crisis,

which halted trade growth worldwide (Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar, 2010).                         Table 2 also shows

that the decline in U.S. manufacturing employment accelerated over time:                       the average industry

contracted by 0.3 log points per year between 1991 and 1999 and by 3.6 log points per year between

1999 and 2007 and by 5.7 log points per year in the Great Recession period of 2007 to 2011.
                                                                                                                 35

  30
       This measure does not correspond to the theoretical concept of import penetration in equation (3).      However,
because most of the temporal variation in the Bernard, Jensen, and Schott measure is in the numeratordue to
China's massive export growththe share of U.S. imports from low-wage countries and the change in U.S. import
penetration due to low-wage countries are highly correlated.
  31
       Similar eects are observed for other countries: Growing Chinese import competition increases plant exit and
reduces rm growth in Mexico (Iacovone, Rauch and Winters, 2013; Utar and Torres-Ruiz, 2013) and reduces employ-
ment growth in Belgian rms (Mion and Zhu, 2013), Danish rms (Utar, 2014), and in a panel of rms from twelve
European countries (Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen, 2015).
  32
       In related work, Pierce and Schott (2015) compare sectors that varied in their vulnerability to China's joining to
the WTO. Prior to the 2001 accession, the U.S. Congress decided annually whether to rescind MFN status on China
and impose much higher non-MFN taris. Relative to pre-2001 trends, employment declines after 2001 were greater
in U.S. manufacturing industries that had larger initial gaps between MFN and non-MFN taris.
   33                                                    UC
      Import penetration is dened here as âˆ†IP jÏ„ = âˆ†Mj,Ï„ / (Yj,91 + Mj,91 âˆ’ Ej,91 ), where Yj is domestic output,    Mj
                                   UC
is imports, Ej is exports, and âˆ†Mj,Ï„ is the change in U.S. imports from China.
  34
       Table 2 slightly aggregates the 397 manufacturing industries of Figure 4 to 392 industries in order to improve
compatibility with other industry-level data such as the BEA input-output tables.
  35
       Ebenstein, Harrison, McMillan, and Philips (2014) describe how employment conditions change in the industries
and occupations that are more exposed to U.S. multinational companies moving production oshore. In mild contrast




                                                            21
Table 2: Industry-Level Changes in Chinese Import Exposure and U.S. Manufacturing Employment,
1991 - 2011

                                               1991-2011                        1991-1999           1999-2011           1999-2007         2007-2011
                                         Mean/SD       Median                   Mean/SD             Mean/SD             Mean/SD           Mean/SD
100 x Annual âˆ† in U.S.                      0.50                0.14               0.27                0.66                0.84              0.30
Exposure to Chinese Imports                (0.94)                                 (0.75)              (1.33)              (1.61)            (1.68)
100 x Annual Log âˆ† in Emp.                  -2.71              -2.05               -0.30               -4.32               -3.62             -5.73
(Manufacturing Industries)                 (3.07)                                 (3.49)              (3.85)              (4.15)            (5.02)
Statistics are based on 392 4-digit manufacturing industries. The change in U.S. exposure to Chinese imports is computed by dividing 100 x the annualized
increase in the value of U.S. imports over the indicated period by 1991 U.S. market volume in that industry. Employment changes are computed in the
County Business Patterns. All observations are weighted by 1991 industry employment.




                 Table 2. Industry-Level Changes in Chinese Import Exposure and U.S. Manufacturing Employment.

 Based&on&AADHP&Tab&1.
Table  3: Industry-Level Changes in Chinese Import Exposure and U.S. Manufacturing Employment,
Based&on&AADHP&Tab&1.
1991 - 2011

                                                                             Stacked First Differences
                                                                            1991-2011                1991-2007
                                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)
                       100 x Annual âˆ† in U.S.                      -0.81***             -1.30***            -1.24***
                       Exposure to Chinese Imports                  (0.16)               (0.41)              (0.37)
                       1{1991-1999}                                     -0.08               0.05                0.04
                                                                       (0.36)              (0.36)              (0.36)
                       1{1999-2011}                                -3.79***             -3.46***
                                                                    (0.33)               (0.33)
                       1{1999-2007}                                                                         -2.58***
                                                                                                             (0.38)
                       Estimation Method                               OLS                 2SLS                2SLS
                       N = 784 (392 4-digit manufacturing industries x 2 periods 1991-1999 and 1999-2011 or 1999-2007).
                       Employment changes are computed in the County Business Patterns and are expressed as 100 x
                       annual log changes. Observations are weighted by 1991 employment. Standard errors in parentheses
                       are clustered on 135 3-digit industries. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                              Table 3. Effect of Import Exposure on Log Employment Change in U.S.
                                        Manufacturing Industries: OLS and 2SLS Estimates.
    Table 3, also based on Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Price (2016), presents estimates
                       Based&on&AADHP&Tab&2.
of equation (4) in stacked rst dierences for the two time periods 1991-1999 and 1999-2011. For

these results, the change in import penetration and a dummy for each time period are the only re-

gressors. In column 1, which estimates the model without instrumentation, the import penetration

variable is negative and highly signicant, consistent with the hypothesis that rising import exposure

to the above results, they nd that trade exposure aects employment not through workers' industry of employment
but through their occupation of employment.




                                                                         22
lowers domestic industry employment. Nevertheless, this OLS point estimate could be biased be-

cause growth in import penetration is driven partly by domestic shocks. Column 2 instruments the

observed changes in industry import penetration with contemporaneous changes in other-country

China imports, as described above. The estimate in column 2 implies that a one-percentage-point

rise in industry import penetration reduces domestic industry employment by 1.3 log points (t-ratio

of 3.2). Column 3 which stacks the periods 1991-1999 and 1999-2007, shows that the coecient of

import penetration is similar if we restrict attention to the years preceding the Great Recession.

   While it is clear empirically that employment in import-competing U.S. industries has shrunk

in the face of China's rapid growth, the challenge for research is how to measure the distributional

consequences and the net economic costs and benets of these labor-market impacts. The answers

turn on mechanisms that are not self-evident from the basic facts above; specically:


  1. Given the spatial concentration of manufacturing, do industry shocks translate into localized

      employment shocksand if so, are they oset or amplied by local labor market mechanisms?


  2. To what extent are trade-induced industry employment contractions oset by employment

      gains elsewhere in the U.S. economy, potentially outside of trade-impacted regions?


  3. Do trade adjustments occur on the employment margin, the wage margin, or both? If on the

      employment margin, what are the costs to individual workers and to the public at large?


  4. Are the costs of trade adjustment borne disproportionately by workers employed at trade-

      impacted rms and residing in trade-impacted local labor markets? Or do these shocks diuse

      nationally, thus moderating their concentrated eects?


We consider these questions below, highlighting both what is known and what remains unanswered.



4.2   Regional Employment Impacts

To assess the distributional consequences of rising trade with China, we turn next to adjustments

in local labor markets. Local exposure arises from the tendency of industries to cluster in specic

regions of a country (Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr, 2010). In the U.S., manufacturing employment is

particularly concentrated in parts of the Midwest and Southeast. Even within these manufacturing

regions, there is wide variation in the industry composition of local rms.     Industry composition

may be aected by trade shocks, however.       In measuring regional trade exposure, we follow the

literature in utilizing data on regional industry specialization patterns in the pre-shock period, thus

preempting any endogenous adjustment of industry location to contemporaneous trade shocks.



                                                  23
       Figure 6: Geographic Exposure to Trade Shocks at the Commuting Zone (CZ) Level


                             A. Quartiles of Unconditional Exposure




            B. Quartiles of Exposure Conditional on Manufacturing Employment Share




   Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) examine the impact of Chinese competition on U.S. commuting

zones (CZs), drawing on data from the U.S. Census, the American Community Survey and the

County Business Patterns for the years 1990 to 2007.    CZs are clusters of counties that have the

commuting structure of a local labor market (Tolbert and Sizer, 1996; Autor and Dorn, 2013). Figure

6 shows the spatial distribution of exposure to increases in Chinese import competition from 1991 to

2007 across CZs. In the map of unconditional import exposure in Panel A, some broad regions have

greater vulnerability to imports simply because they are more specialized in manufacturing overall.

For instance, Alabama and Tennessee, both strongly manufacturing-oriented, have a preponderance

of trade-exposed commuting zones.    Variation of trade intensity within regions becomes larger in



                                                24
Figure 6B, which plots import exposure conditional on the share of manufacturing in CZ employment

as of 1990, thus measuring import competition for the local set of manufacturing industries. When

looking within manufacturing, Tennessee, owing largely to its concentration of furniture producers,

is far more exposed to trade with China than is Alabama, which has agglomerations of relatively

insulated heavy industry. This variation of import exposure within local manufacturing sectors is

the basis for much of the econometric analysis we discuss.




      Table 4: Import Competition and Outcomes in U.S. Local Labor Markets, 1990 - 2007

                    A. âˆ† Fraction of Working Age Population in Manufacturing, Unemployment, NILF
                 Employed in                Employed in Non-
                 Manufacturing               Manufacturing                   Unemployed               Not in Labor Force
                     (1)                          (2)                           (3)                           (4)
                     -0.60***                        -0.18                      0.22***                      0.55***
                      (0.10)                        (0.14)                       (0.06)                       (0.15)

                             B. âˆ† Log Population, Log Wages, Annual Wage and Transfer Income

             âˆ† Log CZ Population            âˆ† Avg Log Weekly           âˆ† Annual Wage/Salary âˆ† Transfers per Capita
                   (log pts)                  Wage (log pts)            Inc per Adult (US$)         (US$)
                      (5)                          (6)                          (7)                  (8)
                       -0.05                      -0.76***                     -549.3***                     57.7***
                      (0.75)                       (0.25)                       (169.4)                       (18.4)
        N=1444 (722 commuting zones x 2 time periods 1990-2000 and 2000-2007). Employment, population and income data is
        based on U.S. Census and American Community Survey data, while transfer payments are based on BEA Regional
        Economic Accounts. All regressions control for the start of period percentage of employment in manufacturing, college-
        educated population, foreign-born population, employment among women, employment in routine occupations, average
        offshorability index of occupations, and Census division and time dummies. Models are weighted by start of period
        commuting zone share of national population. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered on state. * p < 0.10, ** p
        < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



        Table 4. Estimated Impact of a $1K per Worker Increase on Chinese Import Exposure on Outcomes in
                               U.S. Local Labor Markets, 1990-2007: 2SLS Estimates
   Over the period 1990 to 2007considered either as a single long dierence or as stacked changes
           Based&on&ADH&Tab&5/6/8/9.
for 1990 to 2000 and 2000 to 2007CZs that were more exposed to increased import competition

           With an average annual wage of about $40k per employee, the employment loss by 0.78%pt lowers annual income by about $312 (0.0078
from China experienced substantially larger reductions in manufacturing employment. Columns 1

to 4 of Table 4, based on Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), show that the decline in manufactur-

ing jobs was largely accommodated by an increasing share of a CZ's working-age population that

was unemployed or out of the labor force. Specically, a                          $1, 000     increase in a CZ's per-worker im-

port exposure reduces the fraction of the working age population employed in manufacturing and

non-manufacturing, respectively, by               âˆ’0.60      and   âˆ’0.18     percentage points (the latter of which is not

signicant), and raises the fraction unemployed and out of the labor force by                                  0.22    and   0.55     percent-




                                                                    25
age points.
               36 Autor, Dorn, Hanson (2013) further document that this nding holds for workers at

all education levels. For workers with less than a college education, increased trade exposure also

predicts signicant reductions in CZ employment in non-manufacturing industries, suggesting the

presence of negative local demand spillovers.

       Column 5 of Table 4 further shows that import competition has very modest eects on the size

of the working-age population in CZs. Tracing individual workers over time, Autor, Dorn, Hanson

and Song (2014) conrm that there is little geographic migration in response to the trade shock.
                                                                                                                      37

       Thus, the industry-level impacts of Chinese import competition seen in Table 3 are equally visible

within local labor markets. Contrary to the canonical understanding of U.S. labor markets as uid

and exible, trade-induced manufacturing declines in CZs are not, over the course of a decade, largely

oset by sectoral reallocation or labor mobility. Instead, overall CZ employment-to-population rates

fall at least one-for-one with the decline in manufacturing employment, and generally by slightly

more.      These results run counter to a precept of general equilibrium trade theory that the local

employment eect of sectoral demand shocks should be short-lived, as the forces of wage and price

arbitrage and labor mobility dissipate these shocks nationally. In the limit, trade-induced shocks

to local manufacturing employment should aect the allocation of labor across sectors but should

have no measurable impact on employment rates in directly impacted CZs relative to the national

labor market. That this neoclassical prediction does not appear to hold even approximately over the

span of a decade suggests that the labor market impacts of trade shocks are likely to be amplied by

slow and incomplete adjustment: rather than modestly reducing wage levels among low-skill workers

nationally, these shocks catalyze signicant falls in employment rates within trade-impacted local

labor markets.
                   38

       Regional labor-market consequences from exposure to trade with China have also been studied

for countries other than the U.S.. Analyses for Norway (Balsvik, Jensen and Salvanes, 2015) and

for Spain (Donoso, Martin and Minondo, 2014), covering periods from the late 1990s to 2007, nd

  36
       The import per worker measure is a variant of equation (3) that uses data on local employment by industry
to proxy for the sales and expenditure variables   Ï†ik   and   Ek .   It can be interpreted as assigning national imports
by industry to CZs based on CZs' shares in national industry employment, and normalizing the imports assigned
to a CZ by total CZ employment.       A $1,000 increase in annual imports per worker during a decade corresponds
approximately to the dierence in the trade exposure between CZs at the 75th vs. 25th percentile of import exposure
during 1990-2007.
  37
       Population responses to local trade shocks are also limited in other countries. Analyses from Germany (Dauth,
Findeisen and Suedekum, 2014) and Spain (Donoso, Martin and Minondo, 2014) both nd weak and statistically
insignicant population adjustments in local labor markets that are exposed to import competition from low-wage
counties.
  38
       Labor market adjustment to import competition from China may be also be incomplete because the trade shock
continues to accumulate over time as imports from China grow. In the case of Brazil, however, Dix-Carneiro and Kovak
(2015) also nd little spatial mobility and regional convergence in the years following a one-time trade liberalization
shock.




                                                           26
results that are consistent with the U.S. evidence.           Regions that face greater import competition

experienced a dierential decline in manufacturing employment. Lower manufacturing employment

was primarily compensated by higher unemployment in Norway, and by greater employment outside

of manufacturing in Spain. Dauth, Findeisen and Suedekum (2014) nd that in Germany, Chinese

import competition also had a negative impact on manufacturing employment in local labor markets.

In the German case, the impact of rising Chinese import competition between 1988 and 2008 was

compounded by an even more rapid growth of imports from Eastern Europe following the fall of the

iron curtain. Distinct from the U.S. case, German manufacturers sharply increased exports to these

lower-wage countries, resulting in a more modest trade decit with China and a trade surplus with

Eastern Europe. The employment gains related to these export opportunities roughly oset the job

losses from import competition in the case of China, while actually raising German employment in

the case of trade with Eastern Europe.

       Though this paper's focus is on the consequences of increased import exposure to China, this

was not the only trade shock to aect local labor markets in the U.S. over the last two decades.

The North American Free Trade Agreement, enacted in 1994, stands out as a landmark change

in U.S. trade policy, which led to the elimination of taris on U.S. imports from Mexico for the

large majority of manufactured products.
                                                  39 Similar to the analyses in Topalova (2010) for India

and Kovak (2013) for Brazil, McLaren and Hakobyan (2015) estimate the impact of NAFTA tari

changes on wages in U.S. regions (dened as Consistent Public Use Microdata Areas) between

1990 and 2000. They allow workers to be aected by tari reductions either directly through their

industry of employmentwhere industries varied both in the magnitude and the speed of the tari

cutsor indirectly through the specialization of their local labor market in NAFTA-exposed sectors.

Both direct and indirect channels of transmission are important for wage outcomes. Wage growth for

high-school dropouts employed in the industries that were initially the most protected, and therefore

subject to the largest tari declines, was 17 percentage points lower than for comparable workers

employed in initially unprotected industries. And high-school dropouts employed in locations that

were initially the most specialized in industries vulnerable to NAFTA had a wage growth that

was 8 percentage points lower than for similarly educated workers in locations with few protected

industries.     Surprisingly, the next most aected labor-market group is workers with some college

education. NAFTA wage impacts for high-school educated workers are comparatively modest and

for the college-educated are eectively zero.

  39
       U.S. trade with Canada was liberalized earlier in 1989 through the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (Treer,
2004).




                                                         27
4.3      National Impacts versus Regional Impacts

The localized impacts of import competition measure the relative eect of the China trade shock

on more versus less trade-exposed regional labor markets.                  Should we take these results to mean

that trade-impacted locations suered employment declines in absolute terms, or simply that they

beneted less relative to trade-insulated locations? This distinction between relative and absolute

eects matters. The former encompasses the distributional eects of trade, whereas the latter bears

on the magnitude of the net gains from trade.

      Using an expanded version of equation (4), Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Price (2016)

assess whether the seemingly adverse industry and region-level impacts are oset by employment

responses elsewhere in the economy. Looking across U.S. manufacturing industries whose outputs

compete with Chinese import goods, they estimate that had import penetration from China not

grown after 1999, there would have been 560 thousand fewer manufacturing jobs lost through the

year 2011.      Actual U.S. manufacturing employment declined by 5.8 million workers from 1999 to

2011, making the counterfactual job loss from direct import competition amount to 10 percent of

the realized job decline. As these results are based on the reduced-form specication of equation

(2), they may however not capture the full general equilibrium consequences of trade.

      Negative shocks to one industry are transmitted to other industries via economic linkages between

sectors. One source of such linkages is buyer-supplier relationships (Acemoglu, Carvalho, Ozdaglar

and Tahbaz-Salehi, 2012). Rising import competition in apparel and furnituretwo sectors in which

China is strongwill cause these downstream industries to reduce purchases from the upstream

sectors that supply them with fabric, lumber, and textile and woodworking machinery.                            Because

buyers and suppliers often locate near one another, much of the impact of increased trade exposure

in downstream industries is likely to transmit to suppliers in the same regional or national market.

Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Price (2016) use U.S. input-output data to construct upstream

import exposure shocks for both manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries. Estimates from

this exercise indicate negative employment eects in industries that sell outputs to directly trade-

exposed industries, from which trade exposure propagates upstream in the supply chain.
                                                                                                           40 Applying

the direct plus the indirect input-output measure of exposure increases estimates of trade-induced job

losses for 1999 to 2011 to 985 thousand workers in manufacturing, and to 2.0 million workers in the

entire economy. Inter-industry linkages thus magnify the employment eects of trade shocks, almost

doubling the size of the impact within manufacturing and producing an equally large employment

 40
      Pierce and Schott (2015) and Federico (2014) nd qualitatively similar results for the U.S. and Italy, respectively.




                                                            28
eect outside of manufacturing.
                                      41

       Two additional sources of linkages between sectors operate through changes in aggregate de-

mand and the broader reallocation of labor. When manufacturing contracts, workers who have lost

their jobs or suered declines in their earnings reduce their spending on goods and services. The

contraction in demand is multiplied throughout the economy, depressing consumption and invest-

ment. Helping oset these negative aggregate demand eects, workers who exit manufacturing may

take up jobs in the service sector or elsewhere in the economy, replacing some of the earnings lost

in trade-exposed industries. Because aggregate demand and reallocation eects work in opposing

directions, we can only detect their net impact on aggregate employment.

       To adjudicate among these mechanisms, Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Price (2016) sup-

plement their analysis of U.S. industries with an analysis of U.S. commuting zones that adds an

input-output structure to Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013). If the reallocation mechanism is opera-

tive, then when a local industry contracts as a result of Chinese competition, some other industry in

the same commuting zone should expand. Aggregate demand eects should also operate within local

labor markets, as shown by Mian and Su (2014) in the context of the recent U.S. housing bust. If

increased trade exposure lowers aggregate employment in a location, reduced earnings will decrease

spending on non-traded local goods and services, thus magnifying the local impact. Estimates of

the net impact of aggregate demand and reallocation eects imply that import growth from China

between 1999 and 2011 led to an employment reduction of 2.4 million workers. While the employ-

ment losses are concentrated in industries that are either directly exposed to import competition

or indirectly via input-output linkages, there is little evidence for substantial osetting employment

gains in local industries that are not exposed to the trade shock. The estimated employment decline

is larger than the 2.0 million job loss estimate obtained for national industries, which only captures

direct and input-output eects. It may still not capture the full consequences of the China shock on

U.S. employment, however, as neither the analysis for commuting zones nor for national industries

fully incorporates all of the adjustment channels encompassed by the other. The national-industry

estimates exclude reallocation and aggregate demand eects, whereas the commuting-zone estimates

exclude the national component of these two eects, as well as non-local input-output linkages.

       Are there positive employment eects from U.S. trade with China that the literature may be

missing? One mechanism may work through the supply of imported inputs. The expanded ability of

  41
       While the employment impact of upstream import exposure in signicantly negative, the impact of downstream
import exposure is estimated to be small and insignicant in aggregate. Point estimates suggest that manufacturing
industries may expand employment when their supplier industries become exposed to Chinese competition (consistent
with lower input prices), while employment outside manufacturing is negatively aected by shocks that propagate
downstream (e.g., reduced employment in a wholesale business that used to buy locally produced manufactures).




                                                        29
U.S. rms to oshore production to China may raise productivity for workers in the U.S. (Grossman

and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008), lower the relative price of intermediates (Auer, Degen, and Fischer,

2013), or extend the range of nal goods that rms are capable of producing (Goldberg, Khandelwal,

Pavcnik, and Topalova, 2010). Granting that such benets are plausible in theory, and have been

found in other national contexts, neither Pierce and Schott (2015) nor Autor, Dorn and Hanson

(2013) detect evidence of positive U.S. industry or regional employment responses to increased

imported input supply.          A second mechanism may be that increased competition in nal goods

markets alters investments in innovation. Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen (2015) show that European

apparel and textile rms that faced greater competition from China following the elimination of

quotas under the Multi-Fiber Arrangement produced more patents, had higher productivity growth,

and boosted purchases of new technology.             Although intensied product-market competition may

raise the incentive for innovation, it can just as easily work in the opposite direction. The aggregate

impact of Chinese competition on U.S. innovation remains unknown.
                                                                                  42

       The reduced-form analysis suggests that the reallocation of labor across U.S. industries and

regions in response to increased competition from China does not produce an osetting increase in

employment by other U.S. traded-good industries, as the simple logic of neoclassical trade theory

would have predicted. Other indirect gains from trade with China are, in principle, still possible.

One explanation for the extremely modest osetting employment increase in non-exposed sectors

in the U.S. may be related to the rapid contemporaneous rise in the U.S. aggregate trade decit, a

substantial part of which reects a growing trade imbalance with China. When faced with greater

import competition, an open economy normally reallocates resources out of some tradable industries

into others, at least under balanced trade. If, however, the trade shock is accompanied by a rise in

the trade decit, then the reallocation from exposed tradables into tradables not exposed to China

may be delayed, shifting employment into non-tradables instead. While this reasoning still predicts a

long-run employment reallocation towards non-exposed tradables, the large and growing U.S. trade

decit during the period under study may have signicantly slowed such a reallocation.

  42
       A further issue is that measured input-output linkages may miss some positive demand eects from U.S. exports.
Consider the iPhone, whose back panel states, Designed by Apple in California.        Assembled in China.   From its
U.S. headquarters, Apple oshores production to Foxconn, which employs 300,000 workers in its iPhone operations
in China. If productivity in Foxconn rises, iPhone sales may expand, thereby increasing demand for design services
among Apple's 50,000 U.S. employees. However, not all of Apple's design exports to China may appear in U.S. trade
data. For tax purposes, Apple may attribute some iPhone revenues to overseas subsidiaries. These revenues would
not appear in the U.S. current account until the earnings are repatriated, possibly far in the future. A similar logic
applies to U.S. business services that may expand as a result of increased trade with China.




                                                          30
4.4       Wage and Transfer Impacts

Employment is not the only margin of labor market response to trade shocks. Column 6 of Table 4

shows that more trade-exposed CZs experience larger reductions in average weekly wages. Extending

the analysis in Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) using quantile regression, Chetverikov, Larsen, and

Palmer (2015) document that these wage impacts of CZ-level trade exposure are concentrated among

workers in the bottom four wage deciles. The reduction in wages in not limited to manufacturing,

but indeed is concentrated outside that sector. While the shock to manufacturing industries seems

to aect local wages more broadly, the presence of dierential wage impacts of trade across CZs

suggests that these labor markets are indeed local, as spatial mobility is not suciently large to

equilibrate wages at the national level.
                                              43

       The estimates of Table 4 allow a simple calculation of the relative importance of employment and

wage adjustments for the overall decline in earnings in trade-exposed CZs. Given average annual

earnings of about $40,000 per worker, a reduction of employment by 0.78 percentage points (sum

of columns 1 and 2) per $1,000 dollars of imports per worker lowers earnings per adult by about

$312 per year (0.0078        Ã— 40, 000).   The same shock reduces the average weekly wage by 0.76 log

points among the approximately 70% of working-age adults who are employed, which implies an

additional earnings loss per adult of $213 per year (0.0076          Ã— 0.7 Ã— 40, 000).   While trade theory has

typically emphasized the impact of trade shocks on wages, these results suggest that adjustments at

the employment margin might have an even larger quantitative impact on workers' earnings.

       A direct consequence of reduced employment and wages in trade-exposed local labor markets is

an increase in transfer benets. Perhaps unsurprisingly, more trade-exposed CZs see larger increases

in per capita payouts of Unemployment Insurance and Trade Adjustment Assistance (Figure 7,

based on Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2013), both of which are designed to assist laid-o workers.

Yet, the impacts of trade shocks on transfer payments extend far beyond those tied to temporary

downturns.       Because trade-induced declines in local employment and wages appear persistent, a

larger fraction of households in a CZ is likely to qualify for means-tested entitlements. As Figure 7

documents, more trade-exposed CZs experience larger per capita growth in publicly provided medical

care, consistent with more households qualifying for income-based health benets, and in government

  43
       Local labor market analyses for other developed countries nd signicant wage declines in response to import
competition in Norway (Balsvik, Jensen and Salvanes, 2015) and Spain (Donoso, Martin and Minondo, 2014), and an
insignicant wage reduction in Germany (Dauth, Findeisen and Suedekum, 2014). In related work on a developing
economy, Costa, Garred and Pessoa (2014) analyze the Brazilian experience of trade with China during the period
2000 to 2010, which saw rising Brazilian exports of raw materials and growing imports of manufactured goods.
Whereas Brazilian regions specialized in raw materials experienced rising wages, those competing with imported
Chinese manufactures suered wage losses, especially in low-skilled occupations.




                                                         31
income assistance, consistent with more households meeting the threshold for welfare payouts. Trade

exposure also contributes to an increase in disability benets, whose take-up is typically associated

with permanent exit from the labor force (Autor and Duggan, 2003). Retirement benets rise in

more trade-exposed CZs, suggesting that adverse labor-market shocks induce more workers to retire

earlier.
           44


                                          Imports&from&China&and&Change&of&Government&Transfer&Receipts&in&
Figure 7: Imports from China and Induced Government Transfer Receipts in Commuting Zones,
                                                           CommuRng&Zones&(1990L2007)&&
1990 - 2007
                                                                               &
                                               Eï¬€ect&of&an&$1000&Per&Worker&Increase&in&Imports&from&China&during&
                                               1990=2007&on&Dollar&Change&of&Annual&Transfer&Receipts&per&Capita&
                                   $70&


                                   $60&                                                                                           $57.73&


                                   $50&
                 Dollar&Change&&




                                   $40&


                                   $30&


                                   $20&                                                                            $18.27&
                                                                                                  $15.04&

                                                                $8.40&            $10.00&
                                   $10&
                                              $3.65&

                                    $0&
                                           Unemployment&     SSA&Disability&   SSA&ReRrement& Other&Government& Govt&Medical&   Total&Beneï¬ts&
                                          and&TAA&Beneï¬ts&     Beneï¬ts&           Beneï¬ts&    Income&Assistance&  Beneï¬ts&




       What is striking about the impact of trade shocks on benet take-up is not just the size of

these eectsfor every extra $100 in local import exposure per worker transfer receipts rise by

approximately $6 per capitabut their relative magnitudes across categories.                                                     Trade Adjustment

Assistance, the primary federal government program intended to help workers who lose their jobs

as a result of foreign competition (Baicker and Rehavi, 2004), is eectively inconsequential in local

adjustment to trade shocks. Workers eligible for TAA receive extended unemployment benets of

up to 18 months, as long as they remain enrolled in a training program, and may obtain allowances

toward relocation, job search, and healthcare.
                                                                                    45      Trade-exposed CZs certainly experience sharp

  44
       See Kondo (2013) for a general equilibrium analysis of the welfare consequences of trade-related employment losses
and Feler and Senses (2015) for results on the impact of the China trade shock on the provision of public services
across local jurisdictions.
  45
       To qualify for TAA, workers must show that their employer cut back production because of import competition,
relocated production to a country with which the U.S. has a trade agreement, or lost business with a buyer or supplier
that is TAA certied.




                                                                                     32
relative growth in per-capita receipts of TAA benets.              However, while TAA reacts elastically to

trade exposure, it is far from the transfer category that responds most strongly in terms of dollar

expenditure; the total volume of TAA spending is negligible relative to many other transfer programs.

A more trade-exposed CZ (dened to be one at the 75th percentile of change in imports per worker

over 1991-2007) would see increased per capita take-up of TAA of only $0.23 when compared to a

less trade-exposed CZ (dened to be one at the 25th percentile of change in importers per worker),

while spending grows by more than $15 per capita for each of the three categories medical benets,

federal income assistance, and Social Security retirement and disability benets (Figure 7).

       Despite the responsiveness of local transfer payments to local import exposure, on the whole

there appears to be limited regional redistribution of trade gains from winners to losers. Comparing

again the residents of CZs at the 75th and 25th percentile of import exposure, those in the more

exposed location experience a reduction in annual household wage and salary income per adult of

$549, while per capita transfer income rises by about $58, thereby osetting just a small portion of

the earnings loss (Table 4, columns 7 and 8).
                                                      46



4.5       Worker Level Impacts

The evidence above suggests that trade adjustment is a slow-moving process, and that its costs

fall heavily on trade-exposed local markets rather than being dispersed nationally.                    What these

analyses do not answer is to what degree costs are born specically by workers employed at trade-

impacted rms rather than more broadly among comparably skilled workers in a locality. If within

industries and local labor markets, adverse trade eects are dispersed among workers of comparable

skills, the person-level costs of these shocks will be moderated.               Alternatively, if, due to labor-

market frictions or skill-specicity, the impact falls disproportionately on workers directly employed

at import-competing establishmentsand even more so on relatively low-skill workers within these

establishmentsthe adverse distributional consequences of trade exposure may be larger still.

       Trade theory identies a wide range of mechanisms through which trade shocks will have dif-

ferential eects across individuals.         Heckscher-Ohlin reasoning suggests that the impacts of freer

trade on real incomes will vary according to an individual's skill level. In a frictionless labor mar-

ket, rapid mobility of workers across rms, industries and regions guarantees that wages adjust

uniformly within skill groups in response to a trade shock, even if only a subset of industries or

regions are directly exposed to trade. Under imperfect worker mobility across jobs, trade shocks can

  46
       Note, however, that household income is measured per adult (since only adults generate income), while transfer
income is measured per capita including children (since some transfers are based on the presence of children).     A
household with children might thus oset somewhat more than 10 percent of its earnings loss.




                                                           33
have heterogeneous impacts within skill groups. Several recent models of labor-market adjustment

to trade incorporate switching costs for workers who desire to move across sectors. Structural esti-

mates of these models suggest that those costs may amount to several months or even several years

of a worker's earnings (Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren, 2010; Dix-Carneiro, 2014; Pessoa, 2014;

Ashournia, 2015).
                          47 Labor-market frictions may also stem from search costs for rms (Helpman,

Itskhoki, and Redding, 2010). These frictions tie worker outcomes to changes in foreign competition

in the initial rm, industry or region of employment. Until recently, there has been little evidence

on how individual workers adjust to trade shocks.
                                                           48

       Autor, Dorn, Hanson and Song (2014) examine the impact of import competition from China on

the careers of individual workers using longitudinal data from the U.S. Social Security Administra-

tion. Their analysis contrasts the labor-market outcomes of workers who were ex ante observationally

similar except for their initial industry of employment. Workers whose 1991 industry subsequently

became exposed to higher import penetration accumulate substantially lower earnings over the pe-

riod of 1992 to 2007, compared to their peers with similar demographic characteristics and previous

labor-market outcomes. These workers also experience greater job churning. They spend fewer years

working for their initial rm, more years working outside their initial industry, and more years receiv-

ing Social Security Disability Insurance. This trade-induced job mobility is however not sucient

to equilibrate career earnings between more and less trade-exposed workers.

       Why don't employment transitions allow initially trade-exposed workers to fully recoup declines

in earnings with the initial employer?            The literature on job loss provides one potential answer

(e.g., Neal 1995): displacement destroys industry-specic human capital, leaving aected workers in

positions for which they are poorly suited relative to non-displaced workers. A parallel explanation

is that workers' specic skills cause them to seek positions in which they remain exposed to import

competition, notwithstanding the predilection of trade impacted workers to exit their original two

digit sector. Figure 8 provides insight into this latter mechanism by depicting the correlation between

workers' trade exposure at their initial employers and at their current employers for each year between

1991 and 2007.
                       49 In the years immediately following 1991, few workers have yet separated from their

original rms, and hence the correlation remains close to        1.   Over time, the correlation between initial

and current rm trade exposure falls, as job transitions proceed apace, but remains strongly positive,

  47
       Allowing for switching costs across both industries and occupations, Artuc and McLaren (2015) also nd sub-
stantial costs of occupational reallocation.
  48
       Hummels, Jorgenson, Munch, and Xiang (2014) use data for Denmark to analyze the impacts of increased rm-
level imports on within-job spell earnings for workers.
  49
       The correlations compare the 19912007 growth of import penetration between the industry that employed a
worker in 1991 and the industry that employed a worker in the subsequent year indicated on the x-axis.       This
correlation is   1.0   in 1991 by construction.




                                                          34
leveling o at         0.43 in the nal year (2007).                             As a benchmark against which to evaluate the persistence

of trade exposure, the gure also plots counterfactual correlations in which trade exposure at any

new employer is set to zero, such that the reported series summarizes the cumulative likelihood of

having left the initial rm as of a given year. Logically, this counterfactual correlation also declines

over time, reecting the rising likelihood of having departed from the original place of work. But the

counterfactual decline is far more rapid than the actual series and ends up at the much lower level of

0.17   in 2007. By implication, were trade-exposed workers to exit manufacturing immediately after

the rst job separation, their net subsequent exposure would be                                                                 60   percent lower than in the actual

data. Thus, even after changing employers, initially trade-exposed workers appear likely to remain

in high-exposure industries, which are subject to further trade shocks.



                                        Figure 8: Persistence of Trade Exposure since 1991
                  1.2
                  1     .8
            Coefficient
               .6 .4
                  .2
                  0
                             19


                                  19


                                           19


                                                    19


                                                              19


                                                                       19


                                                                                 19


                                                                                          19


                                                                                                    19


                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                                20
                             91


                                  92


                                             93


                                                      94


                                                                95


                                                                         96


                                                                                   97


                                                                                            98


                                                                                                      99


                                                                                                               00


                                                                                                                        01


                                                                                                                                02


                                                                                                                                       03


                                                                                                                                             04


                                                                                                                                                     05


                                                                                                                                                           06


                                                                                                                                                                 07




                                       Conditional correlation in trade exposure between 1991 firm and firm in indicated year
                                       Counterfactual with zero trade exposure in all firms except 1991 firm



The graph plots regression coecients and 90% condence intervals obtained from                                                            2 Ã— 16   regressions that relate the
19912007 trade exposure of a worker's industry in the year indicated on the x-axis to the 19912007 trade exposure
of the worker's initial 1991 industry. The counterfactual data series sets trade exposure to                                                         0   for all rms except the
worker's initial employer.             It refers to a hypothetical scenario in which no worker joins a trade-exposed rm after
separating from their initial rm, and so all persistence in trade exposure is due to workers who have not separated
from their initial rm.




    Although trade shocks disrupt the careers of both high-wage and low-wage individuals, there is

also substantial heterogeneity in patterns of adjustment. Workers whose pre-period wage falls in the

top earnings tercile of their birth cohort react to the trade exposure of their initial rm primarily



                                                                                              35
by relocating to rms outside the manufacturing sector. They do not experience an earnings loss

relative to their peers who started out in less trade-exposed industries. By contrast, workers in the

bottom tercile of pre-period earnings relocate primarily within the manufacturing sector, and often

remain in industries that are hit by subsequent increases in import competition. These low-wage

workers suer large dierential earnings losses, as they obtain lower earnings per year both while

working at the initial rm and after relocating to new employers.
                                                                                   50 Labor-market adjustment to

trade further varies according to workers' initial labor-force attachment. Among lower-attachment

workers (but not among higher-attachment workers), greater trade exposure results in fewer calendar

years in which their main income comes from earnings, and more calendar years where Social Security

Disability Insurance (SSDI) is the main source of recorded income.

         Patterns of worker-level adjustment to Chinese import competition have also been studied for a

number of European countries. Pessoa's (2014) analysis for the United Kingdom shows that workers

whose initial industries became exposed to Chinese import competition accumulated signicantly

lower earnings over the period 2000 to 2007. This earnings dierential results both from fewer years

of employment, and from lower hourly earnings while employed. For the case of Denmark, Ashournia,

Munch and Nguyen (2014) similarly nd a negative impact of the China shock on workers' earnings

accumulation between 1997 and 2008, while Utar (2015) shows adverse earnings and employment

outcomes for workers whose industries were subject to the removal of MFA quotas.                            As in the

U.S., earnings losses are concentrated among low-skill workers.
                                                                              51 Both these reduced-form results

and structural estimates of models with sectoral switching costs suggest that workers in import

competing sectors bear dierential adjustment costs in reaction to the China trade shock.




5         (Re)Assessing the Gains from Trade


China's economic growth has lifted hundreds of millions of individuals out of poverty. The resulting

positive impacts on the material well-being of Chinese citizens are abundantly evident.                       Beijing's

seven ring roads, Shanghai's sparkling skyline, and Guangzhou's multitude of export factories

none of which existed in 1980are testimony to China's success. What makes China so interesting

to economists, in part, is that the timing of this growth was dictated by forces internal to the

    50
         Conditional on similar initial annual earnings and other observable conditions of employment, men and women
experience similar consequences from an increase in exposure to import competition. Within manufacturing women
are disproportionately likely to hold low-wage jobs. Therefore,   unconditional   on other observables, women within the
sector are more adversely aected by the trade shock than are men.
    51
         In other work, Donoso, Martin and Minondo (2015) study year-to-year labor market transitions in Spain over the
period 1997 to 2011, and nd that import competition from China increases the likelihood that workers transition
from employment to unemployment, and from employment in manufacturing to employment outside that sector.




                                                            36
country and was therefore hard for outsiders to forecast.                To maintain power, Mao was willing

to subject China to a state of near perpetual political and economic upheaval, beginning with the

collectivization of agriculture (1950-1953), continuing on to the Great Leap Forward (1958-1961) and

culminating in the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976). At each successive juncture, China fell further

behind the rest of the world economically. Its reversal of fortune under Deng began tenuously before

consolidating into the most rapid accumulation of wealth in human history.

      If one had to project the impact of China's momentous economic reform for the U.S. labor market

with nothing to go on other than a standard undergraduate international economics textbook, one

would predict large movements of workers between U.S. tradable industries (say, from apparel and

furniture to pharmaceuticals and jet aircraft), limited reallocation of jobs from tradables to non-

tradables, and no net impacts on U.S. aggregate employment.                   The reality of adjustment to the

China trade shock has been far dierent. Employment has certainly fallen in U.S. industries more

exposed to import competition. But so too has overall employment in the local labor markets in

which these industries were concentrated.            Osetting employment gains either in export-oriented

tradables or in non-tradables have, for the most part, failed to materialize. Input-output linkages

between sectors appear to have magnied rather than dampened the employment eects of trade

both within regions and nationally.

      How should labor-market responses to trade with China change the way that economists think

about the gains from trade for the U.S. and other developed countries? One way is by recharac-

terizing the sets of individuals who are likely candidates for opposing distributional consequences

from economic integration.          The literature is perhaps too comfortable with characterizing factor

markets in terms of just two national skill types, such that the essential margin of adjustment is the

relative wage of more- and less-skilled labor.
                                                      52 Without question, a worker's position in the wage

distribution is indicative of her exposure to import competition. In response to a given trade shock,

a lower-wage employee experiences larger proportionate reductions in annual and lifetime earnings,

a diminished ability to exit a job before an adverse shock hits, and a greater likelihood of exiting the

labor market, relative to her higher-wage coworker. Yet, the intensity of action along other margins

of adjustment means that we will misrepresent the welfare impacts of trade shocks unless we also

account for a worker's local labor market, initial industry of employment, and starting employer.

      The importance of location for evaluating trade gains depends on how long it takes for regional

adjustment to occur. A presumption that U.S. labor markets are smoothly integrated across space

has long made regional equilibration the starting point for welfare analysis.                 The U.S. experience

 52
      Analyses based on the specic-factors model (e.g., Kovak, 2013) are of course immune to this criticism.




                                                          37
of trade with China makes this starting point less compelling. Labor-market adjustment to trade

shocks is stunningly slow, with local labor-force participation rates remaining depressed and local

unemployment rates remaining elevated for a full decade or more after a shock commences.                           The

persistence of local decline perhaps explains the breadth of public transfer programs whose uptake

increases in regions subject to rising trade exposure. The mobility costs that rationalize slow adjust-

ment imply that short-run trade gains may be much smaller than long-run gains and that spatial

heterogeneity in the magnitudes of the net benets may be much greater than previously thought.

Using a quantitative theoretical model, Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2015) nd that in the imme-

diate aftermath of a trade shock, constructed to mimic the eects of growth in U.S. imports from

China, U.S. net welfare gains are close to zero. The ultimate and sizable net gains are realized only

once workers are able to reallocate across regions in order to move from declining to expanding in-

dustries. Establishing the speed of regional labor-market adjustment to trade shocks should capture

considerably more attention from trade and labor economists.

       In a modern gravity-type trade model, moving from autarky to freer trade expands the set of

product varieties to which consumers have access and thereby raises real income in inverse proportion

to the change in the share of spending a country devotes to domestically produced goods (Arko-

lakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare, 2013).
                                                       53 Labor immobility amends this logic and gives local

comparative advantage a central role in the analysis of trade gains. If workers cannot move between

local labor markets easily or quickly and local patterns of comparative advantage are xedat least

temporarilythe national gains from trade will depend both on the standard gravity mechanism

of changing expenditure shares and on how easily workers within localities can resort into new in-

dustries. Galle, Rodriguez-Clare, and Yi (2015) demonstrate that in the limiting case where worker

resorting is infeasiblesuch that both regional and worker comparative advantages are locked ina

trade shock of the magnitude of the China surge would yield geographic dispersion in welfare gains

whose standard deviation across regions equals twice the national mean. As the literature develops

a clearer picture of the permanence of local comparative advantage, economic models will be better

equipped to quantify the spatial dispersion in net benets from trade within a country.

       The great China trade experiment may soon be over, if it is not already. The country is moving

beyond the period of catch-up associated with its market transition and becoming a middle-income

nation. Rapidly rising real wages indicate that the end of cheap labor in China is at hand (Li, Li,

  53
       Even in this seemingly benign setting, any individual country could lose from China's rise. Although productivity
growth in China would necessarily raise welfare by expanding the product varieties to which a country has access,
it may alsodepending on the sectors aecteddepress national incomes by attenuating home-markets eects or
deteriorating the terms of trade (Hsieh and Ossa, 2015).




                                                            38
Wu and Xiong, 2012). Its comparative advantage in the future will likely be less about its labor

abundance and random initial industry prowesses, and more about the endogenous responses of

business and government to the global economic environment. While the China of the future will

surely look very dierent than the China of the past, the exceptional nature of its progression from

Mao to Deng to today provides a rich vein for analysis that economists have far from exhausted.




References


Acemoglu, Daron, David H. Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson and Brendan Price. 2016. Im-
port Competition and the Great U.S. Employment Sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics,
34(S1): S141-S198.
   Alder, Simon, Lin Shao and Fabrizio Zilibotti.       2013.   The Eect of Economic Reform and
Industrial Policy in a Panel of Chinese Cities. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9748.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. 2012. The
Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations. Econometrica, 80(5): 1977-2016.
   Amiti, Mary, and Donald Davis.      2012.    Trade, Firms, and Wages:   Theory and Evidence.
Review of Economic Studies, 79(1): 1-36.

   Amiti, Mary, and Caroline Freund. 2010. The Anatomy of China's Export Growth, in: Robert
Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei (eds.): China's Growing Role in World Trade, Cambridge: NBER.
   Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot and Andres Rodriguez-Clare.        2012.   New Trade Models,
Same Old Gains? American Economic Review, 102(1): 94-130.
   Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2015. The
Elusive Pro-Competitive Eects of Trade American Economic Review, NBER Working Paper No.
21370, July.
   Artuc, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri and John McLaren. 2010. Trade Shocks and Labor Adjust-
ment: A Structural Empirical Approach. American Economic Review, 100: 1008-1045.
   Artuc, Erhan and John McLaren. 2015. Trade Policy and Wage Inequality: A Structural Anal-
ysis with Occupational and Sectoral Mobility. Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
   Ashournia, Damoun.     2015.   Labor Market Eects when Mobility Is Costly.     Mimeo, Oxford
University.
   Ashournia, Damoun, Jakob Munch and Daniel Nguyen. 2014. The Impact of Chinese Import
Penetration on Danish Firms and Workers. Mimeo, Oxford University.
   Auer, Raphael A., Kathrin Degen and Andreas M. Fischer. 2013. Low-Wage Import Competi-
tion, Inationary Pressure, and Industry Dynamics in Europe. European Economic Review, 59(C):
141-166.
   Autor, David H., and David Dorn.        2013.   The Growth of Low Skill Service Jobs and the
Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market. American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553-1597.
   Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Eects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review, 103(6):
2121-2168.
   Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013b. The Geography of Trade and
Technology Shocks in the United States.       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,

103(3): 220-225.
   Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson. 2015. Untangling Trade and Technology:
Evidence from Local Labor Markets. Economic Journal, 125(584): 621-646.



                                                   39
   Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson and Jae Song.              2014.    Trade Adjustment:
Worker Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1799-1860.
   Autor, David H. and Mark Duggan.       2003.       The Rise in Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 157-205.
   Bai, Xue, Kala Krishna and Hong Ma. 2015. How You Export Matters: Export Mode, Learning
and Productivity in China. NBER Working Paper No. 21164.
   Baicker, Katherine, and Marit M. Rehavi. 2004. Policy Watch: Trade Adjustment Assistance.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(2): 239-255.

   Baily, Martin Neil, and Barry P. Bosworth. 2014. US Manufacturing: Understanding Its Past
and Its Potential Future. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28 (1), 326.
   Balsvik, Ragnhild, Sissel Jensen and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2015. Made in China, Sold in Norway:
Local Labor Market Eects of an Import Shock. Journal of Public Economics, 127: 137-144.
   Berman, Eli, John Bound and Machin. 1998. Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change:
International Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4): 1245-1279.
   Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott. 2006. Survival of the Best Fit:
Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants. Journal
of International Economics, 68(1), 219-237.

   Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1980. Protectionism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
   Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence Katz.        1992.   Regional Evolutions.     Brookings Papers on

Economic Activity, 23(1): 1-76.

   Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen. 2015. Trade Induced Technical Change?
The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT, and Productivity. Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming.
   Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F, Katz. 1997. How Much Do Immigra-
tion and Trade Aect Labor Market Outcomes? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997, 1,
190.
   Borjas, George J., and Valerie A. Ramey. 1995. Foreign Competition, Market Power, and Wage
Inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(4): 1075-1110.
   Bound, John, and Harry Holzer.     2000.    Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor
Market Outcomes During the 1980s. Journal of Labor Economics, 18(1): 20-54.
   Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang.           2012.   Creative Accounting or
Creative Destruction?   Firm-Level Productivity Growth in Chinese Manufacturing.            Journal of

Development Economics, 97(2): 339-351.

   Brandt, Loren, Debin Ma, and Thomas G. Rawski. 2014. From Divergence to Convergence:
Reevaluating the History behind China's Economic Boom. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1):
45-123.
   Brandt, Loren, and Peter Morrow.      2014.    Taris and the Organization of Trade in China.
Mimeo, University of Toronto.
   Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel. 2011. Factor Prices and International Trade: A Unifying
Perspective. NBER Working Paper No. 16904.
   Burstein, Ariel, and Jonathan Vogel.       2012.    International Trade, Technology, and the Skill
Premium. Mimeo, UCLA.
   Caliendo, Lorenzo, Maximilano Dvorkin and Fernando Parro. 2015. The Impact of Trade on
Labor Market Dynamics. NBER Working Paper No. 21149.
   Chetverikov, Denis, Bradley Larsen and Christopher Palmer. 2015. IV Quantile Regression for
Group-Level Treatments, with an Application to the Eects of Trade on the Distribution of Wages.
Econometrica, forthcoming.




                                                  40
   Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn and Eiji Fujii.           2007.   The Overvaluation of Renminbi
Undervaluation. Journal of International Money and Finance, 25(5): 762-785.
   Cline, William R. 2010. Renminbi Undervaluation, China's Surplus, and the US Trade Decit.
Peterson Institute for International Economic Policy Briefs PB 10-20.
   Costa, Francisco J.M., Jason Gared and Joao Paulo Pessoa. 2014. Winners and Losers from a
Commodities-for-Manufactures Trades Boom. Mimeo LSE, 2014.
   Crino, Rosario, and Paolo Epifani. 2014. Trade Imbalances, Export Structure and Wage In-
equality. Economic Journal, 576: 507-539.
   Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen and Jens Suedekum. 2014. The Rise of the East and
the Far East: German Labor Markets and Trade Integration. Journal of the European Economic
Association, 12(6): 1643-1675.

   Diamond, Rebecca. 2015. The Determinants and Welfare Implications of U.S. Workers' Diverg-
ing Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000. Mimeo, Stanford University.
   Di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei Levchenko, and Jing Zhang.          2014.   The Global Welfare Impact
of China: Trade Integration and Technological Change.        American Economic Journal: Macroeco-

nomics, 6(3): 153-183.

   Dix-Carneiro, Rafael. 2014. Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics. Econometrica,
82(3): 825-885.
   Dix-Carneiro, Rafael and Brian K. Kovak. 2015. Trade Reform and Regional Dynamics: Evi-
dence from 25 Years of Brazilian Matched Employer-Employee Data. Mimeo Duke University.
   Donoso, Vicente, Victor Martin and Asier Minondo.           2014.   Do Dierences in Exposure to
Chinese Imports Lead to Dierences in Local Labour Market Outcomes? An Analysis for Spanish
Provinces. Regional Studies, 1-19.
   Donoso, Vicente, Victor Martin and Asier Minondo. 2015. Does Competition from China Raise
the Probability of Becoming Unemployed? An Analysis Using Spanish Workers' Micro-Data. Social
Indicators Research, 120: 373-394.

   Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan and Shannon Phillips. 2014. Estimat-
ing the Impact of Trade and Oshoring on American Workers Using the Current Population Survey.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(3): 581-595.

   Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. Technology, Geography, and Trade. Economet-
rica, 70(5), 1741-1779.

   Edwards, Lawrence, and Robert Z. Lawrence.          2013.    Rising Tide:   Is Growth in Emerging

Economies Good for the United States? Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Eco-

nomics.
   Eichengreen, Barry, Donghyun Park, and Kwanho Shin. 2013. Growth Slowdowns Redux: New
Evidence on the Middle-Income Trap. NBER Working Paper No. 18673.
   Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser and William Kerr. 2010. What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns American Economic Review, 100(3): 1195-1213.
   Feenstra, Robert C. 1998. Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the Global
Economy. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (4), 3150.
   Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1997. "Foreign Direct Investment and Relative
Wages: Evidence from Mexico's Maquiladoras," Journal of International Economics , 42: 371 - 394.
   Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson.         1999.    The Impact of Outsourcing and High-
Technology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 19791990. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114 ( 3 ) : 90740.

   Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson.         2003.    Global Production and Inequality:   A
Survey of Trade and Wages, in E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, eds., Handbook of International
Trade, Blackwell, 2003, pp. 146-185.



                                               41
   Federico, Stefano. 2014. Industry Dynamics and Competition from Low-Wage Countries: Evi-
dence on Italy. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 76(3): 389-410.
   Feler, Leo, and Mine Senses. 2015. Trade Shocks and the Provision of Local Public Goods.
Mimeo: Johns Hopkins University.
   Freeman, Richard. 1995. Are Your Wages Set in Beijing? Journal of Economic Perspectives,
9(3): 15-32.
   Galle, Simon, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Moises Yi. 2015. Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the
Aggregate and Distributional Eects of Trade. Mimeo, UC Berkeley.
   Glaeser, Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. Urban Decline and Durable Housing. Journal
of Political Economy, 113(2), 345-375.

   Goldberg, Penny, and Nina Pavcnik. 2007. Distributional Eects of Globalization in Developing
Countries. Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1): 39-82.
   Goldberg, Pinelopi, Amit Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, Petia Topalova. 2010. "Imported Interme-
diate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
125(4): 1727-1767.
   Grossman, Gene M., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2008. "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
Oshoring." American Economic Review, American Economic Association, 98(5): 1978-1997.
   Handley, Kyle, and Nuno Limao. 2014. Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare: Theory and
Evidence for China and the U.S. Mimeo, University of Michigan.
   Hanson, Gordon, Nels Lind, and Marc Muendler. 2015. The Lon Run Evolution of Comparative
Advantage. Mimeo, UC San Diego.
   Harrison, Ann, John McLaren and Margaret McMillan. 2014. Recent Perspectives on Trade
and Wage Inequality. Annual Review of Economics, 3: 261-289.
   Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen Redding. 2010. Inequality and Unemployment
in a Global Economy. Econometrica, 78: 1239-1283.
   Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Ralph Ossa. 2015. A Global View of Productivity Growth in China.
NBER Working Paper No. 16778.
   Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Zheng Song. 2015. Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small: The Trans-
formation of the State Sector in China. NBER Working Paper No. 21006.
   Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Keong T. Woo. 2005. The Impact of Outsourcing to China on Hong
Kong's Labor Market. American Economic Review, 95(5): 1673-1687.
   Hummels, David, Rasmus Jorgensen, Jakok Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2014. The Wage Eects
of Oshoring:   Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data. American Economic Review,
104(6): 1597-1629.
   Iacovone, Leonardo, Ferdinand Rauch and Alan L. Winters.        2013.   Trade as an Engine of
Creative Destruction: Mexican Experience with Chinese Competition.        Journal of International

Economics, 89(2): 379-392.

   Katz, Lawrence F., and David Autor.      1999.    Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
Inequality, in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A,
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1463-1555
   Koopman, Robert, William Powers, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2012. Estimating Domestic
Content in Exports when Processing Trade is Pervasive. Journal of Development Economics, 99(1):
178-189.
   Kondo, Illenin O. 2013. Trade Reforms, Foreign Competition, and Labor Market Adjustments
in the U.S. International Finance Discussion Paper No. 1095, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
   Kovak, Brian.     2013.   Regional Eects of Trade Reform:   What is the Correct Measure of
Liberalization? American Economic Review, 103(5): 1960-1976.




                                                42
   Krugman, Paul. 1997. What Should Trade Negotiators Negotiate About? Journal of Economic
Literature, 35 (1), 113120.

   Krugman, Paul. 2000. Trade, Technology, and Factor Prices.        Journal of International Eco-

nomics, 50(1): 51-71.

   Lawrence, Robert Z., Slaughter, Matthew. J., 1993. International Trade and American Wages
in the 1980s:   Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:

Microeconomics, 161-226.

   Leamer, Edward E. 2000. What's the Use of Factor Contents? Journal of International Eco-
nomics, 50(1), 17-49.

   Levchenko, Andrei A., Logan T. Lewis and Linda L. Tesar. 2010. The Collapse of International
Trade during the 2008-09 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun.        IMF Economic Review, 58(2):

214-253.
   Li, Hongbin, Lei Li, Binzhen Wu, and Yanyan Xiong. 2012. The End of Cheap Chinese Labor.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(4): 57-74.

   Manova, Kalina, and Zhiwei Zhang. 2012. Multi-Product Firms and Product Quality. NBER
Working Paper 18637.
   Malamud, Ofer, and Abigail Wozniak. 2012. The Impact of College Education on Geographic
Mobility. Journal of Human Resources, 47: 913-950.
   McLaren, John, and Shushanik Hakobyan. 2015. Looking for Local Labor Market Eects of
NAFTA. Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
   Melitz, Marc J. 2003.       The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity. Econometrica, 71(6): 1695-1725.
   Mian, Atif, and Amir Su. 2014. What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment? Econo-
metrica, 82(6): 2197-2223.

   Mion, Giordano and Linke Zhu. 2013. Import Competition from China: A Curse or a Blessing
for Firms? Journal of International Economics, 94(1): 85-101.
   Naughton, Barry. 2007. The Chinese Economy: Transitions and Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
   Neal, Derek.    1995.    Industry-Specic Human Capital:     Evidence from Displaced Workers.
Journal of Labor Economics, 13: 653-677.

   Pessoa, Joao Paulo. 2014. International Competition and Labor Market Adjustment. Mimeo
LSE.
   Pierce, Justin R, and Peter K Schott. 2015. The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufac-
turing Employment. Yale Department of Economics Working Paper, February.
   President's Council of Economic Advisers.       2015.   Economic Report of the President.   The
White House, February.
   Redding, Stephen. 2012. Goods, Factor Trade, Mobility, and Welfare. NBER Working Paper
No. 18008.
   Sampson, Thomas.        2014.   Selection into Trade and Wage Inequality.   American Economic

Journal: Microeconomics, 6(3): 157-202.

   Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2011. Growing Like China. American
Economic Review, 101(1): 196-233.

   Storesletten, Kjetil, and Fabrizio Zilibotti.   2014.   China's Great Convergence and Beyond.
Annual Reviews of Economics, 6: 333-362.

   Tolbert, Charles M., and Molly Sizer. 1996. U.S. Commuting Zones and Labor Market Areas.
A 1990 Update. Economic Research Service Sta Paper No. 9614.
   Topalova, Petia. 2010. Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evi-
dence on Poverty from India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 1-41.



                                                   43
   Treer, Daniel. 2004. The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement. American
Economic Review 94(4): 870-895.

   Utar, Hale. 2014. When the Floodgates Open: Northern Firms' Response to Removal of Trade
Quotas on Chinese Goods. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(4): 226-250.
   Utar, Hale. 2015. Workers Beneath the Floodgates: Impact of Low-Wage Import Competition
and Workers' Adjustment. Mimeo, University of Bielefeld.
   Utar, Hale and Luis Torres-Ruiz. 2013. International Competition and Industrial Evolution:
Evidence from the Impact of Chinese Competition on Mexican Maquiladoras. Journal of Develop-
ment Economics, 105: 267-287.

   Vogel, Johnathan. 2011. Spatial Price Discrimination with Heterogeneous Firms. Journal of
Industrial Economics, 59(4): 661-676.

   Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang.     2011.   The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from
Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China. Journal of Political Economy, 119(3): 511-564.
   Wozniak, Abigail.   2010.   Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor Market
Opportunities? Journal of Human Resources, 45: 944-970.
   Yagan, Danny. 2014. Moving to Opportunity? Migratory Insurance over the Great Recession.
Mimeo, UC Berkeley.
   Yu, Miaojie, and Wei Tian. 2012. China's Firm-Level Processing Trade: Trends, Characteris-
tics, and Productivity. China Center for Economic Research Working Paper No. E2012002.
   Zhu, Xiaodong. 2012. Understanding China's Growth: Past, Present, and Future. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 26(4): 103-124.




                                                 44
